Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-5-1995 by Ord. No. 83-95; amended in its entirety
11-8-2006 by Ord. No. 168-06]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 702, Clause XLI.1 (53 P.S. § 65741.1),1 of the Second
Class Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for
the Township of Jackson, County of York, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
as revised, codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and sections by
General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 133,
together with an Appendix, is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Jackson, which shall be
known and is hereby designated as the "Code of Jackson Township, York
County, Pennsylvania."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Board of Supervisors of Jackson Township, and it is the intention of said
Board of Supervisors that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to
be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by Jackson Township and in force on the date of the adoption of this
Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective
date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
1. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 65741.1 was repealed by Act of November 9, 1995, P.L. 350, No. 60.
See now 53 P.S. § 66601.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to May 2, 2006.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence
of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
§ 1-4 JACKSON CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances and resolutions of a general and permanent nature adopted
subsequent to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of
this ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon
being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances
and resolutions shall be temporarily placed in the Code until printed
supplements arc included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Township for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, the following changes and revisions of a
substantive nature are hereby made to various ordinances and
resolutions included in the Code. These changes are made to bring
provisions into conformity with the desired policies of the Board of
Supervisors, and it is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so changed
have been previously formally amended to read as such. All such
changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective
date of the Code specified in § 1-15.2
2. Editor's Note: The changes and revisions referred to were made by Ord. No. 83-95,
adopted 12-5-1995, and are noted in the Code by histories as applicable. A complete
description of the changes is on file in the Township offices.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Township
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-7 JACKSON CODE § 1-11
1:6
therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; violations.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered. It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the Board of Supervisors that this ordinance and the Code would
have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause,
sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof had not been
included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after November 8, 2006.
A. It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by
additions or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or
portion thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of
the Township to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this
section of this ordinance shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a
judgment of not more than $600, plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof. If
the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation.
B. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this ordinance shall be paid over to the Township.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
Chapter 5
AUTHORITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 99.
§ 1-15 JACKSON CODE § 1-15
5:8
ARTICLE I
Sewer Authority
[Adopted 4-6-1993 by Ord. No. 58-93]
§ 5-1. Intent. [Amended 12-5-1995 by Ord. No. 83-95]
Jackson Township hereby signifies its intent and desire to create and to
organize a municipality authority under the Municipality Authorities Act
of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended, 53 P.S. § 301 (the "Act")3, for the
purpose of exercising all powers under the Act.
§ 5-2. Studies and investigations.
The Board of Supervisors hereby directs the Authority upon its
incorporation to undertake such studies and investigations as it may deem
reasonably necessary to determine the sewage treatment and sewer system
needs of the Township or to adopt any such studies and investigations
as may have been performed by or on behalf of the Township and to
undertake the recommendations of a plan or plans to Jackson Township for
implementing the results of such studies and investigations or to adopt any
such recommendations of a plan or plans for implementing the results of
such studies obtained or performed by or on behalf of a Township, which
undertakings are referred to as the "project."
§ 5-3. Articles of Incorporation.
The Board of Supervisors of Jackson Township hereby approves the Articles
of Incorporation substantially in the form attached hereto4 and by reference
thereto hereby incorporate such Articles herein, together with such
additions and deletions as may be approved by the Supervisors of this
Township executing the same, their execution to be deemed to be conclusive
evidence of such approval.5
§ 5-4. Filing and publication.
The Board of Supervisors of this Township hereby authorizes the execution
of the Articles of Incorporation as approved by § 5-3 hereof and authorizes
the filing thereof with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and further authorizes and directs the publication of notice of the substance
of this article and the foregoing Articles of Incorporation in accordance with
the provisions of the Act.
3. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 301 was repealed by Act of June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22. See now
53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
4. Editor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation are on file in the office of the Township
Secretary.
5. Editor's Note: Original Section 4, dealing with the appropriation for the Authority's
administrative costs, which immediately followed this section, was deleted 12-5-1995 by
Ord. No. 83-95.
§ 5-1 AUTHORITIES § 5-5
5:9
§ 5-5. Membership.
The following named persons shall be and they hereby are appointed as the
first members to represent this Township on the Board of the Authority for
the following terms of office:
§ 5-6. Enactment; repealer.
The enactment of this article is deemed necessary for the benefit and
preservation of the public health, peace, comfort and general welfare of the
citizens of this Township, and all other ordinances or portions of ordinances
inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
A. Robert E. Shutt, 115 Pauline Drive, York, Pennsylvania 17404, one-year
term.
B. Dean J. Smith, RR 4, Box 4593, Spring Grove, Pennsylvania 17362, twoyear
term.
C. Thomas A. Boyer, 110 Biesecker Road, York, Pennsylvania 17404, threeyear
term.
D. Bradley L. Sheridan, RR 4, 4656 Glen Mar Drive, Spring Grove,
Pennsylvania 17362, four-year term.
E. Joyce Sheridan, RR 4, 4656 Glen Mar Drive, Spring Grove, Pennsylvania
17362, five-year term.
§ 5-5 JACKSON CODE § 5-6
5:10
Chapter 13
FIRE COMPANIES
§ 13-1. Fire companies recognized.
The Lincoln Fire Company No. 1 and Nashville Volunteer Fire Company No.
1, being volunteer fire companies organized and existing in York County,
Pennsylvania, are hereby designated as the officially recognized fire
companies for the Township.
§ 13-2. Authorized activities.
§ 13-3. Authorized activities of fire company members.
In addition to actually participating in the activities of the fire company as
authorized above or in going to or returning from any activity, the members
of the fire companies recognized by the Township are also authorized to do
the following things:
A. The fire companies recognized by the Township are hereby authorized
to provide such services to the Township as may be necessary for the
protection of property and persons situate therein, which include, by
way of example and not of limitation, the extinguishment and
prevention of loss of life and property from fire, automobile accidents,
medical emergencies, hazardous materials incidents and other
dangerous situations.
B. The companies may also provide nonemergency and public service
functions such as, again by way of example and not of limitation,
removing water from property after storms and assisting in the
removal, abatement and prevention of damage or injury to persons or
property, whether through natural causes or man-made situations.
C. The companies may also conduct and participate in such training
activities and drills, either within or outside of the Township, as may be
deemed necessary by the officers of the company to maintain
proficiency in providing service.
D. The companies may also respond to calls and provide services to
municipalities outside of the Township.
A. Engage in any type of drill, training, ceremony, practice, test or parade
when duly called for or authorized by an officer or officers of the fire
company.
B. Engage in fund-raising activities for the fire company when authorized
by an officer or officers of the fire company.
C. Engage in the performance of any other duty or activity authorized by
any officer of the recognized fire company.
§ 5-6 FIRE COMPANIES § 13-4
13:11
§ 13-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to recognize the fire companies, to set forth
that the fire companies are considered qualified volunteer fire companies
for Internal Revenue Code purposes and to state additional authorized
activities for fire fighters for worker's compensation purposes.
Chapter 20
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 32.
§ 13-4 JACKSON CODE § 13-4
20:12
ARTICLE I
Manager
[Adopted 3-2-1999 by Ord. No. 107-996]
§ 20-1. Creation.
Pursuant to 53 P.S. § 65599.1 of the Second Class Township Code,7 the office
of Township Manager of Jackson Township, York County, Pennsylvania, is
hereby created.
§ 20-2. Appointment and removal.
The Township Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a
majority of all members of the Board of Supervisors. The Manager shall
serve at the pleasure of the Board of Supervisors and he may be removed
at any time by a majority vote of all its members. At least thirty days before
such removal becomes effective, the Board shall furnish the Manager with
a written statement setting forth its intention to remove him.
§ 20-3. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to the duties of the office as
herein outlined.
§ 20-3.1. Bond.
The Township Manager shall post bond at Township expense, with sufficient
surety approved by the Board of Supervisors in the amount of $50,000,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties.
§ 20-3.2. Compensation.
The salary of the Township Manager shall be fixed from time to time by
resolution.
§ 20-3.3. Powers and duties.
A. The Township Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the
Township and shall be responsible to the Board as a whole for the
proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the Township placed
in his charge. The powers and duties of all Township business shall be
vested in the Manager, unless expressly imposed or conferred by
statute or ordinance upon other Township officers. The duties of the
Township Manager shall not include any legislative powers. The powers
and duties of the Manager shall include the following:
6. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. I, Manager, adopted 7-5-1988
by Ord. No. 46-88, as amended.
7. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 65599.1 was repealed by Act of November 9, 1995, P.L. 350, No. 60.
See now 53 P.S. § 66301 et seq.
§ 20-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 20-3.3
20:13
(1) To prepare and submit to the Board, before the close of each fiscal
year, a budget for the next fiscal year and an explanatory budget
message. In preparing the budget, the Manager or an officer
designated by him shall obtain from the head of each department,
agency or board or any qualified officer thereof estimates of
revenues and expenditures and such other supporting data as
required. The Manager shall review such estimates and may revise
them before submitting the budget to the Board of Supervisors.
(2) To be responsible for the administration of the budget after its
adoption by the Board.
(3) To develop, in conjunction with the preparation of the yearly
budget, long-range fiscal plans for the municipality, such plans to
be presented annually to the Board of Supervisors for its review
and adoption.
(4) To hold such other office and to head such municipal departments
as the Board may from time to time direct; provided, however, that
such office shall not include the office of supervisor, auditor,
assessor or Township police officer.
(5) To attend all meetings of the Board of Supervisors and its
committees with the right to take part in the discussions. The
Manager shall receive notice of all special meetings of the Board
and its committees.
(6) To prepare the agendas for each meeting of the Board and supply
facts pertinent thereto.
(7) To keep the Board informed as to the conduct of Township affairs;
to submit periodic reports on the condition of the Township
finances and such other reports as the Board requests; and to make
such recommendations to the Board as he deems advisable.
(8) To submit to the Board, as soon as possible after the close of the
fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and administrative
activities of the Township for the preceding year.
(9) To see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits,
agreements and privileges granted by the Township are observed.
(10) To employ, by and with the approval of the Board, experts and
consultants to perform work and to advise in connection with any of
the functions of the Township.
(11) To see that all money owed the Township is promptly paid and that
proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all
the Township's claims.
B. The duties of the Township Manager shall be delegated or changed as
directed by the Board of Supervisors. These duties shall not include any
legislative powers.
§ 20-3.3 JACKSON CODE § 20-3.3
20:14
ARTICLE II
Defense and Indemnification
[Adopted 12-6-1988 by Ord. No. 47-88]
§ 20-4. Limits of indemnification and defense.
A. Jackson Township, York County, Pennsylvania, shall indemnify and hold
harmless from any personal liability any Supervisor elected subsequent
to the passage of this article arising out of his or her duties as
Supervisor.
B. This indemnity shall cover only that portion of the judgment not
covered by insurance from any source.
C. Jackson Township shall retain the right of subrogation for any amount
paid under this article.
D. This indemnification shall cover judgments for breach of contract,
negligence, intentional torts and punitive as well as compensatory
damages.
E. The Township shall endeavor to have a defense provided through the
insurance carriers for the Township. If no insurance carrier is available,
the Township Solicitor shall provide a defense. If it is a conflict of
interest for the Solicitor to defend, then the Township shall hire an
attorney to defend the Supervisor. The Township's obligation for legal
defense is limited to one attorney for all three Supervisors, and if the
Supervisors desire different or multiple attorneys, it shall be at their
personal expense.
F. Under no circumstance shall the Township indemnify a Supervisor for
any act which, in the written opinion of the Solicitor or District
Attorney, is an indictable criminal offense in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 20-4 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 20-4
20:15
Chapter 24
PENSIONS
§ 20-4 JACKSON CODE § 20-4
20:16
ARTICLE I
Police
[Adopted 8-3-1993 by Ord. No. 59-93]
§ 24-1. Adoption by reference. [Amended 9-2-2003 by Ord. No.
143-038]
The Jackson Township Police Retirement Plan, as contained in Contract
#800798, prepared by Standard Insurance Company, is hereby adopted and
enacted as though the provisions of the aforementioned retirement plan
were repeated and set out in this article in its entirety.
§ 24-2. Copies on file.
Copies of the aforementioned retirement plan are on file in the Jackson
Township Administrative Office.
8. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the effective date would be retroactive to
4-3-2001.
§ 24-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 24-2
20:17

ARTICLE II
Nonuniformed
[Adopted 8-3-1993 by Ord. No. 60-93]
§ 24-3. Adoption by reference. [Amended 9-2-2003 by Ord. No.
143-039]
The Jackson Township Nonuniformed Retirement Plan, as contained in
Contract #800799, prepared by Standard Insurance Company, is hereby
enacted as though the provisions of the aforementioned retirement plan
were repeated and set out in this article in their entirety.
§ 24-4. Copies on file.
Copies of the aforementioned retirement plan are on file in the Jackson
Township Administrative Office.10
9. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the effective date would be retroactive to
4-3-2001.
10.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Township Employees 457 Plan, adopted 9-6-2005 by Ord.
No. 163-05, and which immediately followed this section, was repealed 9-6-2011 by Ord.
No. 189-11.
§ 24-3 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 24-4
20:19
Chapter 28
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police pension plan — See Ch. 24, Art. I.
§ 24-4 JACKSON CODE § 24-4
28:20
ARTICLE I
Law Enforcement Services Agreement
[Adopted 1-7-1981 by Ord. No. 2-81]
§ 28-1. Limitation on law enforcement services; disputes.
§ 28-2. Enumeration of services.
The Township of Jackson, through its Police Department, shall provide law
enforcement services to the Borough of Spring Grove as follows:
A. The Township of Jackson agrees, through its Police Department, to
provide police protection within the corporate limits of the Borough of
Spring Grove to the extent and in the manner hereinafter set forth.
B. Except as otherwise hereinafter specifically set forth, such services
shall only encompass duties and functions of a type coming within the
jurisdiction of and customarily rendered by the Police Department of
Jackson Township and shall not include parades, carnivals, school
traffic or enforcement of parking ordinances.
C. The rendition of such services, the standards of performance, the
discipline of officers and other matters incident to the performance of
such services and the control of personnel so employed shall remain
with the Township.
D. In the event of a dispute between the parties concerning the extent of
the duties and functions to be rendered hereunder or concerning the
level and manner of performance of such service, the parties agree to
attempt to resolve any such dispute through a meeting and discussion
by a committee composed of a representative of the borough and a
representative appointed by the Township. [Amended 12-5-1995 by
Ord. No. 83-95]
E. During the term of this agreement and any extensions thereof, the
Township shall appoint a representative who shall meet regularly with
the Secretary of the borough concerning police matters.
A. Patrol service:
(1) Enforcement of the Vehicle Code11 of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, which is now and hereinafter will be enforced within
the limits of the borough.
(2) Enforcement of the Crimes Code12 of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, which is now and hereinafter will be enforced within
the limits of the borough.
11.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
12.Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 28-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 28-2
28:21
§ 28-3. Furnishing of equipment and supplies.
For the purpose of performing said functions and services, the Township
of Jackson shall furnish and supply all necessary supervision, equipment,
communications facilities and supplies necessary to maintain the level of
service to be rendered hereunder.
§ 28-4. Powers of police officers.
For the purpose of performing such services and functions and for the
purpose of giving official status to the performance thereof, every Township
police officer engaged in performing any such service and function shall
(3) Enforcement of the police ordinances of the borough which are the
same or similar in nature to those of the Township which are now
and hereinafter will be enforced within the limits of the borough.
(4) Maintain periodic security checks of business establishments
located within the limits of the borough.
(5) Report hazardous conditions existing within the borough to the
proper authority (i.e., traffic lights out, holes in the highways,
streetlights out, etc).
B. Investigative service:
(1) Investigate to a satisfactory conclusion all reported criminal
offenses within the limits of the borough.
(2) Investigate accidents occurring on highways or within the borough.
(3) Respond to citizen complaints and requests which are of a type and
similar in nature to those now or hereafter responded to and
investigated within the limits of the Township.
(4) Prosecute in the courts having jurisdiction those persons believed
to be responsible for criminal law, traffic law and ordinance
violations occurring within the borough.
C. Administrative service. The Township Police Department shall:
(1) Establish and maintain a complete and up-to-date uniform police
records system concerning all services rendered to the borough.
(2) Provide the borough with a monthly and yearly police activity
report setting forth an account of services rendered hereunder.
(3) Submit to the state and federal governments all required and
necessary reports that are of a type or similar in nature to those
that are now or hereafter submitted by the Township Police
Department.
(4) Make recommendations to the borough, if and when necessary, for
the improvement of traffic and other regulations.
§ 28-2 JACKSON CODE § 28-4
28:22
have all of the powers and authority conferred by law on borough police
while performing services for the borough in the borough.
§ 28-4.1. Warrantless arrests for certain enumerated offenses.
[Added 4-7-1998 by Ord. No. 105-98]
§ 28-5. Liability for salaries and compensation.
The Borough of Spring Grove shall not be required to assume any liability
for the direct payment of any salaries, wages or other compensation to any
Township personnel performing services hereunder for said borough or any
liability other than that provided for in this agreement.13
A. Police officers employed by Jackson Township Police Department
(Department) shall, upon view, have the right of arrest without warrant
upon probable cause when there is ongoing conduct that imperils the
personal security of any person or endangers private or public property
for any of the following offenses, when such offense constitutes a
summary offense pursuant to the Pennsylvania Crimes Code, 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.:
(1) 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5503 (relating to disorderly conduct);
(2) 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5505 (relating to public drunkenness);
(3) 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5507 (relating to obstructing highways and other
public passages); or
(4) 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6308 (relating to purchase, consumption, possession
or transportation of liquor or malt or brewed beverages).
B. Any officer effecting a warrantless arrest under this section shall
identify himself as a police officer by exhibiting a recognized sign of
authority, which sign shall consist of either an official police uniform of
the Department or an authorized official police badge or police
identification.
C. All warrantless arrests authorized by this section shall be made in
accordance with standards for other types of warrantless arrests and as
set forth in any other statute or law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania concerning the particular conduct or offense. In the event
that any statute or law of the commonwealth provides for more
stringent standards or requirements concerning such warrantless
arrests, the more stringent standards or requirements shall be followed
and shall be deemed to supersede the standards set forth in this
section. No change in the law on warrantless arrests, either by statute
or by the development of case law, shall be deemed or construed to
invalidate this section. Rather, any such change in the law on
warrantless arrests shall be considered to automatically amend this
section by becoming the standards authorized pursuant to this section
and this article.
§ 28-4 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 28-6
28:23
§ 28-6. Liability as an employer; indemnification; insurance.
The parties agree that the police officers of the Township of Jackson are
employed by the Township and under the exclusive supervision and control
of the Township, and the Township agrees, as such employer, to be
responsible for any acts and omissions of such police while on duty in
the Borough of Spring Grove to the same extent that the Township may
be responsible for such acts committed within the Township and agrees
to indemnify and hold harmless the borough from any such liability as an
employer on account of such acts or omissions. The Township agrees to
maintain appropriate insurance protecting the Township against liability for
such acts and omissions to the extent deemed appropriate by the Township.
§ 28-7. Scheduling of hours. [Amended 12-5-1995 by Ord. No.
83-95]
The parties agree that there shall be initially scheduled a minimum number
of hours of police services per week exclusively in the borough set from
time to time by the Board of Supervisors, and a complaint response will
be maintained during those times when there are no active patrols in the
borough. If this agreement shall be renewed, the number of hours set forth
herein may be altered by the parties from time to time, depending on the
needs of the borough, by an executed addendum without the necessity of
amending this agreement.
§ 28-8. Payment by borough for services. [Amended 12-5-1995 by
Ord. No. 83-95]
§ 28-9. No consolidation.
The parties hereto specifically agree and understand that there is no
consolidation of policemen employed by the two parties provided for under
this agreement, that the Township is not receiving or accepting any police
employees of the borough and that the discharge of or other disposition of
A. The borough agrees to pay the Township for the services performed
under this agreement an amount of money based on a per-hour charge
billed the borough, and said bill shall be paid by the 15th of each month
to the Township.
B. In addition, the Borough of Spring Grove agrees that the funds received
from the foreign casualty and insurance companies tax [Act of May 12,
1943, P.L. 259, as amended, (72 P.S. § 2263.1) or any other act
subsequently enacted] distributed to the borough by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be paid to the Township by the
borough for the purposes authorized under such act governing the
operation of the Police Pension Fund.
13.Editor's Note: Original Section 6, dealing with liability of the borough for compensation to
Township officers for sickness or injuries arising out of employment, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted 12-5-1995 by Ord. No. 83-95.
§ 28-6 JACKSON CODE § 28-9
28:24
any policemen heretofore employed by the borough is the sole responsibility
of the borough.
§ 28-10. Renewal.
This agreement shall automatically renew itself for the calendar year 1982
commencing January 1, 1982, and may be terminated by either party on any
December 31 by either party giving written notice 90 days or more prior
thereto by certified mail or by personal service. Accordingly, this agreement
may not be terminated prior to December 31, 1981, and so on.
§ 28-9 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 28-10
28:25

ARTICLE II
County Drug Task Force
[Adopted 10-2-1990 by Ord. No. 53-90]
§ 28-11. Participation.
Jackson Township, York County, Pennsylvania, shall participate in and
become a signatory to the York County Municipal Police Cooperative
Agreement.
§ 28-12. Selection of police officers.
§ 28-13. Representative to Joint Police Advisory Board.
As a signatory municipality to the agreement, the Jackson Township Board
of Supervisors shall appoint a representative to the Joint Police Advisory
Board. The term of such representative shall be at the sole discretion of the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 28-14. Expenses.
Expenses incurred by the Township while participating in accordance with
the agreement, other than police officer's salaries, shall not be paid for with
Township moneys, but shall be paid in accordance with the agreement.
A. As a signatory municipality to the agreement, the Jackson Township
Chief of Police shall submit to the Board of Supervisors for majority
approval a list of Township police officers to be considered for selection
to the Drug Task Force.
B. Only those officers selected both by the Board of Supervisors and the
Drug Task Force's Narcotics Operations Officers will participate in the
Drug Task Force. The Board of Supervisors may revoke an officer's
selection or participation in the Drug Task Force at any time.
§ 28-11 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 28-14
28:27

ARTICLE III
Participation in Northern York County Regional Police Commission
[Adopted 12-3-2002 by Ord. No. 134-02]
§ 28-15. Execution of agreement.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Jackson, Pennsylvania, are
authorized and directed to execute and deliver the joinder agreement
attached hereto, which subjects Jackson Township to the terms and
conditions set forth in the Composite Charter of January 21, 1986. Further,
the specific terms, conditions and provisions of the agreement are made a
part hereof.14
§ 28-16. Provisions of agreement.
The conditions, duration and term, purpose and objective, scope and
authority delegated, manner and extent of financing, organizational
structure and manner in which personal property shall be acquired,
managed and disposed of, are set forth in the attached agreement.
14.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 28-15 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 28-16
28:29
Chapter 32
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 20.
§ 28-16 JACKSON CODE § 28-16
32:30
ARTICLE I
Supervisors
[Adopted 1-6-1986 by Ord. No. 35-86]
§ 32-1. Annual compensation.
Each Supervisor of Jackson Township elected or appointed to office on or
after November 5, 1985, shall receive compensation as a Supervisor in the
annual amount of $1,200.
§ 32-2. Payment in installments. [Amended 12-5-1995 by Ord. No.
83-95]
Such compensation shall be paid in monthly installments.
§ 32-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 32-2
32:31
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 36
ADULT USES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning (adult-oriented facilities) — See Ch.
133.
§ 36-1. Purpose and findings; interpretations.
A. Purpose.
(1) Pursuant to the authority granted in the Second Class Township
Code to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of
the inhabitants of Jackson Township (hereinafter "Township"), to
regulate and inspect the use and occupancy of buildings, to
regulate places of public entertainment, amusement, and
recreation, and to prevent and prohibit public nuisances due to
adverse secondary effects, the Township enacts this chapter to
minimize and control the adverse secondary effects of sexually
oriented businesses, including adult bookstores, adult cabarets,
and adult theaters, and thereby to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of its citizens, protect the citizens' property values and the
character of surrounding neighborhoods, and deter the spread of
blight.
(2) The Township has determined that licensing is a legitimate and
reasonable means of accountability to insure that operators of
sexually oriented businesses comply with reasonable regulations
and to insure that operators do not knowingly allow their
establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or
solicitation.
(3) The Township does not intend this chapter to suppress any speech
activities protected by the First Amendment but to enact a contentneutral
ordinance, which addresses the secondary effects of
sexually oriented businesses. It is not the intent of the Township in
enacting this legislation to deny any person rights of speech
protected by the Constitution of the United States or the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or both, nor is
it the intent of the Township to impose any additional limitations or
restrictions on the contents of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented films, videotapes, books, or other
materials. Further, by enacting this legislation the Township does
not intend to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain or
view, or both, any sexually oriented materials or conduct protected
§ 32-2 JACKSON CODE § 36-1
36:32
by the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or both, nor does it intend
to restrict or deny any constitutionally protected rights that
distributors or exhibitors of sexually oriented materials have to sell,
distribute, or exhibit these materials.
B. The Township Board of Supervisors finds as follows:
(1) Law enforcement personnel have determined, and statistics and
studies performed in a substantial number of communities in this
commonwealth and in the United States indicate, that sexually
oriented businesses have adverse secondary effects, which
secondary effects should be regulated to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare. These secondary effects include, but are not
limited to, the spread of communicable diseases, performance of
sexual acts in public places, presence of discarded sexually
oriented materials on public and private property, sexual
harassment, obscenity, prostitution and other illegal sexual
activities, crime, decreased property values, and neighborhood
deterioration.
(2) Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of
adult uses on the community in findings incorporated in the cases
of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986),
Young v. Amer. Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 41 (1976), and Barnes v.
Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991) and on other information
available to the Township, the Township finds as follows:
(a) Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary
unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently
uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments.
(b) Certain employees of adult cabarets engage in higher
incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than
employees of other establishments.
(c) Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex,
occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which
provide private or semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing
films, videos, or live sex shows. Furthermore, adult bookstores
tend to attract customers who engage in unprotected, high-risk
sexual activities.
(d) Offering and providing such space encourages such activities,
which creates unhealthy conditions.
(e) Persons frequent certain adult theaters and other sexually
oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sexual
activities within the premises of such sexually oriented
businesses.
§ 36-1 ADULT USES § 36-1
36:33
(f) At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including but not
limited to syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus
infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B
amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella infections.
(g) The Surgeon General of the United States in his report of
October 22, 1986, has advised the American public that AIDS
and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact,
intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood
components, and from an infected mother to her newborn
child.
(h) According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV
infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally
transmitted by sexual acts.
(i) Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are
unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of
the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of
the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those
facilities.
(j) Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is
found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where
persons view sexually oriented films.
(k) Numerous studies have indicated that sexually oriented
businesses have a substantial negative impact on property
values and cause neighborhood blight.
(l) The findings noted in Subsection B(2)(a) through (k) raise
substantial governmental concerns.
(3) Sexually oriented businesses have adverse secondary effects,
which secondary effects should be regulated to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
(4) Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics that
should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those
substantial governmental concerns.
(5) A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and
the operators of sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a
licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive
on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in
a manner consistent with the health, safety, and welfare of its
patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the Township. It is
appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is
the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in
§ 36-1 JACKSON CODE § 36-1
36:34
possession and control of the premises and activities occurring
therein.
(6) Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting
on premises with adult booths advances a substantial
governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual
activity occurring in adult facilities.
(7) Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep
information regarding current employees and certain past
employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of
criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential
witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in
such establishments.
(8) The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the
sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially
related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of
such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted
diseases.
(9) It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable
diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding
certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this
chapter is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to
such activity.
(10) The fact that an applicant for a sexually oriented business license
has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational
assumption that the applicant is likely to engage in that conduct in
contravention of this chapter.
(11) The barring of such individuals from the management of sexually
oriented businesses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to
and prevents conduct that leads to the transmission of sexually
transmitted diseases.
(12) The general welfare, health and safety of the citizens of the
Township will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.
(13) The limitation of operating hours of sexually oriented businesses
from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Mondays through Saturdays, and
closure of such businesses on Sundays and holidays reduces the
adverse secondary effects of such businesses, including
particularly, but not limited to, late night noise levels, crime and
sexually offensive materials and activities in public areas, and
promotes the public health, safety, and welfare.
(14) The reasonable regulation and supervision of sexually oriented
businesses tends to discourage sexual acts and prostitution and
§ 36-1 ADULT USES § 36-1
36:35
§ 36-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings indicated unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment in which 5% or more of the
occupied sales or display area offers for sale, for rent or lease, for loan
or for view upon the premises, pictures, photographs, drawings, prints,
images, sculpture, still film, motion-picture film, videotape or similar visual
representations distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on sexual
conduct or sexually explicit nudity; or books, pamphlets, magazines, printed
matter or sound recordings containing explicit and detailed descriptions or
narrative accounts distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on sexual
conduct; or offers for sale sexual devices.
ADULT CABARET — An establishment, club, tavern, restaurant, theater, or
hall that features live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT —
thereby promotes the health, safety and welfare of patrons, clients
and customers of these businesses.
(15) The continued unregulated operation of such sexually oriented
businesses would be detrimental to the general health, safety, and
welfare of the citizens of the Township.
C. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, comforts, convenience, and general welfare of the
Township's citizens. Where the provisions of any statute, other
ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than this chapter,
the provisions of such statute, other ordinance, or regulation shall be
controlling. Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater
restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or regulation, the
provisions of this chapter shall be controlling to the extent allowed by
law. However, in no case shall the provisions of this chapter be
interpreted in such a manner as to violate the United States
Constitution or the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
An exhibition of any adult-oriented motion pictures which are
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specific sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; or
A.
A live performance, display or dance of any type, which has, as a
significant or substantial portion of the performance, any actual or
simulated performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition or
viewing of specified anatomical areas or persons in a state of nudity or
seminudity; or
B.
§ 36-1 JACKSON CODE § 36-2
36:36
ADULT THEATER — A building or a room within a building used for
presenting motion-picture film, videotape, or similar visual representation
of materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on sexual
conduct or sexually explicit nudity.
EMPLOYEE — A person who performs any service on the premises of
a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis,
whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent, lessee, lessee of a dance floor or space or otherwise, and
whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage, or compensation by the
operator of the business. "Employee" does not include a person exclusively
on the premises for the repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment
on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another, or who agrees or offers to privately
model lingerie or to privately perform a strip tease for another person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish, or advertise to furnish escorts as one of its business purposes for
a fee, tip, or other consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT or ESTABLISH —
KNOWINGLY — Having a general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a
belief or grounds for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of
either:
LICENSEE — A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an
applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
C.
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
A.
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
B.
The addition of any sexually oriented business or sexually oriented use
to any other existing sexually oriented use; or
C.
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
The character and content of any material or performance described
herein which is reasonably susceptible of examination by a licensee or
persons; or
A.
The age of a minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall
constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the licensee or person
made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such
minor.
B.
§ 36-2 ADULT USES § 36-2
36:37
person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in
a sexually oriented business.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears
seminude, in a state of nudity, or who displays specified anatomical areas
and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any
form of consideration. "Nude model studios" shall not include a proprietary
school licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a
private college or university which maintains and operates educational
programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation, or in a structure where:
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less
than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less
than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the
covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
SEMINUDE or IN A SEMINUDE CONDITION — The state of dress in which
clothing partially or opaquely covers specified anatomical areas.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult theater, escort agency, nude
model studio, sexual encounter center, or other commercial or not-for-profit
establishment where adult entertainment is presented for money or other
forms of consideration.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Human genitals, pubic region, anus,
buttocks, female breast(s) below a point above the top of the areola, or
No sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other
advertising indicates that a nude or seminude person is available for
viewing; and
A.
In order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three
days in advance of the class; and
B.
No more than one nude or seminude model is in on the premises at one
time.
C.
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminudity.
B.
§ 36-2 JACKSON CODE § 36-2
36:38
human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely
covered.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT — The increase in floor areas occupied by
a sexually oriented business by more than 35%, as the floor areas exist on
the date of licensing.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL —
Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity;
sales, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual
performance by a child; possession or distribution of child
pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a
child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault;
molestation of a child; gambling; or distribution of a controlled
substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under the
criminal or penal code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or other
states or countries, for which:
Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor
offense; or
(1)
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement for conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is a felony offense; or
(2)
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of
two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor
offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period.
(3)
A.
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant.
B.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breast; or
A.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
B.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsections A and B of this definition above; or
C.
D. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
A. The sale, lease, or sublease of a sexually oriented business; or
§ 36-2 ADULT USES § 36-2
36:39
VIEWING BOOTHS — Booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room, rooms,
or other enclosures that are available for viewing:
§ 36-3. Business or employee license required; application.
The establishment or a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of a sexually oriented business; or
B.
Any change in the identity of the officers or directors of a corporation
operating a sexually oriented business.
C.
Films, movies, videos, or visual reproductions of any kind depicting or
describing specified anatomical areas; or
A.
A person or persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or
who offer performances or presentations characterized by the exposure
of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
B.
A. It shall be unlawful:
(1) For any person to establish and operate a sexually oriented
business after the effective date of this chapter without a valid
sexually oriented business license issued by the Township pursuant
to this chapter;
(2) For any person who establishes and operates a sexually oriented
business after the effective date of this chapter to employee a
person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not
licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the Township
pursuant to this chapter;
(3) For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented
business after the effective date of this chapter without having
secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to
this chapter;
(4) Beginning on the 180th day after enactment of this chapter, for any
person to continue to operate a sexually oriented business already
in operation on the effective date of this chapter without a valid
sexually oriented business license pursuant to this chapter;
(5) Beginning on the 180th day after the effective date of this chapter
for any person operating a sexually oriented business in operation
at the time of the enactment of this chapter to employ a person to
work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a
sexually oriented business employee by the Township pursuant to
this chapter;
(6) Beginning on the 180th day after the effective date of this chapter
for any person working as an employee of a sexually oriented
business on the effective date of this chapter to continue such
employment without having secured a sexually oriented business
employee license pursuant to this chapter.
§ 36-2 JACKSON CODE § 36-3
36:40
B. Application for a business or employee license must be made on a form
provided by the Township. For purposes of this chapter, the
responsibility for conducting any investigation, receiving and
processing any application, and issuing or denying any license required
under this chapter shall be the Township's Zoning Officer or other
Township official so designated by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
C. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide
such information as to enable the Township to determine whether the
applicant meets the qualifications established in this chapter.
D. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, the person must sign the application for a license as
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20% or
greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license
as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under the following
section and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is
granted.
E. The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall
contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the
following documents:
(1) If the applicant is:
(a) An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and
any aliases and submit proof that he/she is at least 18 years of
age;
(b) A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name,
and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is
general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if
any;
(c) A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation, the type of classification of the
corporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing
under the laws of its state of incorporation and qualified and
authorized to conduct business in Pennsylvania, the names and
capacity of all officers, directors, and the name of the
registered corporate agent and address of the registered office
for service of process;
(d) Any entity other than a partnership or corporation, the entity
shall submit the information required in § 36-3E(10) for each
person exercising control over the entity.
(2) If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must state
§ 36-3 ADULT USES § 36-3
36:41
the sexually oriented business's fictitious name and submit the
required registration documents.
(3) Whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity as defined in this chapter and, if so, the specified criminal
activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
(4) Whether the applicant has had a previous license under this
chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from
another municipality, county, or jurisdiction denied, suspended or
revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented
business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked,
as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and
whether the applicant has been a partner in a partnership, or an
officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is
licensed under this chapter whose license has previously been
denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of
the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied,
suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or
revocation.
(5) Whether the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter
or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another
municipality, county, or jurisdiction, and if so, the names and
locations of such other licensed businesses.
(6) The specific classification of sexually oriented use for which the
applicant is filing, along with a detailed description of each and
every activity encompassed by the proposed sexually oriented use,
which description shall thoroughly demonstrate compliance and/or
intended compliance with all provisions of this chapter.
(7) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a
legal description of the property, street address, and telephone
number(s), if any.
(8) The applicant's mailing address and residential address.
(9) A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
(10) The applicant's driver's permit number, social security number,
and/or his/her state or federally issued tax identification number.
(11) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.
The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.
(12) If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business,
which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room or booth of
§ 36-3 JACKSON CODE § 36-3
36:42
less than 150 square feet of floor space, films, video cassettes,
other video reproductions, or live entertainment which depict
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the
applicant shall also comply with the application requirements set
forth in § 36-12 of this chapter.
(13) A statement of intended operating hours in compliance with
§ 36-18 of this chapter.
(14) An infectious control plan to protect employees and the public from
bodily fluids of infectious contamination. A copy of the plan shall be
attached to the application and shall be OSHA (Occupational Safety
and Health Act) compliant.
F. Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business
employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by
the Township the following information:
(1) The applicant's name or any other name (including "stage" names)
or aliases used by the individual;
(2) Age, date and place of birth;
(3) Height, weight, hair and eye color;
(4) Present residence address and telephone number;
(5) Present business address and telephone number;
(6) Date, issuing state and number of driver's license or other
identification card information;
(7) Social security number; and
(8) Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
G. Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business
employee license as provided above shall be the following:
(1) A color photograph clearly showing the applicant's face, to be
taken at the time the application is filed, which photograph shall be
used to complete the criminal background check required by this
chapter.
(2) A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for five
years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application, including whether such applicant previously operated
or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county, municipality,
sate, or country any sexually oriented business or has ever had a
license, permit, or authorization to operate a sexually oriented
business denied, revoked, or suspended, or had any professional or
vocational license or permit denied, revoked or suspended. In the
event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name
of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the
§ 36-3 ADULT USES § 36-3
36:43
§ 36-4. Issuance of license; temporary license; renewal.
reason for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any
order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the
application.
(3) A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter and, if so, the
specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction
of each.
(4) A statement acknowledging that the employee has reviewed the
infectious control plan adopted by the sexually oriented business.
H. Any and all sexually oriented businesses in operation within the
Township, as of the effective date of this chapter, must apply for the
required licenses, and pay any applicable license fees under this
chapter within five months after the effective date of this chapter and
furthermore must come into full compliance with this chapter within six
months after the effective date of this chapter.
I. To the extent permitted by law, all applications for licenses required by
this chapter, and materials submitted therewith, shall be maintained by
the Township in a confidential file.
A. Upon the filing of a fully completed application form for a sexually
oriented business license or employee license, the Township shall issue
a temporary license to said applicant, which shall entitle the applicant
to operate the sexually oriented business or work as an employee. The
application shall then be referred to the Township Zoning Officer or
other Township official so designated by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors as the licensing administrator for purposes of this chapter
for an investigation to be made on such information as is contained on
the application. The processing and investigation of the application
shall be completed within 30 days of the date that the fully completed
application is filed with the Township. Any incomplete application shall
be returned to the applicant, and the thirty-day period for processing
and investigation shall not commence until a fully completed
application has been filed. After the processing and investigation, the
Township shall issue a permanent license, unless it is determined by a
preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following
findings is true:
(1) The applicant has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form.
(2) The applicant is under the age of 18 years.
(3) The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as
defined in this chapter.
§ 36-3 JACKSON CODE § 36-4
36:44
(4) The license is to be used for operation of a business or employment
in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or
regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this chapter.
(5) The applicant has had a sexually oriented business license or
sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the
Township or any other jurisdiction within one year of the date of the
current application.
(6) The required application, investigation, and license fees have not
been paid.
(7) The application demonstrates that the proposed sexually oriented
business is in violation of or is not in compliance with any
provisions of this chapter.
(8) If the sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented
business employee license is denied, the temporary license
previously issued shall remain in effect during all appeals. Denial,
nonrenewal, suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant
to this subsection shall be subject to appeal as set forth in § 36-9.
B. A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual
renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by
the Township that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified
criminal activity as defined in this chapter or committed any act during
the existence of the previous licensee that would be grounds to deny
the initial license application. The renewal of the license shall be
subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in § 36-5.
C. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or
persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the
sexually oriented business or employee and the specific classification of
sexually oriented use for which the license is issued. All licenses shall
be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the sexually
oriented business so that they may be easily read at any time.
D. Applications for license required by the Township under this chapter
shall be processed and either denied or approved within 30 days after a
complete application is filed with the Township. A letter notifying the
applicant of such denial or approval shall be mailed to the applicant
within 30 days of the submittal of a complete application. If the
Township fails to render a decision granting, denying or renewing a
license required by this chapter within 30 days after a complete
application is filed with the Township, the permanent license required
by this chapter shall be deemed to have been approved. This "deemed
approval" rule shall apply to both applications for sexually oriented
business licenses and sexually oriented business employee licenses.
E. A sexually oriented business license shall be issued for the specific
classification of a sexually oriented use permitted by this chapter and
for which application has been made.
§ 36-4 ADULT USES § 36-4
36:45
§ 36-5. Fees.
§ 36-6. Inspections.
Subject to the consent of an applicant or licensee, the Township Zoning
Officer or other Township official so designated by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors may inspect the premises of sexually oriented businesses for
purposes of ensuring compliance with this chapter during any time it is
open for business. In the event that the Township Zoning Officer or other
Township official so designated by resolution of the Board of Supervisors
has probable cause to believe that a sexually oriented business is operating
in violation of this chapter, he may inspect the premises of the sexually
oriented business for purposes of ensuring compliance with this chapter
during any time it is open for business.
§ 36-7. Expiration of license.
F. Any person aggrieved by the denial, suspension, nonrenewal or
revocation of a license may appeal, in writing, within 10 days from the
date of such denial, suspension, nonrenewal or revocation to the
Township Board of Supervisors in accordance with the procedures set
forth in § 36-9.
A. Every application for a new sexually oriented business license shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application and investigation fee in
amount to be set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
B. Every application for renewal of an existing sexually oriented business
license shall be accompanied by an annual nonrefundable renewal
license fee within 30 days of license renewal. Said fee shall be set by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
C. Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license
(whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by an annual nonrefundable application, investigation and
license fee. Said fee shall be set by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
D. All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the office of the
Township Secretary/Treasurer, and thereafter, the application shall be
forwarded to the Township Zoning Officer designated as licensing
administrator for review, investigation, and approval or denial.
A. Each license issued under this chapter shall expire one year from the
date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as
provided in § 36-3. Application for renewal shall be made at least 30
days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days
before the expiration date, the date of expiration of the license will not
be extended.
§ 36-4 JACKSON CODE § 36-7
36:46
§ 36-8. Suspension and revocation.
B. When the Township Zoning Officer or other Township official so
designated by resolution of the Board of Supervisors denies renewal of
a license, the applicant shall not be issued a new license for one year
from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the Township Zoning
Officer or other Township official so designated by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors finds that the basis for denial of the renewal
license has been corrected and abated, the applicant may be granted a
license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became
final.
A. The Township Zoning Officer or other Township official so designated
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors shall suspend a license for a
period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee or an
employee of a licensee has violated or is not in compliance with any
provision of this chapter.
B. The Township Zoning Officer or other Township official so designated
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors shall revoke a license if a
cause of suspension in Subsection A occurs and the license has been
suspended within the preceding 12 months.
C. The Township Zoning Officer shall revoke a license if he determines
that:
(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
(2) A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
(3) A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(4) A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business
during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
(5) A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in
or on the licensed premises;
(6) A licensee is delinquent in payment to the Township, county, or
state for any taxes or fees past due; or
(7) A licensee has failed to develop and follow an infectious control
plan to protect employees and the public.
D. When the Township Zoning Officer or other Township official so
designated by resolution of the Board of Supervisors revokes the
license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and a licensee shall
not be issued a new sexually oriented business license for one year from
the date the revocation becomes effective.
§ 36-7 ADULT USES § 36-9
36:47
§ 36-9. Appeals.
A. All license application denial, renewal, suspension, or revocation
decisions shall be sent in writing to the applicant or licensee. All such
decisions which deny, refuse to renew, suspend, or revoke a license
shall state specifically the chapter requirement not met and any other
basis for the decision. After denial of an application, or denial of a
renewal of an application, or after suspension or revocation of any
license, the applicant or licensee may appeal pursuant to procedures of
the Local Agency Law (2 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) to the Township Board
of Supervisors, except as modified herein. Any such appeal must be
filed, in writing, with the Township Secretary, within 10 days from the
date of the mailing of the decision appealed from and shall specify, in
detail, the basis for the appeal. Failure or refusal to file said appeal or to
specify the basis of said appeal shall be deemed a conclusive
determination as to the issues or matters addressed by the written
decision. If an appeal is timely filed, the Township Board of Supervisors
will then hold Local Agency Law hearing pursuant to 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 101
et seq. within 20 days from the date the appeal is filed and will render a
written decision within 10 days from the date such hearing concludes.
In the case of a denial of a license or license renewal, or in the case of a
license suspension or revocation, the licensee may continue to operate
to the same extent as immediately prior to the suspension or revocation
until the earlier of:
(1) The expiration of the ten-day appeal period without filing an
appeal; or
(2) The date of a final decision dismissing any appeal.
B. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Township Board of
Supervisors may appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to
the Local Agency Law (2 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) and 42 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 933(a)(2). The Township shall, upon filing of such appeal, consent to
any request by a licensee applicant or licensee to the court to give
expedited review of such appeal. The Township shall certify any record
to the court within 20 days after the appeal is filed. In the case of a
denial of a license or license renewal, or in the case of a license
suspension or revocation, the licensee may continue to operate to the
same extent as immediately prior to the suspension or revocation until
the earlier of:
(1) The expiration of the thirty-day appeal period without filing an
appeal; or
(2) The date of a decision dismissing an appeal by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 36-9 JACKSON CODE § 36-10
36:48
§ 36-10. Transfer of license.
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee
operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address designated in the application.
§ 36-11. Additional regulations regarding enlargement of sexually
oriented businesses.
A licensed sexually oriented business may not be substantially enlarged
without a new license.
§ 36-12. Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit
films, videos, or live entertainment in viewing rooms.
A. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than
150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, live entertainment,
or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises
showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more
manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures
and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will
not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square
feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at
which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or
architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram
should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or
object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked
dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all
areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus
six inches. The Township may waive the foregoing diagram for
renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted and certified that the configuration of the
premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station
may be made without the prior approval of the Township.
(4) It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least
one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's
station at any time that any patron is present inside the premises.
§ 36-10 ADULT USES § 36-12
36:49
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose excluding rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain
video reproduction equipment. The view required by this
subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's
station.
(6) It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area
specified in Subsection A(5) remains unobstructed by any doors,
curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted
access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an
area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed
pursuant to Subsection A(1) of this section.
(7) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any
time.
(8) The premises shall be quipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle
as measured at the floor level.
(9) It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.
(10)No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between
viewing rooms or booths.
(11)No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind
between viewing booths or rooms.
(12) The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the
walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or
holes exist.
(13) The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be
nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
(14) The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in
viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by,
nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood,
composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48
inches of the floor.
(15) A licensee shall brief all employees as to the approved infectious
control plan and OSHA regulations before and during employment
at intervals of no more than six months.
§ 36-12 JACKSON CODE § 36-12
36:50
§ 36-13. Additional regulations to prevent physical contact with
patrons.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person to knowingly or
intentionally in a sexually oriented business appear in a seminude or nude
condition unless the person is an employee, licensed under this chapter,
who, while nude or seminude, shall be at least two feet from any patron or
customer and on a stage at least two feet from the floor.
§ 36-14. Additional regulations for escort agencies.
§ 36-15. Additional regulations for nude model studios.
§ 36-16. Additional regulations.
B. A person having a duty under Subsections A(1) through (15) above
commits a violation of this chapter if he/she knowingly fails to fulfill that
duty.
A. An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
B. A person commits a violation of this chapter if the person acts as an
escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18
years.
A. A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
B. A person under the age of 18 years commits a violation of this chapter if
the person appears seminude or in a state of nudity and/or on the
premises of a nude model studio.
C. A person commits a violation of this chapter if the person appears in a
state of nudity, or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of
nudity on a nude model studio's premises, where said person can be
viewed from the public right-of-way.
D. A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in
any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a
reception room open to the public.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person to knowingly or
intentionally, in a public place:
(1) Engage in sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse as
defined by the Pennsylvania Crimes Code; or
(2) Fondle the genitals of himself, herself, or another person.
B. For purposes of this chapter, a "public place" includes all outdoor areas
owned by or open to the general public, including but not limited to
places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants, clubs, theaters, dance
§ 36-12 ADULT USES § 36-16
36:51
§ 36-17. Prohibition against children in a sexually oriented
business.
A person commits a violation of this chapter if the person knowingly allows
a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented
business.
§ 36-18. Hours and days of operation.
No sexually oriented business shall be open for business before 8:00 a.m.,
Monday through Saturday, or after 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
A sexually oriented business shall be closed at all times on Sundays and
federal- and state-recognized holidays.
§ 36-19. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 40
AMUSEMENTS
halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls limited to specific members
and party or halls restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend,
whether or not an admission charge is levied. This section shall not
apply to:
(1) Any child 10 years of age or younger; or
(2) Any individual exposing a breast in the process of breast-feeding an
infant under two years of age.
C. It is the intention of the Township that this section be construed,
enforced and interpreted in such a manner as will cause the least
possible infringement on the constitutional rights of free speech, free
expression, due process, equal protection or other fundamental rights.
A. For a violation of any provision of this chapter, enforcement shall be
brought before a District Justice in the same manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure. Upon conviction thereof, a violator shall be subject
to a criminal fine not to exceed $1,000 per violation, plus costs, or a
term of imprisonment to the extent allowed by law for the punishment
of summary offenses, or to a term of imprisonment for the failure to pay
a fine pursuant to the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. A
separate offense shall arise for each day or portion thereof in which a
violation is found to exist for each section of this chapter which is found
to have been violated.
B. The Township may enforce any violation of this chapter through an
equity action brought in the Court of Common Pleas of York County.
§ 36-16 JACKSON CODE § 40-1
40:52
§ 40-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Jackson Township
Amusement Ordinance."
§ 40-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the following meanings, respectively, except
in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADMISSION — A monetary charge of any character whatever, including
donations, contributions and dues, membership fees (periodical or
otherwise) charged or paid or proceeds from concessions, licenses or in any
manner benefiting a promoter and/or owner of premises as herein defined
from the general public or limited or selected number thereof, directly or
indirectly, for the privilege of attending or engaging in any amusement as
herein defined.
AMUSEMENT — Any manner or form of public entertainment, amusement
or recreation conducted within the Township of Jackson, including but not
limited to the following: theatrical performance, operatic performance, folk
or music festival, carnival, circus, show, concert, sports events, auto race,
vaudeville show, side show, amusement park and all forms of entertainment
therein, dancing and any other form of diversion, sport, pastime or
recreation, provided that "amusement" shall not include any form of
entertainment which is conducted entirely within the confines of a building
regularly used for such entertainment.[Amended 12-5-1995 by Ord. No.
83-95]
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Jackson Township.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, association, firm,
trust, club, company or corporation.
PROMOTER AND/OR OWNER OF THE PREMISES — Any person as herein
defined who shall conduct any amusement as herein defined in the
Township of Jackson.[Amended 12-5-1995 by Ord. No. 83-95]
TOWNSHIP — Jackson Township, York County, Pennsylvania.
§ 40-3. Regulations.
Every person operating an amusement under this chapter shall conduct the
amusement and shall maintain the licensed premises in accordance with the
following regulations and any subsequent regulations adopted by the Board:
A. Such premises shall, at all reasonable times, be subject to the
inspection of the Board and/or any police official of the Township or
other persons authorized by the Board.
B. Such premises shall, at all times, be maintained so as not to constitute a
nuisance or a menace to the health of the community or of residents
nearby or a place for the breeding of rodents or vermin.
§ 40-1 AMUSEMENTS § 40-3
40:53
C. Adequate and suitable containers shall be provided for the deposit and
storage of garbage, refuse and other organic and inorganic waste. No
garbage or other organic waste shall be stored on such premises for a
period exceeding 72 hours.
D. All necessary measures shall be taken to prevent and extinguish fires.
Adequate equipment for minimizing fire hazards shall be available at
the site. All equipment and buildings shall be equipped with functional
fire extinguishers of the proper class and type. It shall be the
responsibility of the promoter and/or owner of the premises to provide
such fire-fighting equipment, either privately or by contract, with an
organized fire company.
E. It shall be the responsibility of the promoter and/or owner of the
premises to adequately provide for the cleanup and proper disposal of
all paper, bottles, cans, glass, metal, plastic and all other inorganic
refuse on the premises as well as any such materials or refuse that may
be deposited on any adjacent premises upon the request of the owner of
such premises and upon the public roadway or right-of-way within a
period of 24 hours after the conclusion of the amusement event.
F. It shall be the responsibility of the promoter and/or owner of the
premises to provide for adequate traffic control to ensure safe and
orderly flow of traffic entering upon or exiting from the premises and
from or onto all public roads abutting the premises.
G. It shall be the responsibility of the promoter and/or owner of the
premises to provide for adequate parking facilities either on the
premises or an adjacent property. A minimum of one parking space
shall be provided for each two persons attending the amusement at a
given time based upon the number of persons estimated or expected by
the promoter and/or owner of the premises to attend or the number of
advance ticket sales made up to and including 10 days prior to the
scheduled date for the amusement, whichever is greater. Adequate
measures shall be taken to ensure that no vehicles are parked upon any
part of the traveled portion of any public roadway or upon the property
of any other person without the prior written consent of such person.
H. It shall be the responsibility of the promoter and/or owner of the
premises to provide adequate security measures to ensure protection of
persons and property of persons attending the amusement as well as
persons and property in the vicinity of the premises from acts of
trespassing, theft, mischief, vandalism, riot, rowdyism and destruction
of property arising out of the conduct of persons attending the
amusement. The type of security measures and the number of
personnel so employed shall be subject to such standards as may
reasonably be adopted under the particular circumstances.
I. It shall be the responsibility of the promoter and/or owner of the
premises to provide adequate medical care and/or facilities on the
premises at all times during the conduct of the amusement.
§ 40-3 JACKSON CODE § 40-3
40:54
§ 40-4. Bond required for large events.
§ 40-5. Additional regulations.
The Board may, from time to time, adopt such additional regulations to
carry out the provisions of this chapter as it deems necessary upon notice
to existing licensees affected by such additional regulations.
§ 40-6. Violations. [Amended 12-5-1995 by Ord. No. 83-95;
8-13-1996 by Ord. No. 91-96]
J. No amusement shall be conducted before 8:00 a.m. and after 12:00
p.m.
A. Should any promoter and/or owner of the premises anticipate an
attendance exceeding 10,000 people, he or she shall contact the Board
or Chief of Police 45 days prior to the amusement to advise the
Township of the arrangements he or she has made to provide for the
compliance of these regulations. The Board may, if it determines the
capacity of the attendance could pose a danger to the health, safety or
property of people within the Township, require the posting of a bond in
an amount not to exceed the anticipated cost to the Township to provide
the services in the event the promoter and/or owner of the premises
fails to comply with this chapter. Failure to post an acceptable bond
seven days prior to the scheduled amusement shall be prima facie
evidence that the promoter and/or owner of the premises intends to
violate this chapter.
B. Any amusement conducted exceeding 10,000 people without following
the procedure outlined in Subsection A herein shall constitute a
violation of this chapter. The defense that the promoter and/or owner of
the premises did not anticipate that large an attendance shall not be
recognized in that it shall be the promoter's and/or owner of premises'
responsibility to refuse admittance in excess of 10,000 people unless
Subsection A has been complied with.
A. Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $600
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Township as a result thereof. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Township.
§ 40-3 AMUSEMENTS § 40-7
40:55
§ 40-7. Additional remedies.
In addition to the remedies provided in § 40-6 above for a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter or of any rule or regulation made
hereunder, the Township may institute in the name of the Township any
appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity to prevent, restrain,
correct or abate any such violation or to seek restitution for the Township's
expenditures or property damage.
§ 40-8. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be taken or construed to conflict
with or otherwise limit the provisions of any other ordinance or law
imposing any other greater requirements or restrictions, and in the event of
any such duplication, the provisions imposing the greater requirements or
restriction shall prevail.
Chapter 44
ANIMALS
§ 40-7 JACKSON CODE § 40-8
44:56
ARTICLE I
Barking Dogs
[Adopted 3-5-1985 by Ord. No. 34-85]
§ 44-1. Barking dogs considered a nuisance. [Amended 12-5-1995
by Ord. No. 83-95; 8-13-1996 by Ord. No. 91-96]
No person, partnership, firm, corporation nor association, whether as
landowner, tenant, possessor or occupier, shall cause or permit dogs to bark
or otherwise make noise upon land owned, leased, possessed or occupied by
them in Jackson Township, which noise or barking shall in fact be a nuisance
if proven to be a nuisance in a civil enforcement proceeding as hereinafter
set forth.
§ 44-2. Nuisance defined. [Amended 12-5-1995 by Ord. No. 83-95]
The nuisance contemplated in this article is the unreasonable barking of
dogs which cause injury, damage, hurt, inconvenience, annoyance or
discomfort to others in the legitimate enjoyment of their reasonable right of
person and property after prior written warning by a police officer.
§ 44-3. Violations. [Amended 12-5-1995 by Ord. No. 83-95;
8-13-1996 by Ord. No. 91-96]
A. Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $600
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Township as a result thereof. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this article shall be paid over to the Township.
§ 44-1 ANIMALS § 44-3
44:57
Chapter 47
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 69.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
113.
Zoning — See Ch. 133.
§ 44-3 JACKSON CODE § 44-3
47:58
ARTICLE I
Building Permits
[Adopted 9-5-1995 by Ord. No. 82-95]
§ 47-1. Building permit required; fee.
§ 47-2. Other permits required.
At the time of filing an application for a building permit, the applicant
shall present evidence that he or she has obtained all necessary permits,
licenses and other approvals as may be required under other laws of this
commonwealth and/or of this Township and shall in addition establish that
the proposed work would not constitute a violation of this chapter, Chapter
133, Zoning, or Chapter 113, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 47-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
STRUCTURE — Any object placed upon the land or buildings thereon, and
it shall include but not be limited to buildings, accessory buildings, utility
sheds, swimming pools, decks, porches or driveways.
§ 47-4. Repair of structures.
There shall be no permit required to repair structures damaged, provided
that they were erected by a permit.
§ 47-5. Workers' compensation.
A. Pursuant to the authority of the Second Class Township Code,15 the
Township of Jackson, York County, Pennsylvania, does hereby require
that all persons within Jackson Township must apply for a building
permit before commencing any work on a structure.
B. The fee for said permit shall be established by resolution.16
A. All contractors who apply for a building permit must present proof of
workers' compensation insurance or a notarized affidavit stating that
the contractor does not employ other individuals and is not required to
carry workers' compensation insurance.
B. All individual property owners, if performing their own work, must
present an affidavit stating that he or she is performing their own work
and not paying any nonrelated individuals to assist them.
15.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
16.Editor's Note: The current fees resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 47-1 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 47-6
47:59
§ 47-6. Remedies.
Failure to obtain a permit before commencing work shall result in court
action to remove the structure as well as reimbursement for the Township's
expense in court costs and attorney's fees to obtain compliance with this
article.
§ 47-7. Violations and penalties. [Added 5-6-1997 by Ord. No.
98-97]
A. Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District
Magistrate, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs, or, in default thereof, shall be imprisoned to the extent allowed by
law for the punishment of summary offenses.
B. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this article shall be paid over to the Township Treasurer.
§ 47-6 JACKSON CODE § 47-7
47:60
ARTICLE II
Uniform Construction Codes
[Adopted 7-6-2004 by Ord. No. 148-04]
§ 47-8. Administration and enforcement.
Jackson Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101
through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
§ 47-9. Adoption by reference.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401-405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of Jackson Township.
§ 47-10. Methods of administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within Jackson Township shall
be undertaken in any of the following way as determined by the Board of
Supervisors of Jackson Township from time to time by resolution:
§ 47-11. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors of Jackson Township in conformity with the requirements of the
relevant provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the
purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration
is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board
of Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
§ 47-12. Effect on other provisions.
A. By the designation of an employee(s) of Jackson Township to serve as
the municipal code official(s) to act on behalf of Jackson Township;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of Jackson Township;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of Jackson
Township;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 47-8 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 47-12
47:61
§ 47-13. Fees.
Fees assessable by Jackson Township for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this article and the code shall be
established by the Board of Commissioners by resolution and may be
amended by resolution from time to time.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by Jackson Township on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal
or exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in full force and
effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this article and whose requirements are
less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby amended to
conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the municipality not
governed by the Code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 47-12 JACKSON CODE § 47-13
47:62
Chapter 50
BURNING, OPEN; OUTDOOR FIRES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire companies — See Ch. 13.
§ 50-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the
meanings given herein:
BRUSH (YARD WASTE) — All vegetative garden residue, shrubbery and tree
trimmings, exclusive of grass clippings.
CONTROLLED BURN — A controlled fire in which any material is burned in
the open.
FURNACE — Any enclosed device specifically designed for burning any
material for the production of heat.
LEAVES — Leaves, tree trimmings of less than 1/4 inch in diameter and not
more than 10 inches in length, and similar material, but not including grass
clippings and/or brush.
OPEN BURNING — The burning of materials wherein products of
combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing
through a stack or chimney from an enclosed chamber. A chamber shall
be regarded as enclosed when, during the time combustion occurs, only
apertures, ducts, stacks, flues or chimneys necessary to provide combustion
air and permit the escape of exhaust gas are open. Open burning does not
include road flares, smudgepots and similar devices associated with safety
or occupational uses typically considered open flames, recreational fires or
use of outdoor fireplaces.
OUTDOOR FIRE — Any fire contained in an incinerator, fireplace or other
contained enclosure designed for outdoor cooking.
OUTDOOR FIREPLACE — An outdoor, solid-fuel-burning fireplace that may
be constructed of steel, brick, concrete, clay or other noncombustible
material. It may be open in design, or may be equipped with a small hearth
opening and a short chimney or chimney opening in the top.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation,
department, bureau, agency or legal entity.
RECREATIONAL FIRE — An outdoor fire burning materials other than
brush, leaves, refuse and recyclable materials where the fuel being burned
is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, barbecue grill or
barbecue pit and has a total fuel area of three feet or less in diameter
and two feet or less in height, for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking,
warmth or similar purposes.
§ 47-13 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 50-1
47:63
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials designated by the Township
and its contracted refuse handler as being eligible for collection under its
current refuse/recycling criteria.
REFUSE — Garbage, rubbish and trade waste, not including recyclable
materials.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT — An individual 18 years or older who is not under
the influence of drugs or alcohol or suffering from any other disability which
would impair his or her ability to properly supervise a fire.
§ 50-2. General provision.
A person shall not start or maintain or authorize to start or maintain any
open burning or outdoor fire unless conducted and approved in accordance
with this chapter.
§ 50-3. Burning on public grounds prohibited.
No person or persons, firm, corporation, partnership or association shall
set or maintain any fire upon any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys or public
grounds in the Township of Jackson.
§ 50-4. Fires and burns regulated.
Outdoor fires, open burning, recreational fires and controlled burns of any
kind shall be permitted only upon private property in Jackson Township,
provided that the following regulations and restrictions are strictly adhered
to:
A. Any person who intends to ignite open burning or a controlled burn or
ceremonial bonfire shall, immediately prior to igniting and immediately
following extinguishing the fire or burn, notify York County Control by
calling 911 and informing the operator of the location of the supervised
fire.
B. No open burning shall be allowed to burn within 50 feet of any building
or property line.
C. No fire shall be allowed to burn across property lines.
D. No fire except recreational fires and ceremonial bonfires shall be
allowed to burn on any day between sunset and sunrise.
E. No fire shall be allowed to burn unless supervised by a responsible
adult, which adult shall regulate and control the burning throughout
the entire time the fire is in existence or when any embers are capable
of reigniting. It is the intent of this section that no fire shall be left
unattended at any time.
F. No refuse, brush, leaves, recyclable materials, wet garbage, or other
matter which smolders shall be burned in any fires.
§ 50-1 JACKSON CODE § 50-4
47:64
§ 50-5. Exceptions.
With the exception of § 50-4E, F and I, which do apply, the requirements
of §§ 50-3 and 50-4 of this chapter shall not apply where the open burning
operations result from:
§ 50-6. Extinguishment authority.
The Fire Marshal or Fire Chief is authorized to order the extinguishment by
the property owner or person responsible for the fire of any open burning or
outdoor fire that creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation.
In the event the property owner or person responsible for the fire fails
to extinguish such open burning or outdoor fire as directed by the Fire
Marshal or Fire Chief, the Fire Department shall be authorized to extinguish
such open burning or outdoor fire.
G. Recreational fires for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth
or similar purposes are permitted as long as the total fuel area is three
feet or less in diameter, two feet or less in height and is at least 25 feet
from a building or combustible material and 50 feet from a property
line.
H. Ceremonial bonfires shall not be conducted within 50 feet of a building
or combustible materials or within 50 feet of a property line.
I. All fires shall be properly extinguished through use of fire
extinguishers, dirt, sand and/or water when their function is complete
to eliminate all embers that may be capable of reigniting. Means of
extinguishing shall be readily available at the fire site throughout the
time of burning.
A. Any controlled fire set to prevent or abate a fire hazard when approved
by the Fire Marshal or a Fire Chief and set and supervised by the Fire
Marshal or a Fire Chief or someone designated by one of them.
B. Any controlled fire set for the purpose of instructing personnel in
firefighting when approved by the Fire Marshal or a Fire Chief and
supervised by a responsible adult.
C. Any fire set for the prevention and control of disease or pests when
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
or its designee.
D. Any controlled fire associated with road flares, smudgepots and similar
devices related to safety or occupational uses.
E. Any controlled fire in an outdoor fireplace, being burned in an approved
container, that is not less than 15 feet from any building or 25 feet from
any property line.
§ 50-4 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 50-7
47:65
§ 50-7. Fire Department authorized to bill for reasonable expenses.
If the Fire Department is called to respond to an incident involving a fire
not in compliance with this chapter or an out of control open burn or
outdoor fire, the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief shall have the authority to bill
the responsible person for reasonable costs incurred in responding to and
extinguishing of the fire.
§ 50-8. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 53
CABLE TELEVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 109.
§ 53-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Cable Television
Franchise Ordinance."
§ 53-2. Definitions. [Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 187-10]
For the purpose of this chapter, words and terms used herein shall be
defined as follows:
ADDITIONAL CABLE SERVICES — Any video programming service beyond
the basic service provided over the cable system, which includes expanded
basic service, per-channel or per-program services, and pay-per-view events
that incur an additional charge or fee above that charged to subscribers for
basic service.
A. The enforcement authority for this chapter is hereby vested in the
Northern York County Regional Police Department or its successor in
provision of law enforcement service to Jackson Township.
B. Any person who or which violates or permits the violation of the
provisions of this chapter more than once shall, upon conviction thereof
in a summary proceeding before a District Magistrate, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs, including, but not limited
to, attorney fees incurred by the Township to enforce this chapter, or, in
default thereof, shall be imprisoned to the extent allowed by law for the
punishment of summary offenses.
C. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Township.
§ 50-7 JACKSON CODE § 53-2
47:66
BASIC SERVICE — Any cable service tier which includes the retransmission
of local television broadcast channels.
CABLE ACT — The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended
by the Cable Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as further amended.
CABLE SERVICE — The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming service and subscriber interaction, if
any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming
or other programming service.
CABLE SYSTEM — A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and
which is provided to multiple subscribers within the franchise area, but
such term does not include:
COMPANY — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
trust or corporation owning and maintaining a cable television system
within the confines of the Township.
CUSTOMER or SUBSCRIBER — A person or user of the cable system
who lawfully receives cable service therefrom with the grantee's express
permission.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission, or successor
governmental entity thereto.
FRANCHISE — The initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by
the Township, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise,
agreement, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, ordinance or
otherwise, which authorizes the construction and operation of the cable
system.
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more television broadcast stations;
A.
B. A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way;
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to
the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act, except that such
facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of
Section 621 of the Cable Act) to the extent that facility is used in the
transmission of video programming directly to subscribers unless the
extent of that use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services;
C.
An open video system that complies with Section 653 of the Cable Act;
or
D.
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility systems.
E.
§ 53-2 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 53-2
47:67
FRANCHISE AREA — The present legal boundaries of the Township of
Jackson, County of York, Pennsylvania, as of the effective date, and shall also
include any additions thereto, by annexation or other legal means.
FRANCHISEE — Any cable television company which has been granted a
nonexclusive franchise to operate within the Township.
FRANCHISE FEE — Includes all moneys required to be paid to the
Township by the company for the right to operate in the Township, which
are allowable by federal statute or regulation or state statute or regulation.
GROSS REVENUE — All revenue, including cash, credits, and in-kind
contributions derived by the grantee from the operation of the cable system
in the franchise area to provide cable service, calculated in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"). Gross revenue includes
revenue from monthly basic cable, charges for additional cable services,
premium and pay-per-view video fees, fees from leased access channels,
installation, disconnection, relocation and reconnection fees, locally derived
home shopping commissions, advertising revenues (excluding agency
commissions) and subscriber equipment rental fees. Gross revenue shall not
include refundable deposits, bad debt, late fees, investment income, nor any
taxes, franchise fees, or other fees or assessments imposed or assessed by
any governmental authority. If during the term of this agreement, federal
law is amended or interpreted by the FCC or a court of competent
jurisdiction, which decision is a final order not subject to further appeal,
to permit local franchising authorities to collect franchise fees on revenues
derived from services not currently subject to franchise fees or including
in the definition of gross revenues, the Township may notify the grantee
in writing that it wishes to collect franchise fees on revenues attributable
to such services. No later than 60 days thereafter, such revenues shall be
considered part of gross revenue, and franchise fees shall be collected and
remitted on such revenues.
PERSON — Any natural person or any association, firm, partnership, joint
venture, corporation, or other legally recognized entity, whether for-profit
or not-for-profit, but shall not mean the Township.
PUBLIC WAY — The surface of, and the space above and below, any public
street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard,
sidewalk, way, lane, public way, drive, circle or other public right-of-way,
including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility
strips, or easements dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary or
permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter held
by the Township in the franchise area, which shall entitle the grantee
to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing, and
maintaining the cable system. Public way shall also mean any easement
now or hereafter held by the Township within the franchise area for the
purpose of public travel, or for utility or public service use dedicated for
compatible uses, and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall
within their proper use and meaning entitle the grantee to the use thereof
for the purposes of installing, operating, and maintaining the grantee's
cable system over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults,
§ 53-2 JACKSON CODE § 53-2
47:68
manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may
be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the cable system.
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STREET and RIGHT-OF-WAY — The surface of, as well as the space above
and below, all streets, roadways, highways, freeways, avenues, lanes, alleys,
courts, places, squares, curbs, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way or other
public ways in the Township which have been or may hereafter be dedicated
and opened to public use or such other public property so designated by
law which shall, within its proper use and meaning, entitle the Township
and company to access thereon for the purpose of installing or transmitting
cable transmissions over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits,
vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, broadcasters, receivers,
attachments and any other property as may be necessary and pertinent to
the operation of the business within the Township.
SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of Jackson Township, York
County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP — Jackson Township, York County, Pennsylvania.
§ 53-3. Exclusiveness and term of franchise. [Amended 8-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 187-10]
It is hereby granted by the Township to the company the nonexclusive right,
privilege and franchise to construct, direct, operate, modify and maintain
for a period of 15 years, a cable television system within, upon, along,
across, over and under the Township streets and anywhere where such
conduct may be done lawfully within the boundaries of the Township, and
also to repair, replace and extend the same and to do all other things
necessary or incidental to such business, subject always to the rules,
conditions and provisions of this chapter and rules, regulations and statutes
established and amended by the Federal Communications Commission,
and other regulatory bodies of the Township, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or the United States of America, provided that the annual
franchise fee is paid pursuant to § 53-10 of this chapter.
§ 53-4. System construction; removal.
A. The company's transmission and distribution system, poles, wires and
appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained so as to not
interfere with the lives of persons or to interfere with new
improvements the Township may deem it proper to make, or to
unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, roads,
bridges or other public property; removal of poles to avoid such
interference will be at the company's expense.
B. All installations of equipment shall be of a permanent nature, durable
and installed in accordance with good engineering practices and of
sufficient height or depth to comply with all existing Township
regulations, ordinances and state laws so as to not interfere in any
§ 53-2 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 53-4
47:69
manner with the right of the public or individual property owner and
shall not interfere with the travel and use of public places by the public
and during the construction, repair or removal thereof and shall not
obstruct or impede traffic.
C. In the event that a change is made in the grade of public streets, roads
or grounds by authority of the Township which shall necessitate the
removal of any poles, wires, transmission or distribution lines to
conform to the change of grade, the company shall make the necessary
changes in its lines at its own expense, upon due notice from the
Township or its designated official. In addition, the company shall, at its
expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate on the same
street, road or public place or remove from the street, road or public
place any property of the company when required by the Township, by
reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, construction
or relocation, change or street grade, installation of storm or sanitary
sewer, water pipes, power lines, traffic signals and lines or any other
type of structure improvement by governmental agencies acting in a
governmental or proprietary way; provided, however, that the company
shall in all cases have the privilege to abandon said property of
company in place, subject to the obligations as provided elsewhere in
this chapter.
D. Pole attachments. The poles and posts used for the company's cable
television system lines shall be those erected by the company or by such
other persons, firms or corporations maintaining poles or posts within
the Township limits, provided that mutually satisfactory rental
agreements can be entered into with such persons, firms or
corporations. It is understood and agreed that should the placement of
new poles be required, the Township shall not be liable for any pole
placement and the company agrees to hold the Township harmless for
any liability arising therefrom. In addition, the company shall maintain
all poles, equipment, cables, wires and accompanying equipment
erected or constructed under the provisions of this chapter in good and
safe order and condition and shall at all times fully indemnify, protect
and hold harmless the Township from and against all actions, claims,
suits, damages and charges, and against all loss and necessary
expenditures arising from the erection, construction and maintenance
of said works in good and safe order and condition. In the event that the
permission granted by this chapter should be revoked by the Township
of Jackson, or in the event that the company should fail or refuse to
comply at any time with the terms and conditions of this chapter, or in
the event that the business of the company should be discontinued
voluntarily or involuntarily, then and in any of said events the company
shall, at its own cost and expense, remove its said poles, cables and
wires and accompanying equipment erected or constructed under the
provisions of this chapter.
E. The rights and powers conferred upon the company by this chapter
shall be subject to existing ordinances of the Township and applicable
§ 53-4 JACKSON CODE § 53-4
47:70
§ 53-5. Township use of cable poles.
The company shall grant to the Township, free of expense, joint use of any
and all poles owned by it for any proper municipal purpose insofar as it
may be done without interfering with the free use and enjoyment of the
company's own wires and fixtures, and the Township shall hold the company
harmless from any and all actions, causes or damage caused by the placing
of the Township's wires or appurtenances upon the poles of the company.
§ 53-6. Cable service to public buildings. [Amended 8-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 187-10]
§ 53-7. Compliance with law; changes in law.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this franchise agreement to the
contrary, the company shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations
of the state and federal governments and of any administrative agency
having jurisdiction over the company or its operation. If any such state or
federal laws or regulations shall require the company to perform or shall
prohibit the company from performing any act or action in conflict with
the terms of this franchise or of any law or regulation of the Township, the
obligations expressed by the state or federal regulation shall be controlling,
and observance of those state or federal laws in conflict with this franchise
shall not violate this franchise, notwithstanding anything otherwise set
forth herein. If in the future there are substantial changes by the Federal
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania concerning the location of
sewer and water lines (where underground construction is used) and
electric light, electric power, telephone and telegraph wires and cables
for the conveyance of electrical energy for any purpose.
A. Upon request, the company shall provide free basic service to public,
private and parochial schools, public libraries, municipal buildings,
police and fire stations which are within 150 feet of the cable system.
No charge shall be made for installation or service, except that the
company may charge normal and customary fees for such public
buildings more than 150 feet aerial distance from the cable system or
for more than one cable drop in each building. In addition, the company
shall provide one free residential level cable modem and one free
residential service to the Township municipal building.
B. For purposes of this section, the term "school" shall mean an
educational institution that receives funding pursuant to Title I of the
Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, 20 U.S.C. § 6301 et
seq., as amended, and does not include home schools. Further, for
purposes of this section, "municipal buildings" shall be defined to mean
those buildings owned or leased by the Township for government
administrative services, but shall not include buildings owned by the
Township but leased to third parties, or buildings such as storage
facilities at which municipal employees are not regularly stationed.
§ 53-4 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 53-7
47:71
Communications Commission, the Congress of the United States or the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which would grant the Township or the
company substantial rights not set forth in this franchise agreement, the
Township and the company shall not be bound to automatically renew this
franchise, and any renewal shall be negotiated upon the basis that any
changes which shall benefit the Township or its residents or the company
may be the subject of negotiations.
§ 53-8. Prohibitions.
The company and its employees shall not engage in the business of selling
or servicing television receivers or parts thereof in the area served by the
system. The company shall install and maintain the system in such a manner
so as to not interfere with television reception by use of individual antennas
presently in existence or which may hereafter be installed.
§ 53-9. Company's right to establish rules.
The company shall have the right to prescribe service rules and regulations
for the conduct of its business not inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter or any other ordinances of the Township. The company's rules and
regulations shall include, but not be limited to, the right to disconnect
any subscriber for nonpayment, to regulate the subscriber's use of cable
converters and other equipment and other rules to prevent theft of the
company's service or equipment.
§ 53-10. Franchise fee.
A. As consideration of the franchise granted herein, the company shall pay
to the Township an annual fee equal to 5% of the annual gross revenues
received from the operation of the cable television system in the
Township, by the company, until the current franchise term expires.
B. Subject to the franchise agreement, payment of the aforesaid franchise
fee shall be made on a quarterly basis within 45 days after March 31,
June 30, September 30 and December 31. Failure to pay after 10 days'
written notice shall result in the addition of a ten-percent penalty
charge. The franchisee shall maintain an accurate record of such
annual gross revenues, and it shall submit to the Township within 90
days after the expiration of any calendar year during the term of the
rights granted hereunder, a statement prepared by the franchisee's
controller showing the annual gross revenues as defined herein. In
addition, the franchisee, at Township expense, shall permit the
Township to allow a certified public accountant to conduct an audit of
the franchisee's records and of the accounting procedures followed
each year to assure that there is proper payment of the correct sums to
the Township. [Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 187-10]
§ 53-7 JACKSON CODE § 53-11
47:72
§ 53-11. Liability and indemnification; insurance coverage.
The franchisee shall, at all times, keep in effect the following types of
minimum insurance coverage:
§ 53-12. Supervision and inspection.
The Township shall have the right to supervise all construction or
installation work performed subject to the provisions of this chapter and to
make such inspection as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with
governing ordinances.
A. Workers' Compensation Insurance upon its employees engaged in any
manner in the installation or servicing of its plant and equipment within
the Township of Jackson.
B. Throughout the term and any renewal of any franchise granted
hereunder, the company shall, at its sole cost and expense, secure and
maintain comprehensive general liability insurance and provide to the
Township appropriate certificates of insurance designating the
Township, the Board, its officers, commissioners, councils, elected
officials, agents and employees as additional insureds, as well as
demonstrating compliance with this subsection. Such policy or policies
shall be in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death
to any one person, $1,000,000 for any bodily injury or death of any two
or more persons resulting from one occurrence, and $1,000,000 for
property damage resulting from any one accident. Certificates of
insurance shall be submitted to the Township at the time of acceptance
of this chapter by the company and from time to time as such policy or
policies shall be replaced. Such policy or policies shall be
noncancelable except upon 30 days' prior written notice to the
Township. The company shall carry insurance in the above-described
minimum amounts to protect the parties hereto from and against all
claims, damages, actions, judgments, cost, expenses and liabilities
which may arise or result, directly or indirectly, from or by reason of
such loss, injury or damage. [Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No.
187-10]
C. The company shall indemnify, protect and hold harmless the Township
from and against any losses or physical damage to property or in bodily
injury or death to persons, including any payment made under any
workman’s compensation law, which may arise out of or caused by the
company's construction, operation, maintenance or removal of the
cable system, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys' fees
and costs, provided that the Township shall timely notify the company
of the company’s obligation to indemnify and defend the Township.
[Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 187-10]
§ 53-11 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 53-13
47:73
§ 53-13. Compliance with other regulations.
The company is subject to all requirements of the Township ordinances,
resolutions, rules or regulations and specifications heretofore or hereinafter
enacted or established, including but not limited to those concerning street
work, street excavation, use, removal and relocation of property within a
Township right-of-way and other street work.
§ 53-14. Abandonment.
In the event that the use of any part of the system installed is discontinued
for any reason by the company for a continuous period of six months
causing a cessation of service to subscribers of the system, or in the event
that such system or property has been installed in any street or public place
without complying with the requirements of this chapter, the company shall
remove from the streets and public places all such parts of the system other
than any which the Township may request to be abandoned in place. In
the event of any such removal, the company shall restore the property and
area from which such removal occurred to a condition satisfactory to the
Township.
§ 53-15. Revocation of franchise. [Amended 8-3-2010 by Ord. No.
187-10]
Should the company fail to comply with any terms or this chapter, the
Township shall give written notice of such violation and proceed in
accordance with the appropriate provisions of the franchise agreement,
prior to revocation of any franchise granted hereunder.
§ 53-16. Cable business office.
The company shall maintain a business office at a location where
subscribers may readily visit during regular business hours and days. The
company shall generally respond to all service calls within 24 hours and
correct cable malfunctions as promptly as possible and shall maintain a
competent staff sufficient to provide adequate and prompt service to its
subscribers.
Chapter 56
CURFEW
§ 56-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Curfew Ordinance."
§ 56-2. Curfew hours.
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 to stay out, loiter or
be present on any property within Jackson Township between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless said minor shall be on property owned by
§ 53-13 JACKSON CODE § 56-2
47:74
a parent or guardian or be in the company of an adult guardian, with the
following exceptions:
§ 56-3. Duties of parents or guardians.
No parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of
a minor under the age of 18 years shall permit such minor to be present
on another’s property within Jackson Township between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless said minor shall be accompanied by his or her
parent, guardian or other adult person or where one of the exceptions set
forth in § 56-2 applies.
§ 56-4. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 61
EMERGENCIES AND DISASTERS
A. Where minors are legally employed and are present on any property in
the cause of employment.
B. Where minors possess a senior driver’s license and are legally
operating a vehicle in furtherance of their employment as provided in
Subsection A above.
C. Where in the presence of approved adult chaperones, coaches or
mentors where the minor is attending an activity sponsored by a school,
religious, nonprofit, government, athletic or similar organization.
D. Where minors possess written permission, dated the same day and
signed by a parent/guardian, specifying the starting/ending times,
place(s), purpose and the necessity of the minor being out after the
curfew.
A. Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District
Magistrate, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs, or, in default thereof, shall be imprisoned to the extent allowed by
law for the punishment of summary offences. In lieu of imposed fines for
minor or parents/guardians, the District Magistrate may authorize
alternative penalties, such as community service, counseling or
educational classes.
B. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorneys' fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Township.
§ 56-2 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 56-4
47:75

ARTICLE I
Emergency Service Provider Cost Reimbursement
[Adopted 5-3-2016 by Ord. No. 209-16]
§ 61-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Jackson Township
Emergency Service Provider Cost Reimbursement Ordinance."
§ 61-2. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of the Second Class
Township Code, 53 P.S. § 65101 et. seq., as amended (the "code") and, in
particular, Section 1803(b) of the code, 53 P.S. § 66803(b), which authorizes
the Township to make rules and regulations for the government of fire
companies located within the Township.
§ 61-3. Findings.
The Board recognizes that responses to hazardous materials incidents and
motor vehicle accidents require specialized emergency rescue tools,
equipment, and materials and hazardous material abatement equipment
and materials. The Board further recognizes that such tools and equipment
place a financial burden on volunteer fire companies, and the replacement
of such equipment and materials and specialized training places additional
financial burden on such emergency services providers.
§ 61-4. Purposes.
The Board hereby adopts and enacts this article for the following purposes:
§ 61-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms are hereby given the meanings
set forth below:
EMERGENCY SERVICE PROVIDER — Any volunteer fire department,
ambulance and/or fire and rescue company duly organized, acknowledged
and existing in and/or serving Jackson Township, York County, Pennsylvania.
A. To ensure the continued viability of emergency service providers to
protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare, by
authorizing emergency service providers to seek reimbursement of the
reasonable costs of responding to hazardous materials incidents and/or
motor vehicle accidents.
B. To permit financial assistance to emergency service providers who are
experiencing ever-increasing financial burdens and costs, which costs
have an adverse impact on the provision of emergency services in the
Township.
§ 61-1 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 61-5
47:77
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation, utility company or other legal or commercial group or entity,
whether public or private.
TOWNSHIP — Jackson Township, York County, Pennsylvania.
§ 61-6. Authorization to recover fees, costs and expenses.
§ 61-7. Enforcement.
In the event that any insurance carrier fails to pay any bill or invoice within
30 days of the mailing of such notice of charges, the emergency service
provider directly, or any authorized agent who mailed the bill or invoice,
may enforce the provisions of this article by filing a civil action at law in
A. The Township hereby authorizes emergency service providers to
recover the reasonable costs associated with responding to hazardous
materials incidents and/or motor vehicle accidents, which may include,
but not be limited to, the cost of emergency rescue tools, equipment
and materials; hazardous materials abatement tools, equipment and
materials; and personnel hours involving a hazardous materials
incident or motor vehicle accident. Such reimbursement shall be filed
as an additional claim for damages to vehicles, property or injuries with
the motor vehicle insurance carrier of the person or persons owning or
operating a vehicle involved in a hazardous materials incident and/or
motor vehicle accident or other responsible person.
B. The reasonable costs incurred by the emergency service provider shall
be recovered directly by the emergency service provider, attorney,
collection agency or third-party billing service ("authorized agent") for
collection of such costs.
C. The emergency service provider or authorized agent shall have the
authority hereunder to recover the aforementioned costs from the
applicable insurance company/carrier only and not from the person or
persons owning or operating the vehicle involved in the response.
D. The reimbursement rates for the aforementioned tools, equipment and
materials shall be set by the emergency service providers from time to
time from and which may be charged for services provided after the
effective date of this article. Such rates shall be approved by resolution
of the Township from time to time and kept on file in the Township
office.
E. In addition to the reimbursement of reasonable costs, the emergency
service provider or authorized agent shall be authorized to collect
reasonable interest and administrative expenses for collection of the
reasonable costs, as well as any additional fees as may be authorized by
the Hazardous Material Emergency Planning and Response Act,17 as
amended, otherwise authorized by statute or law.
17.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6022.101 et seq.
§ 61-5 JACKSON CODE § 61-7
47:78
a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of any amounts due
to the emergency service provider, together with any statutory interest,
court costs, collection and/or administration fees, and reasonable attorneys'
fees. The remedies provided herein shall be in addition to any other relief,
remedies, or penalties that may be appropriate and provided by law.
§ 61-7 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 61-7
47:79
Chapter 69
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 47.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 107.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
113.
Zoning — See Ch. 133.
§ 61-7 JACKSON CODE § 61-7
47:80
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 69-1. Authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,18 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry.
18.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 69-1 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-1
47:81

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 69-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 69-3. Permit required prior to construction or development.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or development
anywhere within the Jackson Township, on a property containing a FEMA
defined floodplain or area determined to contain land subject to flooding,
unless a permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 69-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 69-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 69-6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study.
§ 69-2 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-6
47:83
B. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade
or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted
by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside any identified
floodplain areas, or that land uses permitted within such areas, will be
free from flooding or flood damages.
C. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Jackson
Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 69-6 JACKSON CODE § 69-6
47:84
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 69-7. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
§ 69-8. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken on a property within any area of the Jackson Township
containing a FEMA-defined floodplain or area determined to contain land
subject to flooding.
§ 69-9. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this
chapter and is referred to herein as the "Floodplain Administrator." The
Floodplain Administrator may: A) fulfill the duties and responsibilities
set forth in these regulations, B) delegate duties and responsibilities set
forth in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan
examiners, inspectors, and other employees, or C) enter into a written
agreement or written contract with another agency or private sector
entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations.
Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall
not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the
participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as
set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Township Manager.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);19 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);20 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);21 and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
19.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
20.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
21.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 69-7 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-9
47:85
§ 69-10. Application procedures and requirements.
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
concerns can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board of Supervisors for
whatever action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
I. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in the Floodplain Ordinance as the Floodplain Administrator/
Manager.
J. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Jackson Township.
Such application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of the applicant.
(2) Name and address of the owner of the land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of the contractor.
§ 69-9 JACKSON CODE § 69-10
47:86
(4) Site location, including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located on a property
either entirely or partially within any identified floodplain area,
applicants for permits shall provide all the necessary information in
sufficient detail and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to
determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
§ 69-10 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-10
47:87
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within any identified floodplain area (see § 69-18)
when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not cause any increase in the base flood
elevation.
(c) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(d) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 69-25F, Storage, and § 69-26, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 69-25F and 69-26 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
§ 69-10 JACKSON CODE § 69-10
47:88
§ 69-11. Review by County Conservation District.
Within seven days of permit application, a copy of all applications and plans
for any proposed construction or development in any identified floodplain
area to be considered for approval shall be submitted by the applicant to
the York County Conservation District ("YCCD") for review and comment
prior to the issuance of a permit. A copy of all such applications, plans,
recommendations by the YCCD and approvals shall be submitted to the
Township. The recommendations of the YCCD shall be considered by the
Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into the proposed plan.
If, after submission of the application to the YCCD, no correspondence
and/or comments are received regarding the application within the YCCD's
standard or allowable review time, the application process may proceed as
though the application was approved by the YCCD.
§ 69-12. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 69-13. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the
applicant to the Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 69-26
during a base flood.
(e) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(f) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 69-10 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-14
47:89
§ 69-14. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit and the date of
its issuance, and shall be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 69-15. Start of construction.
§ 69-16. Enforcement.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit, or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is
granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of
the development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The "actual start of construction" means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request, and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
§ 69-14 JACKSON CODE § 69-16
47:90
§ 69-17. Appeals.
(3) Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall pay a fine to
Jackson Township of not less than $100 nor more than $600 plus costs
of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are
hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the
Board of Supervisors to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code22 and
any other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.23
22.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
23.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 69-16 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-17
47:91

ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 69-18. Identification.
§ 69-19. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of Jackson Township, classified as special flood hazard
areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated
December 16, 2015, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study; and
(2) Any area within the Township designated by the community as a
community-identified flood hazard area.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by Jackson Township and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The floodway area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development,
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection regional office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
§ 69-18 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-19
47:93
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
(2) AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE
Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which
base flood elevations have been provided but no floodway has been
determined.
(a) No permit shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway
unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development would not, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
(b) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection regional
office.
C. A Area/District.
(1) The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no
base flood elevations have been provided. For these areas,
elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or
other acceptable sources shall be used when available. Where
other acceptable information is not available, the base flood
elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on
the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site.
(2) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality.
D. The AO and AH Area/District shall be those areas identified as Zones
AO and AH on the FIRM and in the FIS. These areas are subject to
inundation by one-percent-annual-chance shallow flooding where
average depths are between one and three feet. In Zones AO and AH,
drainage paths shall be established to guide floodwaters around and
away from structures on slopes.
§ 69-19 JACKSON CODE § 69-19
47:94
§ 69-20. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of
Supervisors where studies or information provided by a qualified agency
or person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any
such change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained
from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six
months after the date such information becomes available, a community
shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by
submitting technical or scientific data. See § 69-23B for situations where
FEMA notification is required.
§ 69-21. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Floodplain Administrator, and
any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the
Jackson Township Board of Supervisors. The burden of proof shall be on the
appellant.
§ 69-22. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
E. Community-identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas where
Jackson Township has identified local flood hazard or ponding areas, as
delineated and adopted on a "Local Flood Hazard Map" using the best
available topographic data and locally derived information such as flood
of record, historic high water marks, soils or approximate study
methodologies.
§ 69-19 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-22
47:95

ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 69-23. General requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
regional office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments:
any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within
the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone
AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than
one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or relocation of a
stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and bridges), the
applicant shall (as per 44 CFR 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map
change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 69-23 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-23
47:97
§ 69-24. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
Within any identified floodplain area, any new construction or substantial
improvements shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained for new
construction or substantial improvements in the identified floodplain area
in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions
apply:
D. Within any identified floodplain area, no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 69-19C of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more
restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
§ 69-23 JACKSON CODE § 69-24
47:98
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 69-19C of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have its lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the FIRM.
(4) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the abovereferenced
standards.
(5) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more
restrictive.
C. Space below lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall
be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 69-24 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-24
47:99
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as
defined in this chapter must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance
requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places
must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State
Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 69-24 JACKSON CODE § 69-25
47:100
§ 69-25. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
A. Fill.
(1) Within any identified floodplain area, the use of fill shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria
in Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
(a) If fill is used, it shall:
[1] Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line
from all points;
[2] Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary
landfills shall not be permitted;
[3] Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
[4] Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet
unless substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are
submitted to, and approved by, the Floodplain
Administrator; and
[5] Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages" and the
"International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
§ 69-25 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-25
47:101
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 69-26, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
§ 69-25 JACKSON CODE § 69-25
47:102
§ 69-26. Development which may endanger human life.
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described
in Subsection A, below, shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained in
accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions
apply:
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that flood water
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as
amended from time to time, and not limited to the following provisions,
shall apply to the above and other sections and subsections of this
chapter, to the extent that they are more restrictive and supplement the
requirements of this chapter.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and
Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,24
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
24.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 69-25 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-26
47:103
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject
to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulfur and sulfur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
C. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited. Where permitted within any
identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved residential
structure of the kind described in § 69-26A, above, shall be elevated to
remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above the base flood
elevation and built in accordance with §§ 69-23, 69-24 and 69-25.
§ 69-26 JACKSON CODE § 69-26
47:104
§ 69-27. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision and letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant. The Zoning Hearing Board may waive these restrictions where
a subdivision does not propose any development impacting any identified
floodplain area.
§ 69-28. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
D. Design standards.
(1) Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind
described in § 69-26A above shall be built in accordance with
§§ 69-23, 69-24 and 69-25, including:
(a) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely
dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood.
(2) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992), or
with some other equivalent watertight standard.
A. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply.
B. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation;
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
(4) Have all ductwork and utilities, including HVAC/heat pump,
elevated to the regulatory flood elevation.
§ 69-26 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-28
47:105
§ 69-29. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
C. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's "Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 through 405 shall apply.
D. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the most recent revisions thereto, and
34 Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturer's standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the proposed unit's installation.
A. Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; and
(3) Be removed from the floodplain area when a flood warning is
issued.
§ 69-28 JACKSON CODE § 69-29
47:106
ARTICLE VI
Activities Requiring Special Permits
§ 69-30. General requirements.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,25 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area unless a special permit
has been issued by Jackson Township:
§ 69-31. Application requirements for special permits.
Applicants for special permits shall provide five copies of the following
items:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
A. A written request, including a completed permit application form.
B. A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
C. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch
being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale and date;
(2) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet;
(3) All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of the
site expressed in acres or square feet;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways, and
parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types
and construction, and elevations;
25.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 69-30 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-31
47:107
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and
man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity
or development;
(6) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the base flood elevation, and information
concerning the flow of water, including direction and velocities;
(7) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and any
other improvements; and
(8) Any other information which the municipality considers necessary
for adequate review of the application.
D. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(1) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate;
(2) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other
floor;
(3) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated
with the base flood;
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(5) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(6) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways, including existing and proposed grades; and
(7) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
E. The following data and documentation:
(1) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he represents;
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect, or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
§ 69-31 JACKSON CODE § 69-31
47:108
§ 69-32. Application review procedures.
Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by Jackson Township, the
following procedures shall apply in addition to those of Article III:
adequately designed to protect against damage from the base
flood;
(3) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development
during the course of a base flood, including a statement concerning
the effects such pollution may have on human life;
(4) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect which contains a complete and
accurate description of the effects the proposed development will
have on base flood elevation and flows;
(5) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the base flood elevation and the effects such materials and
debris may have on base flood elevation and flows;
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's "Planning Module for Land Development";
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
(8) Any other applicable permits, such as, but not limited to, a permit
for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental
Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166;26 and
(9) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a base
flood.
A. Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation
shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or
certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the
application shall also be forwarded to the Jackson Township Planning
Commission and Jackson Township Engineer for review and comment.
26.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.302.
§ 69-31 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-32
47:109
§ 69-33. Special technical requirements.
B. If an application is received that is incomplete, Jackson Township shall
notify the applicant in writing, stating in what respect the application is
deficient.
C. If Jackson Township decides to disapprove an application, it shall notify
the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
D. If Jackson Township approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent information,
with the Department of Community and Economic Development, by
registered or certified mail, within five working days after the date of
approval.
E. Before issuing the special permit, Jackson Township shall allow the
Department of Community and Economic Development 30 days, after
receipt of the notification by the Department, to review the application
and decision made by Jackson Township.
F. If Jackson Township does not receive any communication from the
Department of Community and Economic Development during the
thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to the applicant.
G. If the Department of Community and Economic Development should
decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify Jackson Township
and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval, and
Jackson Township shall not issue the special permit.
A. In addition to the requirements of Article V of this chapter, the following
minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed development
requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict between any of the
following requirements and those in Article V of this chapter or in any
other code, ordinance, or regulation, the more restrictive provision
shall apply.
B. No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed
and maintained in a manner which will:
(1) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall
be designed, located, and constructed so that:
(a) The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood without any lateral movement or damage to either the
structure itself or to any of its equipment or contents below the
BFE.
(b) The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
§ 69-32 JACKSON CODE § 69-33
47:110
(c) The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time
during the base flood.
(2) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
C. All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by Jackson Township and the Department of Environmental
Protection regional office.
§ 69-33 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-33
47:111

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 69-34. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 69-35 shall apply.
§ 69-35. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any identified floodplain area that would cause any increase in
BFE. In A Area(s)/District(s), BFEs are determined using the
methodology in § 69-19C.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa. Code,
as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
D. Within any floodway area/district (See also § 69-19A), no new
construction or development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
regional office.
E. Within any AE Area/District without floodway (See also § 69-19B), no
new construction or development shall be located within the area
measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse,
unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection regional office.
F. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
G. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 69-34 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-35
47:113

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 69-36. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
Jackson Township may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application
of the requirements.
§ 69-37. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by Jackson Township Zoning
Hearing Board in accordance with the procedures contained in § 69-17
and the following:
(1) No variance shall be granted within any identified floodplain area
that would cause any increase in BFE. In an A Area/District, BFEs
are determined using the methodology in § 69-19C.
(2) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated by special permit (or prohibited activities) (Article VI) or
to development which may endanger human life (§ 69-26).
(3) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(4) In granting any variance, the Jackson Township Zoning Hearing
Board shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards
it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(5) Whenever a variance is granted, the Jackson Township Zoning
Hearing Board shall notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(6) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Jackson Township
Zoning Hearing Board shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
§ 69-36 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-37
47:115
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense; nor
[2] Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public,
or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(7) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by Jackson Township. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual
report to the FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual-chance flood.
§ 69-37 JACKSON CODE § 69-37
47:116
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 69-38. Interpretation.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 69-39. Specific definitions.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
"one-percent-annual-chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, and A1-30 that indicates
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
§ 69-38 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-39
47:117
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FILL — Ground or aggregate placed loose in a certain location for the
only purpose of increasing the elevation of that area, but shall not include
compacted ground and aggregate placed to support or enhance grading,
building foundations, roadway construction, or like uses and applications
subject to § 69-25A.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
§ 69-39 JACKSON CODE § 69-39
47:118
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — An umbrella term that includes all of
the areas within which the community has selected to enforce floodplain
regulations. It will always include the area identified as the special flood
hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Study,
but may include additional areas identified by the community. See §§ 69-18
and 69-19 for the specifics on what areas the community has included in the
identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement of or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective start date of this floodplain
management chapter, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. Any construction started after September 1, 1981, and before
the effective start date of this floodplain management chapter is subject to
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 69-39 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-39
47:119
the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the start
of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated September
1, 1981, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated September
1, 1981, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 69-39 JACKSON CODE § 69-39
47:120
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks/subdivisions and
substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such development is
located in all, or a designated portion of, a floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage or repetitive loss, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
§ 69-39 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-39
47:121
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 69-39 JACKSON CODE § 69-39
47:122
ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 69-40. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on December 16, 2015, and shall remain
in force until modified, amended or rescinded by Jackson Township, York
County, Pennsylvania.
§ 69-40 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 69-40
47:123
Chapter 76
JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 93.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 123.
Zoning — See Ch. 133.
§ 76-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Jackson Township
Junkyard Ordinance."
§ 76-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings herein indicated:
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Jackson Township.
FARM MACHINERY — All types of machinery and equipment which were
originally manufactured for farm use, which are retained on farm
properties, either as operable equipment or for the purpose of salvaging
repair parts.
JUNK — Any discarded material or article and shall include but not be
limited to scrap metal, scrapped, abandoned, junked, damaged or wrecked
motor vehicles, machinery, equipment, paper, glass, containers and
structures. It shall not include, however, refuse or garbage kept in a proper
container for the purpose of prompt disposal.
JUNK DEALER — Any person, as hereinafter defined, who shall engage in
the business of selling, buying, salvaging and dealing in junk or who causes
or permits damaged or wrecked motor vehicles to be stored upon premises
owned or occupied by him and who maintains and operates a junkyard
within the Township of Jackson.
JUNKYARD — Any lot, land, or structure, or part thereof, used primarily
for the collection, storage, and/or sale of scrap metal or discarded material,
or for the collecting, dismantling, storage, and salvaging of machinery,
equipment, junked or inoperable motor vehicles, and/or for the sale of parts
thereof. For all such uses, issuance of an annual license shall be required
according to the provisions of the Jackson Township Junkyard Ordinance.
LICENSE — The permit granted to a person who accumulates, stores or
disposes of junk, as hereinbefore defined.
MOTOR VEHICLE — All types of automobiles, trucks and tractors, including
self-propelled machinery of all kinds with the exception of farm machinery.
§ 69-40 JACKSON CODE § 76-2
47:124
PERSON — Includes any individual, partnership, association, firm,
corporation or other legal entity.
TOWNSHIP — Jackson Township, York County, Pennsylvania.
§ 76-3. License required; renewal.
§ 76-4. Application for license.
The license provided for in this chapter shall be issued by the Board after
written application shall have been made therefor by the person desiring
to be licensed. Such license shall state the name of the person to whom
such license is issued and the premises on which such business is to be
conducted or such junkyard is to be maintained. Such license shall be
posted conspicuously upon the premises licensed thereunder. The written
application for a license hereinabove mentioned shall be accompanied by
a form, every question of which must be answered, which form will be
supplied by the Township. The applicant shall also submit therewith a plat of
the premises used or to be used in connection with such license. Application
shall be made at the Township Municipal Building during regular business
hours.
§ 76-5. Issuance of license.
After receipt of an application by the Township, the Board shall issue a
license or shall refuse to issue a license to the person applying therefor
after an examination of the application and taking into consideration the
suitability of the property proposed to be used for the purposes of the
license, the character of the properties located nearby and the effects of
the proposed use upon the Township, including environmental, economic
and aesthetic. In the event that the Board shall issue a license, it may
A. No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer or maintain a
junkyard without first having obtained a license from the Board for
which license a fee in accordance with the schedule hereinafter set
forth shall be paid to the Township for the use of the Township. The
license shall be issued for the twelve-month period beginning July 1 and
ending June 30 of the following year, and each license must be renewed
annually on or before the first day of July of each year.
B. At least 30 days prior to the expiration of the current existing license
year, each licensee shall file a written application for renewal of his
license with the Township Zoning Officer which application shall
contain an affidavit under oath by the licensee that he or she is not
maintaining a junkyard within the Township in violation of the terms of
this chapter or the terms and conditions imposed by the Board when the
license was issued under the provisions of § 76-5 of this chapter. Upon
receipt of an application for renewal of a license, the Supervisors or
their designee may inspect the premises of the applicant, and the
Supervisors shall have the right to grant or refuse a renewal of any
license.
§ 76-2 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 76-5
47:125
impose upon the license and the person applying therefor such terms and
conditions in addition to the regulations herein contained and adopted
pursuant to this chapter as may be deemed necessary to carry out the spirit
and intent of this chapter.
§ 76-6. License fee.
The license fee shall be paid immediately upon the issuance or renewal of a
license. The amount of the license fee shall be calculated in accordance with
a schedule set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 76-7. License limitation.
No person licensed under this chapter shall, by virtue of one license, keep
more than one place of business within the Township or maintain more than
one junkyard for the purpose of buying, selling and dealing in junk. No
person shall engage in business as a junk dealer in any place other than the
place designated upon his or her license or maintain a junkyard in any place
other than the place designated upon his or her license.
§ 76-8. Transfer of license.
No license issued by the Board shall be transferable by the licensee to
any other person unless such a transfer is authorized by the Board. Any
person desiring to transfer the license shall notify the Board, in writing,
which notification shall be accompanied by an application for a license as
described in § 76-4 of this chapter by the transferee.
§ 76-9. Transfer fee.
In the event that the Board shall approve the transfer of a license, the
transferee shall immediately pay to the Township a transfer fee as set from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 76-10. Records.
Every person licensed under this chapter shall provide and shall constantly
keep a book in which shall be fairly written down in English language at the
time of the purchase of any junk, a description of every article or material
purchased or received, the date and hour of such purchase or receipt, and
the name and address of the person from whom such article or material was
purchased, or received. Such book shall at all reasonable business hours be
subject to the inspection of any official of the Township.
§ 76-11. Delay in disposal.
Every person licensed under this chapter shall keep and retain upon the
licensed premises for a period of 48 hours after the purchase or receipt
thereof all junk received or purchased by him or her, and he or she shall
not disturb or reduce the same or alter the original form, shape or condition
until such period of 48 hours shall have elapsed.
§ 76-5 JACKSON CODE § 76-12
47:126
§ 76-12. Regulations.
Every person licensed under this chapter shall constantly maintain the
licensed premises in accordance with any special provisions imposed by the
Board and in the manner prescribed by this section and any subsequent
regulations adopted by the Board.
A. Size of junkyard.
(1) No license shall be issued for the use of a lot as a junkyard, unless
said lot contains a minimum of five acres.
(2) Maximum. The area of a junkyard lot that is occupied by the
presence of junk can not exceed a maximum of five acres.
B. Such premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to constitute a
nuisance or a menace to the health of the community or of residents
nearby or a place for the breeding of rodents, vermin and/or
mosquitoes.
C. No garbage or other organic waste shall be stored in such premises.
D. Motor vehicles.
(1) Fluids. Whenever any motor vehicle shall be received in such
premises as junk, all of the following fluids shall be drained and
collected and reused, recycled or disposed of in conformance with
current Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
regulations and guidelines. None of these fluids shall be disposed
of into a septic system or public sanitary sewer system:
(a) Drained crankcase oil.
(b) Hydraulic oil/fluid.
(c) Brake fluid.
(d) Oil recovered from steam cleaning.
(e) Gasoline.
(f) Antifreeze.
(g) Transmission fluid.
(h) Windshield washer fluid.
(i) Wastewater recovered from steam cleaning.
[1] Oil, antifreeze and gasoline should be drained and
collected from junk motor vehicles, then be reused or
recycled properly. If the fluids cannot be reused or
recycled, they must be disposed either as residual or
hazardous waste.
§ 76-12 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 76-12
47:127
[2] Antifreeze should be recycled for reuse. Antifreeze should
not be disposed into a septic system.
[3] Gasoline should be drained from junk motor vehicles and
may be used as vehicle fuel by the junkyard. If gasoline is
to be stored at a junkyard, the tank must comply with
Pennsylvania storage tank regulations. If gasoline is not
used by the junkyard, it must be managed as a hazardous
waste because it is ignitable.
[4] Brake fluids, transmission fluids, hydraulic oils and similar
fluids are wastes and must be managed as wastes.
[5] Windshield washer fluid may be collected and reused.
(2) Tires.
(a) Stored tires present a fire hazard and may become a breeding
ground for mosquitoes. Tire management and permit
requirements, available from DEP, include allowable stockpile
measurements, fire lane size, storage time limitations, total
waste tire site size restrictions about location of tires and
effective emergency management to avoid tire fire hazards.
(b) Tires should be sent for recycling or energy recovery as soon
as possible.
(3) Batteries. Lead-acid batteries should be taken to a secondary lead
smelter for recycling. Disposal of lead-acid batteries at landfills is
prohibited. If batteries are cracked and/or leaking, they need to be
placed in sealable five-gallon buckets and managed as hazardous
waste per Pennsylvania DEP guidelines. Any spills shall be cleaned
up promptly.
(4) Parts. All parts that are to be removed from a motor vehicle shall be
removed within six months of its coming into the junkyard;
thereafter the remaining body and/or frame shall be removed from
the junkyard.
(5) Permitted number. No junkyard shall at any time contain more than
100 motor vehicles.
E. Drums/containers. The junkyard cannot accept drums containing any
type of waste material. All containers that are accepted shall be empty
and have been completely cleaned of previous contents.
F. Appliances (white goods).
(1) Refrigerant gases from refrigerators, freezers and air conditioners
must be captured and recycled or disposed and must not be vented
to the air.
§ 76-12 JACKSON CODE § 76-12
47:128
§ 76-13. Violations.
(2) Older appliances may contain capacitors with polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs) which must be managed in accordance with the
requirements of the Toxic Substances Control Act.27
G. Wastewater runoff. When steam cleaning engines and parts, steam
(water) use must be kept to a minimum and collected as wastewater
and disposed of properly.
H. The manner of storage and arrangement of junk and the drainage
facilities of the premises shall be such as to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water upon the premises and to facilitate access for firefighting
purposes.
I. All junk kept, stored or arranged on the licensed premises shall at all
times be kept, stored and arranged within the junkyard as described in
the application for license hereunder.
J. The area to be licensed as a junkyard shall be set back a minimum
distance of 100 feet from the right-of-way lines on all streets or roads
and a minimum distance of 75 feet from all other property lines. The
area between the setback line and the right-of-way line of all streets and
roads and all other property lines shall be, at all times, kept clear and
vacant of junk.
K. When the Board shall deem it necessary and desirable, the premises to
be licensed shall at the setback lines be enclosed by a fence of type and
style to be determined by the Board or by evergreen screen plantings,
or both. The Board may set forth the fence and planting requirements at
the time of the issuance of a license or at the time of renewal or transfer
of a license.
L. No open burning of waste materials or tires is permitted.
M. Junkyards shall comply in all other respects with the requirements for a
junkyard set forth in the Jackson Township Zoning Ordinance.
A. Any person who or which has violated or permitted the violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a
judgment of not more than $1,000 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof. If
the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. In addition, if any licensee shall have been found
liable on two occasions of any violation of this chapter, the Board shall
have the power to revoke the license granted under the authority of this
chapter.
27.Editor's Note: See 15 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.
§ 76-12 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 76-13
47:129
§ 76-14. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to the remedies provided in § 76-13 above, any continued
violations of this chapter which shall constitute a nuisance or which shall in
the opinion of the Board constitute a nuisance may be abated by proceeding
against the violator in a court of equity for relief.
Chapter 84
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 44, Art. I.
Junkyards — See Ch. 76.
Solid waste — See Ch. 105, Art. I.
§ 84-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Nuisance Ordinance."
§ 84-2. Prohibited acts.
No person, firm, corporation or any other legal entity shall do any act or
omit to perform any act or duty or permit a condition or thing to exist, which
act, omission, condition or thing is defined in § 84-3 as a nuisance.
§ 84-3. Acts declared nuisances.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
defined and declared to be nuisances, which include the erecting,
maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or
remain in or upon any private lot, building, structure or premises, or in or
upon any street, avenue, alley, parkway or other private or public place in
the Township, or any one or more of the following disordered, disturbing,
unsanitary, fly-producing, rat-harboring, disease-causing places, conditions
or things:
B. All judgment, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Township.
A. Any putrid, unsound or unwholesome bones, meat, hides, skins of the
whole or any part of dead animal, fish or fowl.
B. Vaults, cesspools, dumps, pits of like places which are not securely
protected from flies or rats, or which are foul or malodorous.
C. Filthy, littered or trash-covered house yards, factory yards, vacant areas
in rear or stores, vacant lots, houses, buildings or premises.
§ 76-13 JACKSON CODE § 84-3
84:130
§ 84-4. Notice; cost.
Jackson Township, or any officer, employee or agent thereof including, but
not limited to, the Jackson Township Zoning Officer, is hereby authorized
to notify any owner or occupant of any said property, personally or by
United States regular mail or by positing such notice upon the premises, to
remove or eliminate any nuisance on said person's property within 10 days
of the date of the notice. Upon the failure of such owner or occupant to
comply with the Township's orders within such period of time, the Township
Supervisors, the Jackson Township Zoning Officer, or any officer, employee
or agent of the Jackson Township is hereby authorized and directed, at its
option, to enter upon such premises and remove and eliminate the nuisance
contained thereon. The cost of such entry, removal or elimination, together
with a penalty of 10 percent of the amount thereof, shall be paid by such
owner or occupant within 10 days from the date of notification of the cost
and penalty. In the event the owner or occupier refuses to pay the cost and
penalty, the same shall be filed and entered as a lien against said premises
D. Animal manure in any quantity which is not securely protected from
flies and the elements.
E. Stagnant water in pools in which mosquitoes, flies or insects multiply.
F. Weeds or plants which provide rodent harborage, or weeds or plants
which are poisonous or noxious growing in yards, vacant lots or along
public streets in the Township, which may pollute the neighborhood or
menace health.
G. Tin cans, bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small pieces of scrap iron, wire
metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or trash or abandoned
material, unless the same is kept in covered bins or receptacles
approved by the Township.
H. Any and all places used as dumping ground or for the wrecking or
disassembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors, vehicles or machinery of
any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn out, wrecked or
abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, vehicles or machinery of any
kind, or of any of the parts thereof, which such places are kept so as to
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by others.
I. Trash, litter, upholstered furniture, rags, accumulation of empty
barrels, boxes, carts, packing crates, mattresses, bedding, excelsior,
packing hay, straw or other packing material, lumber not neatly piled,
scrap iron, tin or other metal not neatly piled or anything in which flies
or rats may breed or multiply or which may be a fire danger, unused and
discarded household goods and appliances.
J. All refrigerators and freezers shall have all doors removed while placed
outside for any purpose in order to prevent access to any individual,
wherein possible physical harm or injury or death may result.
§ 84-3 NUISANCES § 84-4
84:131
and shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of
municipal liens.
§ 84-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine in a sum not less than $50 and not exceeding $600
in proceedings commenced by the Township before any district justice.
Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense for the purpose of
commencing proceedings. Upon judgment against any person by conviction,
or by proceedings by summons or default of the fine imposed and costs, said
person may be sentenced to York County Jail for a period not to exceed 30
days. This remedy is cumulative with any and all other remedies set forth in
this chapter.
§ 84-6. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective immediately upon enactment.
Chapter 87
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning; outdoor fires — See Ch. 50.
§ 84-4 JACKSON CODE § 84-6
84:132
ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 7-13-2012 by Ord. No. 195-12]
§ 87-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "The Jackson Township Park Rules and
Regulations Ordinance."
§ 87-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall regulate the activities of persons in any park owned or
operated by Jackson Township.
§ 87-3. Hours of operation.
The park shall be open from sunrise to sunset.
§ 87-4. Burning regulations.
§ 87-5. Protection of wildlife.
All persons using the park facilities shall protect, wherever possible, wildlife
in the park. To accomplish this goal, the following is prohibited:
§ 87-6. Discharge of firearms prohibited.
The discharge of any type of firearm, bow and arrow, paint ball marker, air
gun, sling shots, fireworks or any other weapon within the limits of the park
is prohibited.
§ 87-7. Disorderly acts prohibited.
Disorderly and/or immoral acts or practices are prohibited, including:
A. Fires are not permitted in the park.
B. Food grilling is allowed, provided that grills are powered by propane
only. No charcoal or wood-fired grills are permitted.
A. No person shall injure, deface, climb, mutilate, pull up, remove, or
destroy any vegetation in the park, whether sod, tree, brush, shrub,
vine, fern, flower or fruit.
B. No person shall hunt, trap, chase, capture or molest in any manner
whatsoever wildlife of any kind or disturb the nests or eggs of birds or
fish or homes of animals.
A. The possession and/or use of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs within
the park.
§ 87-1 NUISANCES § 87-7
84:133
§ 87-8. Littering prohibited.
Dumping of rubbish, leaving trash on the park and littering of any kind are
prohibited.
§ 87-9. Defacing of property prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to deface, mutilate, mistreat, abuse, destroy,
mark, write or paint upon anything in the park whether natural or manmade.
§ 87-10. Motorized vehicles.
Use or operation of motorized vehicles in the park is prohibited except
in designated parking areas during the normal hours the park is open.
ATVs, snowmobiles or any four or more wheeled, or tracked vehicle, and
recreational vehicles are prohibited anywhere in the park, including the
designated parking areas.
§ 87-11. Reservations.
B. No person shall sell, peddle or advertise any tickets, articles or services
in the park.
C. No person shall be intoxicated, under the influence of illegal drugs,
gamble or use threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language,
fight or commit disorderly or immoral conduct of any kind.
D. No person shall post, display or distribute any banner or poster of
private, commercial or political nature.
E. Offering anything for sale.
F. Parking of vehicles in other than designated parking areas.
G. Careless and unsafe operation of any nonmotorized, human-powered
equipment, including bicycles, tricycles, skateboards, etc.
H. Trespassing onto adjoining properties without permission of owners of
those properties.
I. Any practices endangering the welfare and safety of others, including
the hitting of golf balls or tossing lawn darts and their like.
A. Groups with reservations shall have the sole use of designated reserved
areas for the duration of the reservation.
B. All reservation permits will be issued by the Jackson Township office
staff, and a deposit and rental fee set by the Board of Supervisors by
resolution will be required to ensure proper use and care of park
property. Costs for cleanup and/or repair of any damages determined to
be caused by the rental party and discovered during a post-rental
inspection of the facilities by Township personnel will be retained from
§ 87-7 JACKSON CODE § 87-11
84:134
§ 87-12. Animal controls.
§ 87-13. General provisions.
§ 87-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty of a violation of this chapter in a summary criminal
proceeding before a District Magistrate shall pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 and not less than $50 and the costs of prosecution, and in default
of payment of such fines and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned for
not more than 10 days; provided, each day's continuance of a violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 87-15. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced:
the deposit amount. If cleanup and/or damage fees exceed the deposit
amount, the difference will be invoiced to the permit applicant. Invoiced
amounts not paid within 30 days of such invoice shall bear interest
at a rate of 1% per month until paid. The Township may proceed to
collect any amounts invoiced hereunder in accordance with law, and
the individual signing the application shall be deemed liable for such
amount due, including any and all costs of collection, including attorney
fees and costs.
C. Reserved use of the pavilions, courts, and ball fields shall be by permit
only.
A. Pets are permitted in the park and must be leashed and under the direct
control of the owner at all times. Pet waste must be cleaned up, bagged
and removed from the park by the pet owner.
B. Equestrian activities are prohibited.
A. The park is primarily for the use of the Township residents; however, as
Township property, no discrimination shall be permitted between
residents of the Township and visitors from other areas.
B. Parents are responsible for the safety and behavior of their children
within the park, and no Township supervision will be available or
provided.
C. Users of the park shall respect the rights of others and conduct
themselves in a manner acceptable and becoming to others. Users of
the park are required to follow the direction of Township personnel, or
other duly authorized authorities, who are working in or monitoring the
park and activities.
A. By a law enforcement officer instituting summary criminal proceedings
by citations as provided by law; or
§ 87-11 NUISANCES § 87-15
84:135
B. When the affiant is not a law enforcement officer, the affiant shall
institute a criminal proceeding by filing a complaint with the District
Magistrate as provided by law; or
C. By another proceeding now or hereafter authorized by law.
§ 87-15 JACKSON CODE § 87-15
84:136
Chapter 89
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 89-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Solicitation Ordinance."
§ 89-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOLICITATION — The solicitation of funds or the sale of merchandise or
services by any individual over the age of 18 years at the residence of
Jackson Township citizens without prior invitation.
§ 89-3. Licensing requirements.
Five days after the passage of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person to engage in solicitation within the Township of Jackson without first
having taken out a license as hereinafter provided. Every individual desiring
to engage in solicitation shall apply to the Jackson Township police and give
such information as required. The police shall issue a permit unless the
applicant shall have a criminal record or unless a complaint against that
individual or purpose has been received by the police. If a permit is refused,
the individual may appear at the next scheduled meeting of the Board of
Supervisors to appeal the refusal to issue a license.
§ 89-4. Term of license.
A license shall be valid only for the year issued regardless of the date issued.
§ 89-5. Rules and regulations.
§ 89-6. Exceptions.
All solicitations made in Jackson Township not in accord with this chapter
shall be voidable by the residents of said Township, except that this chapter
shall not apply to individuals under the age of 18 years, individuals who
A. The license shall be carried and shown upon request to all police or
residents contacted.
B. The license shall not be transferable.
C. The solicitor shall not represent that the license constitutes an
endorsement of the Township.
D. The solicitor must present a written notification containing his or her
license number to customers that they may rescind this transaction
within 48 hours by writing to the Jackson Township police.
§ 87-15 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 89-6
89:137
work for organizations registered under the Solicitation of Funds for
Charitable Purposes Act of Pennsylvania (10 P.S. § 162.1 et seq.), individuals
licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or individuals selling
agricultural products.
§ 89-7. Fee.
The fee for a license shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.28
§ 89-8. Violations. [Amended 8-13-1996 by Ord. No. 91-96; 5-6-1997
by Ord. No. 98-97]
Chapter 91
PLUMBING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 47.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 93.
Sewers — See Ch. 99.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
113.
§ 91-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, two copies of which are on file in the Jackson Township
Office, being marked and designated as the "BOCA National Plumbing
Code, Ninth Edition, 1993," as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc., with the below stated modifications, be
and hereby is adopted as the Plumbing Code of Jackson Township Sewer
Authority, York County, Pennsylvania (hereinafter referred to as "Plumbing
Code"), in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings
and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA National Plumbing
Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions and changes as prescribed
in § 91-2.
A. Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District
Magistrate, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs, or, in default thereof, shall be imprisoned to the extent allowed by
law for the punishment of summary offenses.
B. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Township Treasurer.
28.Editor's Note: The current fees resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 89-6 JACKSON CODE § 91-2
91:138
§ 91-2. Modifications to standards.
The 1993 BOCA National Plumbing Code is amended, supplemented,
revised or deleted from as herein set forth. The references are to section
numbers of said code.
A. Section P-101.1. Section P-101.1 shall specify "Jackson Township Sewer
Authority."
B. Section P-113.2. The fee schedule shall be as follows:
(1) Fee for permit and one inspection: $50.
(2) Additional inspection fee: $25 per additional inspection.
C. Section P-304.3. Section P-304.3 shall specify distances as adopted by
each participating municipality. As of the date of adoption of this
ordinance, Jackson Township has adopted 150 feet as the specified
distance for mandatory connection.
D. Section P-309.4. Section P-309.4 shall specify four feet zero inches for
pipeline depth.
E. Section P-309.5. Section P-309.5 shall specify 48 inches.
F. Section P-404.2. Section P-404.2 shall specify that regardless of the
pipe type, a bed of five inches of crushed stone (1B, 2B or as approved
by the Plumbing Inspector) must be laid and pipe backfilled with 12
inches of stone above the pipe.
G. Section P-404.3. Table P-404.3 shall delete bituminized fiber and
asbestos-cement type pipes; they are not approved materials.
H. Section P-407.8. Section P-407.8 shall specify that any cleanout plugs
used outdoors shall be metallic, including but not limited to brass.
I. Section P-603.1. Table P-603.1(1) shall change the minimum trap size
for automatic clothes washer standpipe (domestic) and shower (each
head) to two inches in diameter.
J. Section P-603.4. Add Section P-603.4 as follows:
P-603.4 Underground sanitary grinder pump force main pipe:
Minimum size for underground sanitary grinder pump force main pipe
shall be 1 1/2 inches in diameter.
K. Section P-603.5. Add Section P-603.5 as follows:
P-603.5 Commercial establishments: Minimum size of a building
sewer/drain servicing a commercial establishment (including
apartment buildings with more than two apartments) must be six
inches in diameter.
L. Section P-603.6. Add Section P-603.6 as follows:
§ 91-2 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 91-2
91:139
P-603.6 Single-family structures: Minimum size of a building
sewer/drain servicing a single-family structure shall be four inches in
diameter to first three-inch or larger stack.
M. Section P-606.2. Section P-606.2 shall specify that grinder pumps,
grinder ejectors, sewage pumps and sewage ejectors are allowed.
Grinder pump systems may be installed within or outside the structure.
Prior approval from the Authority for size, type and model is required.
N. Section 6. Add Section P-607 as follows:
P-607 Abandonment of existing septic tanks: All existing septic
tanks must be pumped and abandoned at the owners expense. After
pump out and being deemed watertight by the Plumbing Inspector,
the tanks may be used for a pump tank. Proof of pump out must be
provided to the Plumbing Inspector or Authority within 30 days of
connection to the public sewer system. It is recommended that unused
tanks be filled with granular material.
O. Section P-805.6. Add as follows:
P-805.6 Prohibited connection: Roof gutters, leaders and
conductors are prohibited to connect to the sanitary sewer system.
P. Section P-806.5. Add: Section P-806.5 as follows:
P-806.5 Prohibited connection: Building subdrains and foundationtype
area drains (footer drain) are prohibited to connect to the sanitary
sewer system.
Q. Section P-810.5. Add Section P-810.5 as follows:
P-810.5 Prohibited connection: Roof drains are prohibited to
connect to the sanitary sewer system.
R. Section P-1003.7. Section P-1003.7 shall specify that building (house)
traps are to be installed on every new or additional connection to the
sanitary sewer system.
S. Section P-1004.6. Section P-1004.6 shall specify that food waste
grinders may discharge into five-hundred-gallon or larger grease
interceptors. Commercial dishwashers are required to discharge into
grease interceptors with a minimum distance of 10 feet between the
dishwasher outlet and the inlet of the grease interceptor.
T. Section P-1004.11. Add Section P-1004.11.1 as follows:
P-1004.11.1 Beauty salon/barber shop type establishments:
Beauty sinks shall discharge into a hair-type interceptor (hair trap).
U. Section P-1004.11. Add Section P-1004.11.2 as follows:
§ 91-2 JACKSON CODE § 91-2
91:140
§ 91-3. Definitions; regulations and administration.
P-1004.11.2 Animal grooming establishments: Wash tubs/sinks
shall discharge into a hair- or solids-type interceptor.
V. Section P-1103.2. Section P-1103.2 shall require cleanouts at intervals
of not more than 75 feet apart.
W. Section P-1103.6. Add Section P-1003.6 as follows:
P-1103.6 Curb cleanout: A cleanout shall be installed at or near
the existing or projected curbline of the property unless the building
trap assembly is within 15 feet of the curbline; a curb cleanout shall
also be installed when a lateral is repaired or replaced and when
no cleanout had been installed previously; all necessary material and
labor to install new cleanout shall be paid by the property owner when
lateral is repaired or replaced.
X. Section P-1213.1.1. Add Section P-1213.1.1 as follows:
P-1213.1.1 Prohibited connection: Floor drains below grade are
prohibited to be connected to the building sanitary sewer systems
unless specifically waived by the Authority.
A. Definitions. As used in this Plumbing Code, the following terms shall
have the indicated meanings:
APPRENTICE PLUMBER — A person regularly employed by and
engaged in the plumbing business conducted by a master plumber, duly
licensed as an apprentice in accordance with the provisions of this
code.
AUTHORITY — A five-member Board appointed by the Jackson
Township Board of Supervisors and known as the "Jackson Township,
York County, Sewer Authority."
CODE — This Plumbing Code, as amended, together with the BOCA
National Plumbing Code, Ninth Edition, 1993, and any rule or
regulation promulgated hereunder by the Authority.
JOURNEYMAN PLUMBER — A person to whom a currently valid
journeyman plumbers license has been issued in accordance with the
provisions of this code.
LABORER — A person not otherwise licensed or registered under the
provisions of the code and employed in the performance of plumbing
work by a master plumber.
MASTER PLUMBER — A person to whom a currently valid master
plumbers license has been issued by Springettsbury Township or the
City of York, York County, Pennsylvania.
§ 91-2 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 91-3
91:141
OFFICIAL COPY — A copy of the 1993 BOCA National Plumbing Code,
Ninth Edition, and appropriately amended to be an official copy of the
Code.
PLUMBING INSPECTOR — A person hired by the Jackson Township
Sewer Authority to perform the duties assigned in the code.
B. Plumbing permits.
(1) Application; issuance. No plumbing, house drainage or building
drainage system work shall be undertaken unless and until the
registered and licensed master plumber proposing to undertake
the same shall have filed with the Plumbing Inspector or Authority
an application for a plumbing permit for such work and until the
necessary fees have been paid therefor, and a plumbing permit
shall have been issued therefor. The owner of said property may
pay the necessary fees in advance of the licensed master plumber
picking up the permit to perform the work. No permit shall be
issued until plans and specifications showing the proposed work in
reasonable detail shall have been submitted to the Plumbing
Inspector and it has been determined from examination of such
plans and specifications that the proposed work will conform with
the provisions of the code. If a permit is refused, written notice
thereof shall be provided to the applicant who may submit such
revised plans and specifications as are necessary to obtain
approval. If, in the course of the work, it is found necessary to
obtain approval to make any change from the plans and
specification on which a permit has been issued, amended plans
and specifications shall be submitted and a supplementary permit
shall be issued to cover the change after the same conditions
required to secure the original permit have been satisfied.
(2) Exceptions. No permit shall be required for the following:
(a) Repairs which involve only the working parts of a faucet valve
or the replacement of a defective faucet or valve, provided that
their only minor alterations are made in the existing piping to
accommodate new fixtures.
(b) The clearance of stoppages so long as no fixtures or fixture
traps larger than 1 1/2 inches in diameter are required to be
removed in order to perform the work.
(c) Installation or repair of potable waterlines.
(d) The installation or repair of hot-water heaters.
(e) The installation or repair of gas piping.
(f) The installation or repair of chilled water piping for
refrigeration and comfort cooling.
§ 91-3 JACKSON CODE § 91-3
91:142
(g) The installation or repair of hot-water piping in connection
with building heating.
(h) The installation or repair of fire sprinklers and standpipes.
(3) Fees. Fees shall be set from time to time by resolution of the
Authority.
C. Condemned equipment. The Plumbing Inspector shall condemn any
plumbing material or equipment which is so worn, damaged, defective
or constructed as to constitute a sanitary or safety hazard, and such
condemned material or equipment shall not be reused for plumbing
purposes. Where, in the opinion of the Plumbing Inspector, condemned
material or equipment should be destroyed to prevent its reuse, he may
order such destruction.
D. Procedure in event of sewer stoppage. In the event of a stoppage of a
main building drain or sewer, the owner or tenant shall first contact a
plumber to ascertain the location of the stoppage, and, in the event that
the public sewer is the problem, the plumber in turn shall notify the
Authority office.
E. Inspection of building before connection to sewer. Before any building
shall be connected with the sanitary sewerage system, the plumbing
system thereof shall be inspected and approved by the Plumbing
Inspector. The Plumbing Inspector may order revision, alteration and
correction to the plumbing system to the end that the plumbing system
shall conform, both in construction and manner of use, to the provisions
of the Plumbing Code.
F. Procedure upon removal of building. When any building is removed or
any drainage or sewer system is abandoned or dismantled or removed,
the sewer connection shall be disconnected at the curb or property line
and properly sealed, plugged or capped, and inspected by the Plumbing
Inspector.
G. Waiver of Authority liability prerequisite to permit issuance for
structures below grade. When a permit is issued for a building having
plumbing fixtures in a basement or a section of the building below
grade construction, the owner shall be required to sign a written
agreement or waiver upon a form furnished by the Authority in the
hands of the Plumbing Inspector releasing the Authority from any
damage that may result from this area being flooded by the stoppage or
backflow of sewers. In areas where stoppage or backflow is prevalent,
the building shall be provided with a backwater valve or check valve.
H. Connection of floor drains and sump pumps to building sanitary
systems prohibited.
(1) Floor drains are prohibited from being connected to building
sanitary sewer systems.
§ 91-3 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 91-3
91:143
(2) Sump pumps are prohibited from being connected to building
sanitary sewer systems.
I. Enforcement.
(1) Any portion of a plumbing system found by the Plumbing Inspector
to be unsanitary as defined herein is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
(2) Whenever it is brought to the attention of the Authority that any
unsanitary conditions exist or that any construction or work
regulated by this code does not meet the code, the Authority may
request an investigation by the Plumbing Inspector who, upon
determining such information to be fact, shall order any person
using or maintaining any such condition or responsible for the use
of maintenance thereof to repair, alter, change, remove or demolish
the same as may be considered necessary for the proper protection
of life, health or property. Every such order shall be in writing,
addressed to the owner, agent or person responsible for the
premises in which such conditions exist and shall specify the date
or time for compliance with such order.
(3) Refusal, failure or neglect to comply with any such notice or order
shall be considered a violation of this code.
(4) When any plumbing system is maintained in violation of this code
and in violation of any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of
this section or where a nuisance exists in any building or on a lot on
which a building is situate, the Plumbing Inspector shall institute
any appropriate action or proceeding in any court of competent
jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation or
nuisance.
J. Violation and penalties.
(1) Any person, partnership, business, corporation or other entity
violating the provisions of this chapter may be cited for violating
the provisions of this chapter and, upon the issuance of a citation
and conviction by a District Justice, shall be guilty of a summary
offense and shall pay a fine not to exceed $1,000 and/or imprisoned
up to 90 days.
(2) Each day a violation exists shall be considered a separate violation,
subject to the same penalties as set forth above. It shall not be
necessary to issue a separate citation for each day of violation, but
one citation shall be sufficient to cover all days of violations.
(3) The Board of Supervisors authorizes the Township Manager,
Plumbing Code Enforcement Officer and Township police officers to
issue citations for violations of this chapter.
§ 91-3 JACKSON CODE § 91-3
91:144
§ 91-4. Plumbing Inspector.
K. Applicability. This code shall apply to all of the area served by the
Authority.
A. Office created; assistant. The offices of Plumbing Inspector and
Assistant Plumbing Inspector are hereby created. The Plumbing
Inspector shall be hired by the Authority to serve at its pleasure for
such compensation as such Authority shall from time to time determine.
B. Duties. The duties of the Plumbing Inspector(s) are as follows:
(1) Maintain public office hours necessary to efficiently administer the
provisions of this code and amendments thereto.
(2) Require submission of, examine and check plans and specifications,
drawings, descriptions and/or diagrams necessary to show clearly
the character, kind and extent of work covered by applications for a
permit and, upon approval thereof, issue the permit applied for.
(3) Keep a permanent, accurate account of all fees for permits issued
and other moneys collected and received as provided by this code
and other Authority codes, regulations or standard details, the
names of the persons upon whose account the fees were paid, the
date and amount thereof, together with the location or premises to
which they relate.
(4) Enforce the provisions of this code in a manner consistent with the
intent thereof and inspect all plumbing and drainage work
authorized by any permit to assure compliance with provisions of
this code or amendments thereto, approving or condemning such
work in whole or in part as conditions require.
(5) Issue upon request a certificate of approval for any work approved.
(6) Condemn and reject all work done or being done or materials used
or being used which do not in all respects comply with the
provisions of this code and amendments thereto.
(7) Order changes in workmanship and/or materials essential to obtain
compliance with all provisions of this code.
(8) Investigate any construction or work regulated by this code and
issue such notices and orders as deemed necessary.
(9) Keep a complete record of all the essential transactions of his
office.
C. Conduct of plumbing business.
(1) Plumbing permits will only be granted to a master plumber, duly
licensed in Springettsbury Township or the City of York, in person,
§ 91-3 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 91-4
91:145
§ 91-5. Appeals.
An appeal of any dispute between the Plumbing Inspector and the permit
holder may be brought before the Authority for final arbitration and
decision.
Chapter 93
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 76.
§ 93-1. Height of grass and weeds restricted. [Amended 12-5-1995
by Ord. No. 83-95; 5-3-2016 by Ord. No. 208-16]
after the filing and payment of all information, plans, specifications
and fees required by this code or any ordinance of the Authority.
(2) A journeyman or master plumber must be present at all times on all
plumbing work performed in the area served by the Authority.
(3) No more than two apprentices and one laborer may be used on
plumbing work for each journeyman on the job.
(4) Master plumbers shall keep a record at all times of the laborers,
apprentices and journeymen employed by them and shall at the
time of their employment supply their names to the Plumbing
Inspector in writing.
(5) In any plumbing business or corporation, when more than one
person is issued a master plumbers license, permits may be lifted
or procured on only one license. The Authority must be notified, in
writing, of the designated master plumber.
D. Display of certificate or cards. Every master plumber, journeyman
plumber and apprentice plumber shall have in their possession at all
times when engaged in plumbing work a certificate of license card,
showing that such workman is the holder of a license issued pursuant to
this chapter, and such workman shall exhibit the same upon request.
The original certificate of license shall be displayed for all at the place
of business at all times and a photocopy at the work sites at all times for
which work is to be performed by his or their company.
A. No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any real property
within a residential zone of the Township shall permit any grass, weeds
or any vegetation, not edible or planted for some useful or ornamental
purpose, to grow or remain upon such premises so as to exceed six
inches in height or, where weeds are concerned, to allow the same to go
§ 91-4 JACKSON CODE § 93-1
91:146
§ 93-2. Responsibility of occupants.
Persons responsible for meeting the requirements of this chapter shall be
the occupiers of the premises and/or the owner thereof.
§ 93-3. Notice; time limit for compliance. [Amended 12-5-1995 by
Ord. No. 83-95]
Notice to comply with this chapter may be given by certified United States
Mail by the Permit Officer of the Board of Supervisors and shall grant 10
days for the compliance.
§ 93-4. Performance of work by Township; recovery of costs.
[Amended 12-5-1995 by Ord. No. 83-95]
If the person responsible fails to comply, the Township may enter and
perform the necessary work and the cost therefor shall be collected from
the person responsible by a suit before a District Magistrate.
§ 93-5. Violations. [Added 12-5-1995 by Ord. No. 83-95; amended
8-13-1996 by Ord. No. 91-96; 5-6-1997 by Ord. No. 98-97]
to seed. In all other zoning districts, the height shall be no more than
12 inches.
B. The following shall be excepted from the maximum heights stated
herein:
(1) Areas within public road or street rights-of-way that are maintained
by Jackson Township or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Department of Transportation.
(2) Areas within or a part of stormwater facilities that are designed to
operate with grass, weeds or vegetation in excess of the maximum
height restrictions stated herein.
C. Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be detrimental to the
health, safety and cleanliness of the inhabitants of the Township.
A. Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District
Magistrate, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs, or, in default thereof, shall be imprisoned to the extent allowed by
law for the punishment of summary offenses.
B. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Township Treasurer.
§ 93-1 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 93-5
91:147
Chapter 99
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer Authority — See Ch. 5, Art. I.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 107.
Wells — See Ch. 131.
§ 93-5 JACKSON CODE § 93-5
99:148
ARTICLE I
Individual and Community Sewage Systems
[Adopted 1-5-1976 by Ord. No. 2-75]
§ 99-1. Permit required. [Amended 12-5-1995 by Ord. No. 83-95]
No person shall install, construct or request bid proposals for construction
or alter an individual sewage system or community sewage system or
construct or request bid proposals for construction or install or occupy any
building or structure for which an individual sewage system or community
sewage system is to be installed without first obtaining a permit indicating
that the site and plans and specifications of such system are in compliance
with the provisions of Act No. 537 (35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.) and the standards
adopted by the Department of Environmental Resources of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania pursuant to said Act.
§ 99-2. Sewage Enforcement Officer.
The positions of Sewage Enforcement Officer and Assistant Sewage
Enforcement Officer are hereby created to be filled by appointment by
resolution of Jackson Township. No person shall be appointed as a Sewage
Enforcement Officer or Assistant unless such person has been certified
"qualified" by the Department of Environmental Resources. The duly
appointed Sewage Enforcement Officer and/or the Assistant shall
administer the provisions of Act No. 537 (35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.) insofar as
said provisions are applicable to Jackson Township.
§ 99-3. Permit application. [Amended 12-5-1995 by Ord. No. 83-95]
Applications for permits shall be in writing to Jackson Township in
accordance with the provisions of Act No. 537 (35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.) and
shall be made in such form and shall include such data as the Department
of Environmental Resources may prescribe.
§ 99-4. Fees. [Amended 12-5-1995 by Ord. No. 83-95]
A. Application fees shall be the actual costs of administering and
processing the application in accordance with the prevailing fee
schedule as adopted from time to time by resolution of Jackson
Township; provided, however, that a fee shall be paid to Jackson
Township when the application is first submitted in accordance with a
schedule set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.29
B. Upon completion of the alteration or construction for which the permit
had been issued, the applicant shall pay to Jackson Township the
amount by which the actual costs exceed the applicant's fee. Final
29.Editor's Note: The current fees resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 99-1 SEWERS § 99-4
99:149
§ 99-5. Applicability of statute.
All provisions of Act No. 537 (35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.) as said provisions apply
to Jackson Township are incorporated herein by reference.
§ 99-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1994 by Ord. No.
77-94;30 5-6-1997 by Ord. No. 98-97]
Any person who shall violate any provision of Act No. 537 (35 P.S. § 750.1
et seq.) or the rules, regulations or standards promulgated thereunder or
who violates any provision of this chapter or who resists or interferes with
any officer, agent or employee of Jackson Township or the Department of
Environmental Resources in the performance of his duties shall be guilty of
a summary offense.
approval of the permit may be withheld until any excess costs are paid
by the applicant.
A. Upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District
Magistrate, such person shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000, plus costs, for each day of violation or, in default thereof,
shall be imprisoned to the extent allowed by law for the punishment of
summary offenses.
B. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this article shall be paid over to the Jackson Township
Treasurer.
30.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 77-94 provided that it was adopted pursuant to the authority
set forth in 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 3573(c)(2).
§ 99-4 JACKSON CODE § 99-6
99:150
ARTICLE II
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 6-1-1999 by Ord. No. 111-99]
§ 99-7. Title.
This article shall be known as "The Jackson Township Sewer Connection
Ordinance."
§ 99-8. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for requiring owners
of improved property to connect to a community sanitary sewer system
as hereinafter more fully described, and it is hereby directed that the
enactment of this article is necessary for the protection, benefit and
preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this
municipality.
§ 99-9. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of the terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — Jackson Township Sewer Authority, a Pennsylvania
municipality authority.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the sewage drainage system of
any structure to the lateral or service connection of a sewer.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — That part of a multiple-family
dwelling or commercial or industrial establishment with sewage flows equal
to 350 gallons per day.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located within Jackson Township
and within the area served by this Authority upon which there is erected
a structure or structures intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings and from which structure or structures
sewage and/or industrial or commercial wastes shall be or may be
discharged. Each dwelling unit within a structure shall be considered as a
separate improved property.
INDUSTRIAL OR COMMERCIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous
substance or form of energy rejected or escaping in the course of any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or in the course of the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct from
sewage, excluding any ground-, surface or stormwater.
LATERAL — That part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to a point
at or in front of the right-of-way line.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property located within the area served by the
Authority.
§ 99-7 SEWERS § 99-9
99:151
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation or other group or entity, public or private.
SERVICE CONNECTION — That portion of, or place in, a sewer, in those
cases where no lateral is provided, which is provided for connection of any
building sewer or privately-owned sewer mains.
SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from any
improved property, excluding any ground-, surface or stormwater.
SEWER MAIN — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system
owned and maintained by the Sewer Authority used or usable for sewage
collection purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
pumping, treating and disposing of sewage and industrial or commercial
wastes.
STREET — Includes any street, road, lane, court, alley or public square.
TOWNSHIP — Jackson Township, York County, Pennsylvania.
§ 99-10. Connection to public sewers required.
§ 99-11. Unlawful discharge.
A. The owner of any improved property or private wastewater collection
system adjacent to the sewer system, the principal building or
collection line thereof which is located within 150 feet of a sewer
system, shall connect such improved property or private system with
such sewer, in such manner as the Authority may require, within 90
days after notice to such owner from the Authority to make such
connection, for the purpose of discharge of all sewage and, to the extent
permitted by the Authority, industrial or commercial wastes from such
improved property, subject to such limitations and restrictions as shall
be established herein or otherwise shall be established by the Authority,
from time to time.
B. All sewage and, to the extent permitted by the Authority, industrial or
commercial wastes from any improved property, after connection of
such improved property with a sewer required under § 99-10A, shall be
discharged into a sewer, subject to such limitations and restrictions as
shall be established herein or otherwise shall be established by the
Authority, from time to time.
C. If the owner of any improved property benefited, improved or
accommodated by a sewer, after 90 days' notice from the Authority, in
accordance with § 99-10A, shall fail to connect such improved property,
as required, the Authority or Jackson Township may make such
connection and may collect from such owner the costs and expenses
thereof by filing of a municipal claim or lien, an action in assumpsit or
such other legal proceeding as may be permitted by law.
§ 99-9 JACKSON CODE § 99-11
99:152
§ 99-12. Pretreatment of industrial and commercial wastes
required.
The Authority shall have the right to require pretreatment of sewage or
industrial or commercial wastes for the removal of substances including,
but not limited to, heavy metals, toxic or hazardous substances or
chemicals, pesticides, disinfectants, acids, paints, paint thinners,
herbicides, gasoline and other solvents, automobile oil and other
nondomestic oils, fat or grease; provided, however, that the owner of the
improved property shall bear all expense for the required pretreatment.
§ 99-13. Sewer connection of certain receptacles on improved
property prohibited.
A. No person shall place or deposit or permit to be placed or deposited
upon or into public or private property within the area served by a
community sanitary sewage system any sewage or industrial or
commercial wastes in violation of § 99-10B.
B. No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged to any natural
outlet within the area served by the Authority any sewage or industrial
or commercial wastes in violation of § 99-10B except where suitable
treatment has been provided which is satisfactory to the Authority.
C. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage into any
part of the sanitary sewer system.
D. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any sewer any
sewage or industrial or commercial waste which contains any
substances listed in § 99-12 without first providing pretreatment
sufficient for the removal of such substances to the satisfaction of the
Authority.
A. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall be used and maintained at any time upon any improved property
which has been connected to a sewer or which shall be required under
§ 99-10A to be connected to a sewer, except that such receptacle may
continue to be used and maintained solely for the purpose of receiving
the discharge of water other than sewage from a basement sump pump
and/or other surface or subsurface drainage facility.
B. Every such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar
receptacle in existence that is not maintained solely for the purpose of
receiving the discharge of water other than sewage from a basement
sump pump and/or other surface or subsurface drainage facility shall be
abandoned and shall be cleaned and filled under the observation of the
Authority; and any such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or
similar receptacle not so abandoned, cleansed and filled shall constitute
a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare and such hazard may
§ 99-11 SEWERS § 99-13
99:153
§ 99-14. Notice to connect; service.
The notice by the Authority to make a connection to a sewer, referred to
in § 99-10A, shall consist of a written or printed document requiring the
connection and referring to this article. Notice may be given at any time
after a sewer is in place which can receive and convey sewage and, to
the extent permitted by the Authority, industrial or commercial wastes for
treatment and disposal from the improved property. Such notice shall be
served upon the owner either by personal service or by certified mail or by
posting upon the property for 30 days.
§ 99-15. Permit to connect to sewer required.
be abated as provided by law, at the expense of the owner of the
improved property.
C. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall at any time be connected to a sewer. No surface or subsurface
drainage facility shall at any time be connected to a sanitary sewer.
A. No person shall uncover, connect with, make any opening into or use,
alter or disturb in any manner any sewer or any part of the sewer
system without first obtaining a sewer connection permit.
B. Application for a permit required under § 99-10A shall be made by the
owner of the improved property, or by his designee.
C. No person shall make or cause to be made a connection of any improved
property with a sewer until such person shall have fulfilled each of the
following conditions:
(1) Such person shall have notified the Authority, in writing, of his
desire and intention to connect such improved property to a sewer.
(2) Such person shall have applied for and obtained a permit as
required by § 99-10A of this article and shall have paid all required
permit and/or inspections fees.31
(3) Such person shall have given the Authority at least three working
days notice of the time when such connection will be made so that
the Authority may observe and inspect the work of connection and
necessary testing.
(4) Such person shall have furnished satisfactory evidence to the
Authority that any tapping fee or connection charge imposed by the
Authority and/or reserve rental charges or fees imposed by the
Authority against the owner of each improved property have been
paid. In those cases where the developer connects the building
sewer into the sewer system and no tapping fee is charged, all
required permit and/or inspection fees to cover the cost of
31.Editor's Note: The current fees resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 99-13 JACKSON CODE § 99-15
99:154
§ 99-16. Separate connection of each improved property required;
exceptions.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, each improved property shall
be connected separately and independently with a sewer through a building
sewer. Grouping of more than one improved property on one building
sewer shall not be permitted, except under special circumstances, for good
sanitary reasons or other good cause shown; but then only after special
written permission of the Authority. Each dwelling unit within a structure
shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system in accordance with this
section.
§ 99-17. Certain costs payable by property owner; liability thereof.
All costs and expenses of construction of a building sewer and all costs and
expenses of connection of a building sewer to a sewer, including testing,
shall be borne by the owner of the improved property. The owner shall
indemnify and save harmless the Authority from all loss or damage that
may be occasioned, directly or indirectly, as a result of the construction of a
building sewer or the connection of a building sewer to a sewer.
§ 99-18. Payment of user fee after notice of connection.
The owner of any improved property adjoining or adjacent to the sanitary
sewer system, the structure of which is within 150 feet of the sewer system,
shall begin to pay a user fee at such rates as determined by the Authority as
of the date of connection, or within 90 days after notice from the Authority
to such owner to connect to the sewer system, whichever first occurs.
The initial bill to the owner for sewage treatment shall be prorated for
the number of days during the billing period the improved property is
connected to the sewer system.
§ 99-19. Point and manner of connection.
A building sewer shall be connected to a sewer at the place designated by
the Authority and where the lateral or service connection is provided. The
invert of a building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same
or a higher elevation than the invert of the sewer. A smooth, neat joint
shall be made with the use of a flexible coupling and the connection of the
building sewer to the lateral or service connection shall be made secure and
watertight.
inspection of each improved property so connected shall have been
paid or adequate bond or surety has been provided to insure
payment.
D. Inspection and permit fees shall be set by resolution from time to time
by the Authority.32
32.Editor's Note: The current fees resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 99-15 SEWERS § 99-20
99:155
§ 99-20. Construction of building sewers; inspection.
§ 99-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or permit the violation of any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil proceeding
before a District Magistrate, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 per day per EDU and court costs, plus reasonable attorney's fees.
Each continuing day of violation of this article shall constitute a separate
offense.
A. The installation of a building sewer shall be the responsibility of the
owner and shall be installed at the expense of the owner. Building
sewers shall be installed in accordance with the BOCA National
Plumbing Code, as revised by Authority resolution. Building sewers
must be constructed and maintained in a working order by qualified
personnel as defined by Authority resolution.
B. Where an improved property is served by its own sewage disposal
system or device, the existing structure sewer line may be broken at the
structure line of such improved property and attachment may be made,
with proper fittings, to continue such structure sewer line as a building
sewer.
C. No building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and
approved by the Authority. If any part of a building sewer is covered
before so being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered for
inspection at the expense of the owner of the improved property.
D. In the case where construction must occur within a Township street or
right-of-way, the owner shall be responsible for obtaining a Jackson
Township Highway Occupancy Permit.
E. Every excavation for a building sewer shall be guarded adequately with
barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage or injury.
Streets, sidewalks and other public property disturbed in the course of
installation of a building sewer shall be restored, at the expense of the
owner of the improved property being connected, in a manner
satisfactory to the Township.
F. Every building sewer of any improved property shall be maintained in a
sanitary and safe operating condition at the expense of the owner.
G. If any person shall fail or refuse, within 45 days of receipt of a written
notice from the Authority, to remedy any unsatisfactory condition with
respect to a building sewer, the Authority may refuse to permit such
person to discharge sewage and industrial or commercial wastes into
the sewer system until such unsatisfactory condition shall have been
remedied to the satisfaction of the Authority.
§ 99-20 JACKSON CODE § 99-21
99:156
ARTICLE III
Capped Sewers
[Adopted 11-1-2000 by Ord. No. 124-00]
§ 99-22. Title.
This article shall be known as "The Jackson Township Capped Sewer
Ordinance."
§ 99-23. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for requiring the
installation of capped sewers as hereinafter more fully described, and it
is hereby directed that the enactment of this article is necessary for the
protection, benefit, and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of this municipality.
§ 99-24. Definitions and word usage.
A. For the purpose of this article, words and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
AUTHORITY — The Jackson Township Sewer Authority, a Pennsylvania
municipality authority.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
LOT — Shall also be considered to mean "plot" or "parcel."
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
trust, corporation or other group or entity, public or private.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving;
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision.
Development in accordance with § 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as reenacted and
amended.33
(3)
33.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 99-22 SEWERS § 99-24
99:157
§ 99-25. Determinations by Township and Authority.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot
development.
SUFFICIENT CAPACITY — That the sewer system is or will be
physically capable of conveying both the existing and projected sewage
flows, and furthermore, that the treatment plant has a permitted
capacity (as defined by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection) to be capable of accepting and treating both the existing
and projected sewage flows.
TOWNSHIP — Jackson Township, York County, Pennsylvania.
B. Word usage.
(1) The word "used" and the word "occupied" as applied to any land or
building shall be construed to include the phrase "intended, or
designed to be occupied."
(2) The singular shall include the plural.
(3) Words or phrases used in the present tense shall include the future.
(4) The masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
(5) Any word or phrase not defined herein shall be defined in
accordance with standard usage and understanding.
A. If Jackson Township determines that a proposed subdivision or land
development lies within the Jackson Township Capped Sewer District as
established on the official Jackson Township Capped Sewer District
Map, attached hereto,34 which shall be adopted from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors, the developer of the proposed
subdivision or land development shall apply to the Jackson Township
Sewer Authority (hereinafter "Authority") for a determination as to
whether or not sufficient capacity exists or will exist within the next five
years in the Authority's sanitary sewer system to accommodate the
proposed development's sewage flows. If sufficient capacity exists or
will exist, the developer shall install capped sewers. This system shall
include, but not be limited to: collector mains installed in the street bed
or approved right-of-way; laterals installed from the collector main to
the right-of-way line; and pump stations, where necessary. The sanitary
sewer system shall be constructed according to Township
specifications, and the collector mains and laterals shall be plugged
watertight pending connection with the sanitary sewer system of the
Authority. [Amended 4-2-2002 by Ord. No. 130-02]
34.Editor's Note: The Capped Sewer District Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 99-24 JACKSON CODE § 99-25
99:158
§ 99-26. Inspections and transfer of facilities; costs.
B. In making its determination, the Authority shall take into consideration
all reasonable and relevant factors and data, including, but not limited
to, the projected growth of the area involved and the economic impact
upon the present sanitary sewer system facilities, with reference being
made to the Authority's projected area of service.
C. Said determinations shall be made by the Authority within 45 days after
written application has been made to the Authority by the developer.
A. The plans and specifications for the installation of the sanitary sewer
system facilities must be submitted to the Authority for review by the
Authority's Engineer. The subdivision plan shall not be approved by the
Board of Supervisors until it is first approved by the Authority.
B. The Engineer of the Authority, as he deems necessary, shall make
periodic on-site inspections of the installation of the sanitary sewer
system facilities during their construction. No part of the sanitary
sewer system shall be covered until the Engineer makes final inspection
and approves the system.
C. Upon completion of the sanitary sewer system, the developer shall file
with the Authority and with the Township a final plan and specifications
for the system as built, which final plan must be prepared by a
Registered Professional Engineer or Registered Professional Surveyor,
showing the size, location and length of all lines. All descriptions shall
include bearings and distances.
D. As a condition of final plan approval, the developer shall, upon
completion of the sanitary sewer system, transfer the facilities and
improvements and any easements to the Authority and shall execute
such maintenance bonds, guaranties and warranties relative to the
design and construction of the facilities and improvements. The
Authority reserves the right to require the developer to execute a hold
harmless agreement absolving the Authority and the Township from any
liability relative to the construction, design or installation of said
sanitary sewer system.
E. The developer shall pay all costs incurred by the Authority in the
inspections, reviews and approvals made by the Authority and its
Engineer during the course of design and construction of the sanitary
sewer system. Prior to the beginning of inspections as defined in this
section, the developer shall deposit a sum amounting to 3.5% of the
estimated cost of said system. Any cost in excess of that amount shall be
remitted by the developer within 30 days from the date invoiced by the
Authority. Final approval shall not be given to the developer by the
Authority until all such costs have been paid in full.
§ 99-25 SEWERS § 99-27
99:159
§ 99-27. Compatibility of sanitary sewer system.
All sanitary systems installed pursuant to this article shall be compatible
with the sanitary sewer systems of the Authority, conforming in all respects
to the standards and requirements to which said system of the Authority
must conform, and having the capacity to receive and transport sewage to
the treatment plant.
§ 99-28. Violations and penalties.
A. No person shall sell, transfer or enter into agreement to sell or transfer
any land in a subdivision or land development situated within the
Township unless and until there has been full and complete compliance
with the provisions of this article. No building or occupancy permit or
certificate shall be valid unless there has been such compliance.
B. Any person who does not comply with the requirements of this article or
who shall in any way violate or permit the violation of any specific
provision of this article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil
proceeding before a District Magistrate, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $1,000 per day and court costs, plus reasonable
attorney's fees. Each continuing day of violation of this article shall
constitute a separate offense.
C. In addition, in the event of a defendant's failure to comply with the
provisions hereof, Jackson Township or the Authority may commence an
action for an injunction to restrain any further subdivision or
development and to compel compliance.
§ 99-27 JACKSON CODE § 99-28
99:160
ARTICLE IV
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 4-5-2005 by Ord. No. 156-05]
§ 99-29. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of existing and new holding tanks designed to receive and
retain sewage, whether from residential or commercial uses, and it is
hereby declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the
protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of Jackson Township.
§ 99-30. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the
meanings of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — The Board of Supervisors of Jackson Township, York County,
Pennsylvania.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle, whether permanent or
temporary, which receives and retains sewage conveyed by a water-carrying
system and is designed and constructed to facilitate the ultimate disposal of
the sewage at another site.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within Jackson Township upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
structure sewage shall or may be discharged.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in Jackson Township.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation.
§ 99-31. Right and privileges granted.
The authority is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within
Jackson Township the control and methods of holding tank installation and
use, collection and transportation of sewage from holding tanks and proper
disposal of sewage from holding tanks.
§ 99-29 SEWERS § 99-32
99:161
§ 99-32. Authority to adopt rules and regulations.
The authority is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and
regulations concerning sewage which it may deem necessary from time to
time to effect the purpose herein.
§ 99-33. Rules and regulations to be in conformity with applicable
law.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the authority shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of Jackson
Township and all applicable laws and applicable rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 99-34. Holding tank permit required; application.
A holding tank permit must be secured from the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer prior to the installation of such tank. Each applicant
for a holding tank shall submit the required application form and required
information along with the required application and inspection fees, which
fees shall be set by resolution of the Jackson Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 99-35. Exclusiveness of rights and privileges.
§ 99-36. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
A. The collection and transportation of all sewage from any holding tank
on an improved property shall be done solely by or under the direction
and control of a collector/hauler licensed to do so by the York County
Solid Waste and Refuse Authority and the disposal of such sewage shall
be made only at such site or sites as may be approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. The authority will receive and retain applications and permits for
holding tanks and annual inspection reports from the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer for each permitted tank.
C. The authority will receive, review and retain pumping receipts (York
County Solid Waste and Refuse Authority manifest copies) submitted by
property owners from haulers servicing permitted holding tanks.
A. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this article, the
provisions of any applicable law and the rules and regulations of the
authority and any administrative agency of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. Permit the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer to inspect the
holding tank on an annual basis and pay the required fee for that
inspection.
§ 99-32 JACKSON CODE § 99-36
99:162
§ 99-37. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of § 99-36, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs of
prosecution and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day on which a violation shall be
continued shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 99-38. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation of
§ 99-36 above shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated by Jackson
Township or the authority by either seeking mitigation of the nuisance or
appropriate equitable or legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
C. Make arrangements with a collector/hauler licensed by the York County
Solid Waste and Refuse Authority to collect, transport and
appropriately dispose of the contents of the holding tank on an asneeded
basis and to have that collector/hauler furnish proof of same via
a copy of the York County Solid Waste and Refuse Authority manifest
which the property owner must then submit to the Jackson Township
Municipal Office.
§ 99-36 SEWERS § 99-38
99:163

ARTICLE V
Outdoor Chemical Toilets
[Adopted 4-5-2005 by Ord. No. 157-05]
§ 99-39. Permit for utilization.
All proposed utilizations of outdoor chemical toilets, commonly referred to
as "jiffy johns," for temporary use in connection with construction activities,
athletic events and outdoor social activities shall require the securing of a
permit from the Jackson Township Zoning Officer at the Township Municipal
Building, 439 Roth's Church Road; Spring Grove, Pennsylvania.
§ 99-40. Design specifications, location and maintenance.
§ 99-41. Application requirements.
All applications shall clearly indicate the approximate location of the
installation and the estimated length of use.
§ 99-42. Permit time limit; renewal.
The permit for the installation of such outdoor chemical toilets shall be
limited to a period of not more than six months, at which time it will be
necessary to reapply for a renewal of the permit.
§ 99-43. Fees.
The applicant shall pay a fee as established from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors. The fee is payable at the time of the filing of
A. Chemical toilets shall meet the design specifications of the
manufacturer, provided that such specifications allow for a safe and
sanitary operation and preclude any potential for health hazards, and
the design of chemical toilets shall be of a type approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
B. If it remains or is to remain more than six months, whether by permit or
permit and renewal, it shall be installed no less than 200 feet from any
dwelling house or building of human habitation. If it is to remain less
than six months, it shall be no less than 75 feet from any dwelling house
or building of human habitation except that, where it is not possible to
obtain the seventy-five-foot distance, it must be at the farthest possible
distance but in any event no less than 50 feet.
C. The location shall be reasonably level, accessible to servicing trucks,
not within any road right-of-way, and on the property upon which the
activity requiring use of the chemical toilet is located.
D. The toilet must be serviced as needed to maintain safe and sanitary
operation so as not to become a health or nuisance hazard.
§ 99-39 SEWERS § 99-43
99:165
the application, and a similar fee will be due for each renewal of the permit
that the Township may authorize if renewal is justified.
§ 99-44. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than 1,000 plus costs of
prosecution, and in default of payment of said fine and costs, shall be
sentenced to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 99-43 JACKSON CODE § 99-44
99:166
ARTICLE VI
On-Lot Sewage Disposal Systems
[Adopted 12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 164-05]
§ 99-45. Introduction, purpose and applicability.
§ 99-46. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT 537 — The Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535 as amended, 35 P.S.
§ 750.1 et seq., known as the "Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act."
A. Introduction.
(1) Municipalities have an obligation to provide for adequate sewage
treatment facilities and protection of the public health by
preventing the discharge of untreated or inadequately treated
sewage as mandated by municipal codes, the Clean Streams Law
(35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.) and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act
(35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.).
(2) The Jackson Township Act 537 Official Wastewater Facilities Plan
has evaluated the need to provide adequate sewage facilities and
has found the formation of an On-Lot Sewage Disposal Systems
Management Program to be an effective method of preventing and
abating water pollution and hazards to the public health.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this article is as follows:
(1) To bring and keep the municipality within the requirements of the
Clean Streams Law (Act of 1937, P.L. 1987, No. 394)35 and the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act of 1966, P.L. 1535, No. 537,
as amended, known as "Act 537")36;
(2) To provide for inspection, pumping, maintenance, and
rehabilitation of private and public on-lot sewage disposal systems;
and
(3) To establish penalties and appeal procedures necessary for the
proper administration of such a management program.
C. Applicability. From the effective date of this article, its provisions shall
apply in all portions of Jackson Township not otherwise served by public
sanitary sewer. The provisions of this article shall apply to all persons
and all other entities owning any property serviced by on-lot sewage
disposal systems.
35.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
36.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 99-45 SEWERS § 99-46
99:167
AUTHORIZED AGENT — A certified sewage enforcement officer, code
enforcement officer, professional engineer, plumbing inspector, municipal
secretary, or any other qualified or licensed person who is delegated by the
Township to carry out the provisions of this article within specified limits.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors, Jackson Township, York County,
Pennsylvania.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (CEO) — An authorized agent of the
Township to administer and enforce other ordinances in the Township.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system, whether publicly or
privately owned, for the collection of sewage from two or more lots, and the
treatment and/or disposal of the sewage on one or more lots or at any other
site.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (DEP).
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM — A system of piping, tanks, or other
facilities serving a single lot and collecting and disposing of sewage in
whole or in part into the soil or into any waters of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
MALFUNCTION — The condition occurring when an on-lot sewage disposal
system causes pollution to ground or surface waters, contamination of
private or public drinking water supplies, nuisance problems or is a hazard
to public health. Any septic or holding tank observed to be leaking or
any instance where sewage is backing up into a building connected to
the system is considered a malfunction. Systems shall be considered to be
malfunctioning if any of the conditions noted above occur for any length of
time during any period of the year.
OFFICIAL ACT 537 SEWAGE FACILITIES PLAN — A comprehensive plan
for the provision of adequate sewage disposal, adopted by the Township
and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
as described in and required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.
Hereinafter called the "Plan," it shall mean the Jackson Township Act 537
Plan, as amended.
ON-LOT MANAGEMENT PROGRAM — A comprehensive set of legal and
administrative requirements encompassing the requirements of this article
and other administrative requirements adopted by the Township to
effectively enforce and administer this article.
ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM ("OLSDS") — Any system for
disposal of sewage involving pretreatment and subsequent disposal of the
clarified effluence into the soil for final treatment and disposal; including
both individual sewage systems and community sewage systems.
PUMPING CERTIFICATION — A properly executed York County Solid Waste
and Refuse Authority sludge/septage manifest.
§ 99-46 JACKSON CODE § 99-46
99:168
QUALIFIED PUMPER/HAULER — Person or organization licensed by the
York County Solid Waste Authority to conduct septage pumping and hauling
within York County.
REHABILITATION — Work done to modify, alter, repair, enlarge, or replace
an existing on-lot disposal system.
SEPTAGE — Any substance pumped out of a septic tank.
SEPTIC SYSTEM REPORT — York County Solid Waste and Refuse Authority
sludge/septage manifest form to be completed by the qualified pumper/
hauler and forwarded to the Township after each inspection and/or
pumping.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or inimical to the
public health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation or which constitutes pollution under the Act
of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 94), known as the "Clean Streams Law," as
amended.37
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO) — An agent of the Township,
DEP certified, to issue and review permit applications and conduct such
investigations and inspections as are necessary to implement Act 537 and
the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
TOWNSHIP — Jackson Township, York County, Pennsylvania.
§ 99-47. Inspections.
A. An initial inspection and subsequent periodic inspections shall be
conducted when an OLSDS is pumped. Inspections shall be conducted
by a qualified pumper/hauler for the purpose of determining the
functional status of the OLSDS. The individual property owner is
responsible to contact and make arrangements directly with the
pumper/hauler.
B. A written report of the inspection shall be prepared by the pumper/
hauler and furnished to the owner of each property inspected. The
pumper/hauler shall provide a copy of the said report to the Township
within 30 days of the inspection.
C. Written reports shall be recorded on the York County sludge/septage
manifest and report form. The pumper/hauler shall fully complete the
form to address all requested information.
D. An authorized agent of the Township shall inspect any OLSDS known to
be, or alleged to be, malfunctioning. Should the said inspection reveal
that the system is indeed malfunctioning, the Township's authorized
agent shall take action to require the correction of the malfunction.
37.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 99-46 SEWERS § 99-47
99:169
§ 99-48. Maintenance.
(1) An authorized agent of the Township may inspect any OLSDS at any
time given reasonable notice.
(2) An authorized agent of the Township shall have the right to enter
upon land for the purpose of inspections as described above.
(3) Inspections by an authorized agent of the Township may include a
physical tour of the property, the taking of samples from surface
water, wells or other groundwater sources, the sampling of
contents of the OLSDS itself and/or the introduction of a traceable
substance into the interior plumbing of the structure served to
ascertain the path and ultimate destination of wastewater
generated in the structure.
A. The Township shall notify all owners of property served by an OLSDS
that their system must be pumped by the end of the calendar year in
which the letter is received. The Township shall follow a schedule
whereby 1/3 of all the owners of properties within the Township served
by an OLSDS are notified annually of the pumping requirement, such
that all owners are notified once every three years. The property owner
must have his OLSDS pumped within the time specified in the
Township's letter, unless he can provide the Township with pumping
certification indicating that the OLSDS was pumped within a one-year
time period prior to the date of the Township's letter. A copy of the fully
completed septic system report shall be furnished to the Township
within 30 days of the date of the pumping. The pumper/hauler shall mail
or hand-deliver the septic system report to the Township Building; 439
Roth's Church Road, Spring Grove, PA 17362.
B. Commencing from the date of pumping as prescribed in Subsection A
above, removal of septage or other solids from treatment tanks shall be
performed at least once every three years thereafter. The pumper/
hauler shall furnish a copy of the septic system report to the Township
within 30 days of the date of the pumping. Septic system reports may be
mailed or hand-delivered as described above.
C. The Township SEO may allow septic tanks to be pumped out at less
frequent intervals when the owner can demonstrate to the Township
SEO that the system can operate properly without the need for pumpout
for a period longer than three years. In no case shall such period
extend beyond six years. Such a request may be made after the initial
pumping and inspection.
(1) Requests must be in writing with all supporting documents
attached and submitted to the Township for due consideration by
the Township SEO. In the event the Township's SEO approves such
extension, the property owner shall be responsible to notify the
Township's SEO of any change in the conditions upon which the
extension was based.
§ 99-47 JACKSON CODE § 99-48
99:170
(2) In making its determination, the Township SEO shall take into
account the sewage permit issued by the Township SEO upon
installation or rehabilitation of the system, reports of inspection
and maintenance of the system, and other relevant information,
and may conduct an on-site inspection. The applicant shall bear the
cost of any inspection (surface or subsurface), and any soil or waste
sampling conducted for the purposes of evaluating the request. The
applicant shall receive a decision within 60 days of accumulation of
all necessary information by the Township SEO.
D. Tanks shall be deemed to be pumped when all organic solids are
removed and the total average liquid depth remaining in the tank is less
than one inch.
E. The Township may require additional maintenance activity as needed,
including, but not limited to, cleaning and unclogging of piping; service
and repair of mechanical equipment; leveling of distribution boxes,
tanks and lines; removal of obstructing roots or trees; and/or the
diversion of surface water away from the absorption area.
F. The required frequency of pumping may be increased at the discretion
of the Township, if:
(1) A system is found to be marginal or malfunctioning;
(2) A system is found to be undersized;
(3) The treatment tanks are filled with solids in excess of 1/3 of the
liquid depth of the tank or with scum in excess of 1/3 of the liquid
depth of the tank;
(4) The hydraulic load on the system increases significantly above
average;
(5) A garbage grinder is used in the building; or
(6) Other good cause can be shown.
G. Any person owning a building served by an OLSDS containing an
aerobic treatment tank shall follow the operation and maintenance
recommendations of the equipment manufacturer. In no case may the
service or pumping interval for aerobic treatment tanks exceed that
required for septic tanks.
H. Any person owning a structure served by a cesspool shall have that
system pumped according to the schedule prescribed for septic tanks.
I. Holding tanks shall be pumped out at intervals that prevent the
overflow, leakage, backup, and other malfunctions characteristic of an
overloaded system.
§ 99-48 SEWERS § 99-48
99:171
§ 99-49. Operation.
§ 99-50. Rehabilitation.
J. Each time a septic tank or other subsurface waste disposal system tank
is pumped, the contracted pumper shall provide to the owner of the
system a fully completed and signed septic system report.
K. The owner of a property upon which an OLSDS is constructed shall
maintain the area around such system so as to provide convenient
access for inspection, maintenance, and pumping; and divert surface
water and downspouts away from the absorption area and OLSDS
components.
L. Tanks shall only be pumped from/through the manhole/access port, i.e.,
the largest tank opening. Tanks shall not be pumped from/through the
observation port.
M. The owner of a property upon which an OLSDS is constructed shall, at
all times, operate and maintain the OLSDS in such condition as will
permit it to function in the manner in which it was designed and to
prevent the unlawful discharge of sewage.
A. Only sewage and normal domestic wastes shall be discharged into any
OLSDS. The following shall not be discharged into the system:
(1) Industrial wastes.
(2) Automobile oil and other nondomestic oil.
(3) Fats and grease.
(4) Toxic or hazardous substances or chemicals, including, but not
limited to, pesticides, herbicides, acids, paints (including latex or
water-based paints), paint thinners, gasoline, and other solvents.
(5) Clean surface or ground water, including springwater, water from
roof or cellar drains, water from basement sump pumps, and water
from french drains.
B. All water used within a residence, including kitchen and laundry wastes
and water softener backwash, and all sewage shall be discharged into
an OLSDS treatment tank.
A. Any OLSDS or component thereof found to be malfunctioning shall be
repaired, modified or replaced pursuant to direction of the Township or
its authorized agent and to correct the conditions causing the
malfunction. Rehabilitation shall be performed in accordance with
Chapter 73, Standards for Sewage Disposal Facilities, of Title 25, Rules
and Regulations, Department of Environmental Protection. The
Township SEO shall inspect the rehabilitated OLSDS and certify its
compliance with local and state standards, including the requirement to
secure a Township permit to repair the OLSDS or component thereof.
§ 99-48 JACKSON CODE § 99-50
99:172
§ 99-51. Emergency repairs; liens; other remedies.
When an imminent health hazard exists due to failure of a property owner
to maintain, repair, or replace an OLSDS as provided under the terms of
this article, the Township shall have the authority to perform, or contract
to have performed, the work required to abate the health hazard, pollution,
or nuisance. The owner shall be charged for the work performed, and, if
necessary, a lien shall be entered therefor in accordance with law. The
Township reserves the right to pursue all other lawful remedies.
§ 99-52. Disposal of septage.
§ 99-53. Administration.
B. A permit exemption declaration must be filed with the Township's SEO
a minimum of 48 hours prior to any soil fracturing or use of the terralift
procedure to an OLSDS.
A. All septage originating within the Township shall be disposed of at sites
or facilities approved by the Pennsylvania DEP for the acceptance of
septage.
B. Only pumpers/haulers licensed by the York County Solid Waste and
Refuse Authority to operate within York County shall be utilized.
A. The Township shall fully utilize those powers it possesses through
enabling statutes and ordinances to effect the purposes of this article.
B. The Township shall employ qualified individuals to carry out the
provisions of this article. Those employees may include the SEO, the
CEO, the secretary, the manager, or other qualified persons as
designated by the Township. The Township may also contract with other
private qualified persons or firms as necessary to carry out the
provisions of this article.
C. All permits, records, reports, files and other written material relating to
the installation, operation, maintenance, and malfunction of OLSDS in
the Township shall become the property of the Township. Existing and
future records shall be available for public inspection during normal
business hours at the official Township office. All records pertaining to
sewage permits, building permits, occupancy permits, and all other
aspects of the Township's sewage management program shall be made
available, upon request. A fee for copying may be charged in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Right-To-Know Law, as amended
from time to time.
D. The Township may establish all administrative procedures necessary to
properly carry out the provisions of this article.
E. The Township may establish a fee schedule and subsequently collect
fees to cover the cost of administering the OLSDS maintenance
§ 99-50 SEWERS § 99-53
99:173
§ 99-54. Appeals.
§ 99-55. Violations and penalties.
§ 99-56. Continuation.
The provisions of this article, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this article, are
program. The Township can set fees by properly enacting a resolution
or ordinance.
A. Appeals from decisions made under this article shall be made to the
Board of Supervisors in writing within 30 days from the date of the
decision in question.
B. The appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the Board at its next
regularly scheduled meeting, if the appeal is received at least 14 days
prior to that meeting. If the appeal is not received within 14 days of the
next regularly scheduled meeting, the appeal shall be heard at the
subsequent meeting. The Township shall thereafter affirm, modify, or
reverse the aforesaid decision. The hearing may be postponed for a
good cause shown by the appellant or the Township. Evidence may be
introduced at the hearing, provided that it is submitted with the written
notice of appeal.
C. A decision shall be rendered in writing within 60 days of the date of the
hearing. If a decision is not rendered within 60 days, the relief sought
by the appellant shall be deemed granted.
A. Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof by a summary proceeding action
brought before a District Justice in the same manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100,
nor more than $1,000, plus all court costs, or imprisonment, all
pursuant to the purpose and mandate of Act No. 172 of 1996.38 Each
day's continuance of a violation of this article shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. The discharge by the Township of its obligations as set forth in this
article shall create no liability upon the Township, its officials,
employees or agents.
C. All reports, inspections, appraisals, certification or records required or
produced by the Township, its officials, employees or agents, as
required by this article, shall be for the use and benefit of the Township
only and shall not be accepted, utilized or relied upon by any other
person or party by way of certification or otherwise.
38.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 66601.
§ 99-53 JACKSON CODE § 99-56
99:174
intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as new enactments.
Provisions of this article shall not affect any act done or liability incurred,
nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to
enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense under the authority of
any ordinance.
§ 99-57. Effective date.
This article shall become effective in accordance with law. The
implementation of this article and the provisions contained herein will be
effective commencing January 1, 2006.
§ 99-56 SEWERS § 99-57
99:175
Chapter 105
MUNICIPAL WASTE COLLECTION AND RECYCLING
§ 105-1. Establishment of program.
This chapter is to establish in Jackson Township a mandatory storage,
collection, transportation and disposal program for municipal solid wastes
and establish and implement a mandatory collection system for recyclable
materials as required by the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and
Waste Reduction Act, Act 101 of 1988,39 as amended by Act 140 of 2006, or
other acts thereafter.
§ 105-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act, Act 101 of 1988,40 as amended by Act 140 of 2006, or
hereafter amended.
ALUMINUM — All food and beverage cans made of the lightweight,
ductile and malleable metallic substances or elements commonly
known as aluminum. This description excludes aluminum foil, trays,
plates and miscellaneous aluminum products.
ASHES — The residue resulting from the burning of wood, coal, coke or
other combustible material.
AUTHORITY — The York County Solid Waste and Refuse Authority or
its replacement or successor.
BRUSH (YARD WASTE) — All vegetative garden residue, shrubbery and
tree trimmings, exclusive of grass clippings and leaves.
COLLECTOR — An individual, partnership, firm or corporation which
has been licensed by the York County Solid Waste Authority to collect
and transport municipal waste and recyclable materials.
COMMENCEMENT DATE — January 1, 2014, the date upon which
Township's mandatory municipal waste and recycling program begins.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any office, hotel, motel,
boardinghouse and any building, group of buildings or part of a building
occupied or capable of being used for the conduct of a business,
commercial, industrial or institutional purpose.
COMMINGLED — Recyclable materials which have been segregated
from regulated municipal waste but which have not been separated into
39.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
40.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 99-57 JACKSON CODE § 105-2
99:176
different types of recyclable materials and which have been placed in a
recycling container for the purpose of collection.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events sponsored in whole or in part
by a municipality, or conducted within a municipality and sponsored
privately, which include, but are not limited to, fairs, bazaars, socials,
picnics and organized sporting events that will be attended by 200 or
more individuals per day.
COMPOSTING — A microbial degradation of organic waste to produce
a relatively nuisance-free product of potential value as a soil
conditioner.
CONTRACTOR — An individual, corporation or partnership with whom
the Township shall enter into or contract for collection, transportation,
and disposal of municipal waste.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Layered paper or cardboard in which one or
more layers is pressed into parallel grooves or ridges and which is
normally used for wrapping, packing, shipping and/or the storage of dry
materials.
COVERED DEVICES — A covered computer device and covered
television device marketed and intended for use by a consumer as
defined by PA Act 108 of 2010, also known as the Covered Device
Recycling Act.41
CURBSIDE — The correct location for the placement of refuse
containers and recycling containers for the purposes of collection by a
collector, which shall be adjacent to the residential unit and no more
than five feet from the public street used by collection vehicles.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those recyclable materials
designated in this chapter.
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and/or consumption of food.
GLASS — The hard, brittle and transparent or partially transparent
substance produced by fusion of silica and silicates or sand containing
soda and lime and/or other chemicals and substances usually or
conveniently included in the manufacture of glass. For the purposes of
this chapter, the term "glass" shall mean only those materials commonly
known as glass bottles or containers, including all food and beverage
containers made of glass, whether clear or colored, of one gallon or
less capacity. The term "glass" excludes containers of a greater capacity
than one gallon, glass which is not in the form of bottles or containers,
glass which is laminated, wired or mirrored, ceramics and crystal.
HIGH GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Printed or unprinted sheets, shavings
or cuttings of sulphite or sulphate ledger, bond, writing or other paper
having similar fiber and filler content, including, but not limited to,
41.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6031.101 et seq.
§ 105-2 SEWERS § 105-2
99:177
stationery, copy paper and computer paper. Treated, coated, padded
and heavily printed stock is not included.
LARGE ITEM — Large or bulky items not normally collected as part of
the normal municipal waste collection services. Large items include but
are not limited to refrigerators, stoves, dishwashers, hot-water heaters,
washing machines, dryers, freezers, televisions, air conditioners,
chairs, rolled carpet, desks, bureaus, tables, mattresses, box springs,
bed frames, sofas, lawn mowers, bathtubs, toilets, sinks, windows,
window screens, doors and similar household items, and tire rims, with
tires removed.
LEAVES — Leaves and tree trimmings of less than 1/4 inch in diameter
and not more than 10 inches in length and similar material, but not
including grass clippings and/or brush.
MULTIFAMILY UNIT — A property with five or more residential units,
including, without limitation, apartment complexes, condominium
complexes, retirement homes and mobile home parks within the
Township.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material resulting from operation of residential,
municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from
community activities and any sludge not meeting the definition of
residual or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste Management Act42 from
a municipal or institutional wastewater treatment plant. The term does
not include designated recyclable materials.
NEWSPRINT — Paper of the type commonly used for the printing
of newspapers and newspaper advertising or other supplements,
including glossy or coated paper of the type found in magazines and
periodicals.
NONRESIDENTIAL UNIT — All commercial, municipal and institutional
units and community activities, excluding residential units and
multifamily units.
OTHER MUNICIPAL WASTE — Furniture, appliances, building
materials, large items and similar waste, but not including designated
recyclable materials, regulated municipal waste, leaves or brush.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
governmental entity or agency or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PLASTICS — Organic, synthetic or processed materials that are
thermoplasatic or thermosetting polymers of high molecular weight
that can be molded, cast, extruded, drawn or laminated into objects,
films or filaments.
42.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 105-2 JACKSON CODE § 105-2
99:178
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES — The rules and regulations adopted
and revised, from time to time, by the Township which govern and
pertain to the Township's recycling program and the collection, storage
or transportation of municipal waste within the Township.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Any material which would be regulated
municipal waste but for source separation and which will be separated,
collected and processed into raw materials or products which are
beneficially reused (other than as fuel).
RECYCLING — The separation, collection, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaves, brush, plastics and other materials which
would otherwise be disposed of or processed as regulated municipal
waste and the recovery of reusable materials other than a fuel for the
creation of energy.
RECYCLING CONTAINER — For residential units, the term "recycling
container" shall refer to the container supplied by the Township. For
multifamily units and nonresidential units, the term "recycling
container" shall refer to a receptacle which is constructed of plastic,
metal or fiberglass and has handles of adequate strength for lifting.
RECYCLING FACILITY — A facility designated to receive classified
materials for transfer to a processing facility or a processing facility
which creates or recovers reusable materials that can be sold or reused
by a manufacturer as a substitute for or as a supplement to virgin raw
materials.
REFUSE — All solid wastes (except body wastes and recyclable
materials), including garbage, rubbish, ashes and trade wastes.
REFUSE CONTAINER — A receptacle which is constructed of plastic,
metal or fiberglass, having handles of adequate strength for lifting
and having a tight-fitting lid capable of preventing entrance into the
container by vectors or a polyethylene bag which is specifically
designed for storage and collection, is protected against animal damage
and overloading so as to prevent littering or attraction of insects or
rodents and has a holding strength capable of withstanding normal
stresses until it is collected.
REGULATED MUNICIPAL WASTE — All municipal waste, excluding
designated recyclable materials, leaves, brush and other municipal
waste.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Any single-family detached, semidetached, or
townhouse dwelling or a dwelling unit within a multifamily building
containing four or fewer dwelling units.
SCAVENGING — The uncontrolled or unauthorized removal of
recyclable materials from the curbside.
STEEL AND BIMETALLIC CANS — The ferrous metal food or beverage
containers commonly known as tin cans.
§ 105-2 SEWERS § 105-2
99:179
§ 105-3. Authorized contractor.
On or after the effective date of this chapter, only the contractor authorized
by the Township shall collect, transport and dispose of municipal waste and
recyclable materials from a dwelling unit within Jackson Township.
§ 105-4. Mandatory participation.
Each person owning or occupying a residential unit within the Township is
required to participate in the mandatory municipal waste disposal program
and mandatory collection system for recyclable materials.
§ 105-5. Accumulation and storage of regulated municipal waste.
No person shall accumulate or store regulated municipal waste or
recyclable materials upon private or public property within the Township,
except in accordance with the following:
B. The singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the
feminine and the neuter.
A. Regulated municipal waste shall at all times prior to collection be
drained and stored in durable, rust-resisting, nonabsorbent, watertight,
easily washable containers equipped with handles and tight-fitting
covers. Containers are not to exceed 75 pounds in weight when filled.
B. Disposal containers. Disposable containers such as paper and
polyethylene bags shall be acceptable for storage of municipal waste
only if the following conditions are met:
(1) Only those bags specially designed for storage and collection shall
be used.
(2) Bags are protected against precipitation, animal damage and
overloading to prevent littering or attracting of vectors.
(3) Bags have holding strength capable of withstanding stresses until
they are collected.
(4) The bag opening is securely closed prior to setting out for
collection.
(5) Bags shall not exceed 75 pounds in weight when filled.
C. Bulk containers. Bulk containers for multifamily units or for
commercial, industrial and institutional refuse shall meet the general
and individual container requirements previously set forth except for
size limitations. Bulk containers shall be sized according to type and
quantity of waste production, equipment-handling capabilities and the
frequency of collection.
§ 105-2 JACKSON CODE § 105-5
99:180
D. Open storage. Certain wastes of a nondecomposable nature may be
stored temporarily between dates of scheduled municipal waste
collection in a manner other than containerization.
E. Tires and large items such as furniture and appliances shall be stored
so that water accumulation and rodent harborage is not possible.
F. If a commercial, industrial or institutional entity utilizes a bulk
collection service other than the current Township contractor, the entity
shall annually report to the Township by February 1 the volume of
municipal waste and recyclables collected, transported and disposed of
during the prior calendar year.
G. All municipal waste receptacles shall be provided by the owners,
tenants or occupants of the premises unless otherwise specified.
H. The storage of all municipal waste by residents of Jackson Township
shall be practiced so as to prevent the attraction, harborage or
breeding of insects, rodents or other vermin and to eliminate conditions
harmful to the public health or which create safety hazards, odors,
unsightliness or a public nuisance.
I. Regulated municipal waste consisting of garbage and similar organic
waste materials shall not be permitted to accumulate for a period of
time in excess of seven days. All other types of regulated municipal
waste shall not be permitted to accumulate for a period of time in
excess of 30 days.
J. Ashes shall be stored in fire-resistant containers equipped with handles
and tight-fitting covers. Ashes containing hot embers shall not be
collected until they have been adequately quenched.
K. The owner or operator of a multifamily unit or nonresidential unit must
establish a collection system for municipal waste at each property. The
collection system must include suitable containers for collecting and
storing municipal waste separate from recyclable materials and easily
accessible locations for the containers, and written instructions must be
provided to the occupants concerning the use and availability of the
collection system.
L. No person shall place municipal waste in any street, alley or other
public place, or upon any private property within the limits of Jackson
Township, unless it is placed in a proper container for collection.
Likewise, no person shall throw or dispose of municipal waste or
recyclable material in any stream or any other body of water.
M. Any unauthorized accumulation of municipal waste on any premises
within Jackson Township is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is
prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of waste within
three days after written notice shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.
§ 105-5 SEWERS § 105-5
99:181
§ 105-6. Accumulation and storage of designated recyclable
materials.
No person shall accumulate or store designated recyclable materials upon
private or public property within the Township, except in accordance with
the following:
§ 105-7. Accumulation and storage of leaves.
No person shall accumulate or store leaves upon any private or public
property within the Township, except in accordance with the following:
N. Materials may be put curbside for collection no earlier than 6:00 p.m.
the day prior to pickup, and empty containers must be removed 8:00
a.m. the day after collection.
O. Covered devices must be properly recycled according to the provisions
of PA Act 108 of 2010, otherwise known as the Covered Device
Recycling Act.43
A. Designated recyclable materials, if stored outside a building, shall be
kept in a recycling container until placed at curbside for collection. If
such materials are stored inside a building, they shall be kept in a
recycling container or any type of container suitable for the purpose.
When designated recyclable materials are placed at curbside for
collection, they shall be contained in a recycling container.
B. Designated recyclable materials shall not be permitted to accumulate
for a period of time in excess of 30 days.
C. The owner or operator of a multifamily unit or nonresidential unit shall
provide recycling containers at easily accessible locations for the use of
the occupants of such unit. The collection system must include suitable
containers for collecting and storing municipal waste separate from
recyclable materials and easily accessible locations for the containers,
and written instructions must be provided to the occupants concerning
the use and availability of the collection system.
D. In order to minimize littering, magazines, newspapers, wastepaper, tree
prunings and brush trimmings, when stored outside of containers, shall
be tied securely in bundles of such size as to be readily handled by the
collection system.
E. Materials may be put curbside for collection no earlier than 6:00 p.m.
the day prior to pickup, and empty containers must be removed by 8:00
a.m. the day after collection.
A. Leaves for collection shall at all times prior to collection be kept or
stored in a refuse container; provided, however, that leaves
accumulated during the fall Township leaf collection season may be
43.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6031.101 et seq.
§ 105-5 JACKSON CODE § 105-7
99:182
§ 105-8. Collection practices.
§ 105-9. Collection schedules.
The contractor shall collect municipal waste and recyclable materials in
accordance with the terms of the contract between the contractor and the
Township, but in no event less than one time per week from each collection
point. The contractor shall commence the collection of municipal waste and
recyclable materials after 6:00 a.m., prevailing time, and shall complete
collection no later than 7:00 p.m., prevailing time, of the same day unless
modified by the Board of Supervisors. If the regular collection day shall fall
on any of the following holidays, the contractor shall make the collection on
the next regular working day after the holiday. The holidays are New Year's
Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas Day.
§ 105-10. Collection equipment.
The vehicles and equipment of each collector used in the Township shall be
adequate for the purpose to which such vehicles or equipment are being
put. Any vehicle used for the collection of municipal waste shall have a
watertight enclosed metal body equipped with a compaction device. Any
vehicle used for the collection of designated recyclable materials or other
municipal waste shall be designed to prevent waste materials from blowing
out of or otherwise escaping the vehicle. All vehicles and equipment shall at
all times be kept in good repair and operating condition and be reasonably
clean and odor free.
§ 105-11. Method of collection.
raked or otherwise deposited uncontained at curbside for collection by
the Township.
B. Leaves for collection shall not be permitted to accumulate for a period
of time in excess of 30 days.
C. Leaves may be accumulated and stored on any property by the owner
thereof or the occupant of any property with the consent of the owner
for the purpose of composting the material for use on the property.
Such composting shall take place in a manner to contain the leaves and
prevent their intrusion onto other property.
A. For collection purposes, except where there is an agreement with the
collector to the contrary, municipal waste and recycling containers shall
be placed at ground level on the property, not within the cartway of a
street or alley, and easily accessible from the side of the street or alley
from which collection is made.
B. Municipal waste shall be collected at least one time per week, except
for large items, which shall be collected as may be agreed upon from
time to time by the contracted collector and the Township.
§ 105-7 SEWERS § 105-11
99:183
§ 105-12. Licensing of collectors.
Only a person licensed by the York County Solid Waste Authority of York
County, Pennsylvania, or its designee may collect or transport municipal
waste and recyclable materials within the territorial limits of said Township.
§ 105-13. Duties of collectors.
A. Municipal waste containers shall be picked up at the designated
collection points and deposited into the collection vehicles. No
municipal waste may be spilled on the roads and streets within the
Township, and the contractor must make every effort to prevent
scattering of municipal waste, particularly paper, and other light
materials, by the wind.
B. The contractor must take care not to damage containers belonging to
residents or Jackson Township, and in the event of willful or
unnecessary damage to such containers, the contractor shall be liable
for the same. The contractor shall promptly notify the Township if any
residents or property owners claim damage (to containers) other than
reasonable wear and tear.
A. All collectors shall utilize vehicles and equipment as described in
§ 105-10, Collection equipment, of this chapter.
B. All regulated municipal waste collected within the territorial limits of
the Township shall be transported to and be disposed of only at the
resource recovery facility owned by the York County Solid Waste and
Refuse Authority on Black Bridge Road in Manchester Township or, in
the event that such facility shall not be operating, at a facility
designated by the Authority, if any, and otherwise to a facility permitted
by the Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
C. All designated recyclable materials collected within the territorial limits
of the Township shall be transported to and processed at a recycling
facility.
D. All other municipal waste collected within the territorial limits of the
Township shall be transported to and disposed of at a facility permitted
for the disposal of such waste by the Department of Environmental
Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. Collectors shall file with the Township on or before the 15th day of the
month succeeding each calendar quarter a report covering the
preceding calendar quarter, which shall set forth such reasonable
information as the Township shall request, including, but not limited to:
(1) The volume of each regulated municipal waste, designated
recyclable materials, and other municipal waste collected. The
volume of designated recyclable materials shall be broken down
into the volume of each designated material.
§ 105-11 JACKSON CODE § 105-13
99:184
§ 105-14. Collection, transportation and processing of designated
recyclable materials.
§ 105-15. Collection, transportation and disposal of regulated
municipal waste.
§ 105-16. Collection, transportation and disposal of brush and/or
leaves.
(2) The name and address of any person the collector shall observe
who consistently fails to comply with any provision of this chapter.
A. All persons within the Township shall separate designated recyclable
materials from the municipal waste generated by such person as
hereinafter provided.
B. Each residential unit, multifamily unit and nonresidential unit and
community activities within the Township shall ensure that the
designated recyclable materials generated at such unit or activity are
processed at a recycling facility.
C. In the case of a multifamily unit and a nonresidential unit and
community activities, compliance with Subsection B of this section may
be obtained by the owner or operator of such unit or activity
contracting with a collector or transporting such recyclable material to
a recycling facility.
D. Compliance with Subsection A of this section may be obtained by
contracting with a collector.
A. Each residential unit, multifamily unit and nonresidential unit and
community activity within the Township shall ensure that the regulated
municipal waste generated at such unit or activity is picked up by the
Township contractor or disposed of at the resource recovery facility
owned by the York County Solid Waste Authority on Black Bridge Road
in Manchester Township or, in the event that such facility shall not be
operating, at a facility designated by the Authority, if any, and otherwise
to a facility permitted by the Department of Environmental Protection
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Compliance with Subsection A of this section may be obtained by
contracting with a collector.
A. Each residential unit, multifamily unit and nonresidential unit and
community activity within the Township shall ensure that the brush
and/or leaves generated at such unit or activity are disposed of at a
facility for the composting of brush and/or leaves as shall, from time to
time, be designated by the Township or by placing such brush or leaves
at curbside for pickup by the Township during designated spring brush
or fall leaf collection seasons.
§ 105-13 SEWERS § 105-16
99:185
§ 105-17. Mandatory recycling of designated materials.
All residential, nonresidential and multifamily units and community
activities shall separate recyclable materials from municipal waste and shall
commingle for recycling the following designated recyclable materials:
§ 105-18. Preparation and placement of designated recyclable
materials.
B. However, nothing herein shall require any person to gather leaves or
prevent any person from utilizing leaves for compost, mulch, or other
agricultural, horticultural, gardening or landscaping purposes.
A. Newsprint.
B. Aluminum.
C. Steel and bimetallic cans.
D. Glass (clear and colored).
E. Plastics.
F. Glossies and magazines.
G. Corrugated paper.
H. High-grade office paper.
A. The owners or occupants of each residential unit shall prepare
designated recyclable materials and place such materials at curbside
for collection as per § 105-8, Collection practices.
(1) All recyclable materials shall be placed in approved containers,
each of which cannot exceed 50 pounds in weight.
(2) Glass and plastic containers shall have caps and lids removed.
(3) Glass and cans shall be rinsed free of contaminants.
(4) Glass, aluminum, cans and plastic shall be commingled in a
recycling container to be approved and provided by the Township.
Plastic garbage bags or other home use containers shall not be
utilized as containers for designated recyclable materials.
(5) Brush (yard waste) shall be placed in a) no more than three-foot
lengths and bundled; b) biodegradable kraft or other paper bags; or
c) a maximum thirty-two gallon container. Collection dates and
times shall be as determined by the Board of Supervisors.
(6) The burning of any recyclable materials, including leaves and brush
(yard waste) is strictly prohibited.
§ 105-16 JACKSON CODE § 105-18
99:186
§ 105-19. Scavenging.
§ 105-20. Municipal waste/recyclable materials collection and
disposal contract and fees.
B. The owner or operator of a multifamily unit or nonresidential unit
contracting with a collector for the collection of designated recyclable
materials shall prepare such materials for collection in such manner as
the collector shall designate.
A. Residential units. From the time of placement at curbside of any
designated recyclable materials, all such designated recyclable
materials shall be and become the property of the contractor. It shall be
a violation of this chapter for any person other than the contractor to
collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such
designated recyclable materials from the curbside.
B. Nonresidential units and multifamily units. From the time of placement
for collection of any designated recyclable materials, all such
designated recyclable materials shall be the property of the collector or
the owner or operator of the nonresidential unit or multifamily unit
where such owner or operator elects to transport such materials to a
recycling facility. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person,
other than the collector or the owner or operator of such units, to
collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such
designated recyclable materials.
A. The Board of Supervisors of Jackson Township is authorized to request
proposals from and enter into an exclusive contract with a collector for
the collection, transportation and disposal of regulated municipal
waste, designated recyclable materials and other municipal waste
generated by each residential unit within the Township.
B. The Board of Supervisors may impose and collect, or authorize the
contractor to collect, a fee to pay for said services in the manner
provided for in the Second Class Township Code.44 Such fee shall be
adopted from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
C. If the Board elects to enter into such contract, the following provisions
shall apply.
(1) All persons owning or occupying any residential unit within the
Township shall dispose of all regulated municipal waste,
designated recyclable materials and other municipal waste
generated by each such unit only through the service of the
contractor with the Township.
(2) The handling, collection, transportation and disposal of such
municipal waste and recyclable materials shall be in accordance
44.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 105-18 SEWERS § 105-20
99:187
§ 105-21. Existing contracts.
§ 105-22. Billing and payment procedures.
with the provisions of this chapter and the terms and conditions of
the contract between the Township and the contracting collector.
(3) The per-unit service fee shall include collection of or from four or
fewer containers per week.
(4) Where there is a use in a home in addition to a residence, and the
combination of uses generates four or fewer containers per week,
the owner of said property shall not be charged for more than one
use, provided the owner shall have so requested in writing, and
provided that the operation of the separate use shall employ no one
other than a residential occupant of the premises.
(5) Reasonable notice of such exclusive contract and the terms and
conditions thereof, including the effective date, shall be given by
the Township to the owner of all residential units within the
Township.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair the obligations of
any existing contracts.
B. No renewal or modification of any existing contract and no new
contract for the storage, collection, transportation, processing or
disposal of regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable
materials shall be entered into after the effective date of this chapter
unless such renewal or modification or new contract shall conform to
the requirements of this chapter.
A. Each owner and/or occupant of a residential unit (as defined in this
chapter) within the Township that participates in the municipal waste
disposal program shall be required to pay to the contractor a quarterly
or semiannual fee for the collection, transportation and disposal of
municipal waste and recyclable materials. This fee shall be paid
regardless of the amount or type of municipal waste and recyclable
materials put out for collection. The quarterly or semiannual fee
charged by the contractor shall be established by a contract to be
entered into between the Township and the contractor pursuant to
public bidding requirements. The Township accepts no responsibility
whatsoever for the collection of the fee to be charged to the owner and/
or occupant of each residential unit. The contractor shall be solely
responsible for the collection of the quarterly or semiannual fees.
B. All fees which remain unpaid 30 days after the invoice date shall be
deemed to be delinquent. All delinquent accounts shall have added to
them a penalty of $10. Thereafter, the ten-dollar fee shall be imposed
once during each quarter that the delinquent balance remains unpaid.
The Township or contractor is authorized to waive such penalty, in
§ 105-20 JACKSON CODE § 105-22
99:188
§ 105-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof in any action brought before a District Justice in the
manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a
violation of this chapter continues, or each section of this chapter which
shall be found to have been violated, shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 105-24. Persons liable.
For purposes of the obligations established by this chapter or the
Township's policies and procedures, and for purposes of any fine, penalty,
imprisonment or other sanction, the terms "person," "residential unit,"
"multifamily unit" and "nonresidential unit" shall include officers and
directors of any corporation or legal entity having officers and directors and
refer to and impose joint and several liability upon both the persons residing
in or occupying any such residential, multifamily or nonresidential units and
the owner, landlord or condominium owners' association of such premises.
§ 105-25. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any section, sentence,
clause, part or provisions hereof shall be held to be illegal, invalid or
whole or in part, if either party believes it is in the best interest of the
Township to do so.
C. If the owner and/or occupant of a residential unit shall fail to pay any
charges or fees after the same become delinquent, the Township
Solicitor is authorized, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipal Claims
Act,45 to enter a lien against the real estate upon which the residential
unit is situate in the amount of the fees and charges or aggregate of
fees and charges, plus penalties and costs of entry.
D. If the owner and/or occupant of a residential unit shall fail to pay any
charges or fees after the same become delinquent, the Township
Solicitor and/or contractor are authorized to file a civil suit against the
owner and/or occupant for the collection of refuse fees, related
charges, penalties, interest, and costs of collection, including
reasonable attorney's fees, and an administrative fee of $50.
E. The existence or exercise of any remedy under this section shall not
prevent the Township from exercising any other remedy provided under
this chapter or the Township's policies or procedures or available at law
or equity.
45.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 105-22 SEWERS § 105-25
99:189
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the
court shall not affect or impair the remaining sections, sentences, clauses,
parts or provisions of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intent of
Jackson Township that this chapter would have been enacted if such illegal,
invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part or provision had
not been included herein.
Chapter 107
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 69.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
113.
Wells — See Ch. 131.
Zoning — See Ch. 133.
§ 105-25 JACKSON CODE § 105-25
99:190
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 107-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Jackson Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 107-2. Statement of findings.
The Board of Supervisors of Jackson Township finds that:
§ 107-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the Township and its watershed(s) by minimizing the harm and maximizing
the benefits described in § 107-2 of this chapter, through provisions
designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the
cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines
floodplain management and flood control efforts in downstream
communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public health
and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, and
welfare and the protection of the people of the commonwealth, their
resources, and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore
the existing and designated uses of the waters of this commonwealth.
B. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
C. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source.
§ 107-1 SEWERS § 107-3
99:191
§ 107-4. Statutory authority.
§ 107-5. Applicability.
All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff,
including land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to
regulation by this chapter. Article VIII, Detection and Elimination of Illicit
Discharges to Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, shall be applicable
to all water entering the storm drain system of the Township generated
on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the
Township.
§ 107-6. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance
requirements.
Permits and approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance.
If more stringent requirements concerning regulation of stormwater or
erosion and sedimentation control are contained in another code, rule, act
or ordinance, the more stringent regulations shall apply.
D. Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
E. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface
water and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water
resources.
F. Prevent scour and erosion of streambanks and streambeds.
G. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all SWM BMPs that are
implemented within the Township.
H. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
A. Primary authority. The Township is empowered to regulate land use
activities that affect stormwater impacts by the authority vested in
Second Class Townships by the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S.
§ 65101 through § 67201, and the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the Storm Water Management
Act.
B. Secondary authority. The Township is also empowered to regulate land
use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31,
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.46
46.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 107-3 JACKSON CODE § 107-7
99:192
§ 107-7. Interpretation.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the succeeding shall, for the purposes of
this chapter, be interpreted in the following manner:
§ 107-8. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful.
No action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the Township
purporting to validate such a violation.
A. Words used in the present tense also imply the future tense.
B. Words used in the singular imply the plural, and vice versa.
C. Words of masculine gender include feminine gender, and vice versa.
D. The words and abbreviation "includes," "including," "shall include,"
"such as," and "e.g." are not limited to the specific example(s) given but
are intended to extend the word's or words' meaning(s) to all other
instances of like kind and character.
E. The words "person," "applicant," or "developer" includes a partnership,
corporation, or other legal entity, as well as an individual.
F. The words "shall," "required," or "must" are mandatory; the words
"may" and "should" are permissive.
§ 107-7 SEWERS § 107-8
99:193

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 107-9. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of man's activities and natural processes at a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural processes alone.
ACT 167 — Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167), as amended, and
known as the "Storm Water Management Act."47
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture such
as, but not limited to, agricultural cultivation, agricultural operations, and
animal heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops,
including tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting,
harvesting crops or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is
not considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an
application to the Township for approval to engage in any regulated activity
at a project site in the Township.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: structural or nonstructural. In this chapter, nonstructural
BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands,
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
BMP MANUAL — Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual, as amended and updated.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Jackson Township.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq., and any subsequent amendments thereto.
47.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. 680.1 et seq.
§ 107-9 SEWERS § 107-9
99:195
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The York County Conservation District,
which District is as defined in Section 3(c) of the Conservation District
Law [3 P.S. § 851(c)] that has the authority under a delegation agreement
executed with DEP to administer and enforce all or a portion of the
regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code 102.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES construction
permits. NPDES Stormwater Phase II permits will be required for
construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more.
Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating and demolition.
COUNTY — York County, Pennsylvania.
CULVERT — A structure which carries surface water through an
obstruction.
DAM — An impoundment structure regulated by the Pennsylvania DEP
Chapter 105 regulations.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence,
e.g., a five-year storm, and duration, e.g., 24 hours, used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return period."
DETENTION BASIN — A structure designed to retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing and releasing the runoff at a predetermined rate.
DETENTION DISTRICT — Those subareas in which some type of detention
is required to meet the plan requirements and the goals of appropriate and
approved Act 167 plans.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of this commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, corporation or other
entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes
any regulated activity.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — See "project site."
DISCONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DIA) — An impervious or
impermeable surface that is disconnected from any stormwater drainage
or conveyance system and is redirected or directed to a pervious area,
which allows for infiltration, filtration, and increased time of concentration
as specified in Appendix B, Disconnected Impervious Area, of this chapter.48
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
DOWN-SLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of a property line of a lot or
parcel of land being developed located such that overland or pipe flow from
the development site would be directed toward it.
48.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 107-9 JACKSON CODE § 107-9
99:196
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility
designed to transmit stormwater runoff, including but not limited to,
streams, channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts and storm sewers.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A limited right of use granted in private land,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes,
wherein no structure may be constructed.
DRAINAGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Township after the drainage
plan has been approved. Said permit is issued prior to or with the final
municipal approval.
E & S MANUAL — Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Manual, as
amended and updated.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to clearing
and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance;
building construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock, or earth materials.
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn
away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A site-specific plan
consisting of both drawings and a narrative that identifies BMPs to minimize
accelerated erosion and sedimentation before, during and after earth
disturbance activity.
EXISTING CONDITION — The dominant land cover during the five-year
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers,
and other waters of this commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source as delineated by applicable FEMA maps and studies as being
a special flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of
the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided
by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the
boundary of the one-hundred-year floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence
to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from
the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forest land. These include conducting
a timber inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber
harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
§ 107-9 SEWERS § 107-9
99:197
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS/SUBSTANCES — Any material, including any
substance, waste, or combination thereof which, because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may
cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential
hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary widely
and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates.
Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their
minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged
wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the
soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the area
of the development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can
be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils
become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS 3,4).
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the storm drain system.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that prevents
the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces and areas
shall include, but not be limited to, roofs, additional indoor living spaces,
patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures, and any new streets
and sidewalks. However, any surface or area designed, constructed and
maintained to permit infiltration as specified herein shall be considered
pervious, not impervious. For the purposes of this chapter, a surface or area
shall not be considered impervious if such surface or area does not diminish
the capacity for infiltration of stormwater for storms up to, and including, a
two-year, twenty-four-hour storm event.
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system and/or
waters of the commonwealth, including but not limited to any
conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge, including
sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain
system and any connections to the storm drain system and/or waters of
the commonwealth from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether
said drain or connections had been previously allowed, permitted, or
approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system and/or waters of the commonwealth
which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records
and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
B.
§ 107-9 JACKSON CODE § 107-9
99:198
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR § 122.26(b)(14).
INFILTRATION — The entrance of surface water into the soil, usually at the
soil-air interface.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the ground (e.g. french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench).
IWRP — The York County Integrated Water Resources Plan, which Plan
includes Act 167 Plan elements and requirements.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface,
underground drainage, and caves. Karst landscapes are formed on
carbonate rocks, such as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Shall include any of the following activities:
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving grading, filling, digging or
filling of ground, or stripping of vegetation, or any other activity that causes
land to be exposed to the danger of erosion.
MS4 — Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System.
MUNICIPALITY/TOWNSHIP — Jackson Township, York County,
Pennsylvania.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by EPA [or by DEP
under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)] that authorizes
the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the
permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drain
system and/or waters of the commonwealth that is not composed entirely of
stormwater.
NPDES — National Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space between or among two
or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for
the purpose of, streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups, or other features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with § 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
C.
§ 107-9 SEWERS § 107-9
99:199
NRCS — USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously SCS).
O & M — Operation and maintenance.
O & M PLAN — Operation and Maintenance Plan.
PCSWMP — Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERCOLATION — The downward movement, under the influence of gravity,
of water under hydrostatic pressure through interstices of the soil or rock.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, Township, governmental unit, public utility
or any other legal entity whatsoever. Whenever used in any section
prescribing or imposing a penalty, the term "person" shall include the
members of a partnership, the officers, agents and servants of a corporation
and the officers of a Township.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as "impervious."
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded
or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that may cause
or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalk and parking strips.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the Township are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PERSON — Any person licensed by the State of Pennsylvania
or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work required by this chapter.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that
may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code 92, 25 Pa. Code 102, or
the Clean Streams Law.49
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment in which stormwater is stored and
not released during a storm event. Stored water may be released from the
basin at some time after the end of a storm.
49.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 107-9 JACKSON CODE § 107-9
99:200
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff that
is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time. For example,
the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to occur on
average once every 25 years; or stated in another way, the probability of a
twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one year is 0.04, i.e., a four-percent
chance.
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A best management practice that is an area of
permanent vegetation along surface waters. (Such areas serve as natural
vegetative filters between upland landscapes and waterways.)
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond or other water
impoundment that is used to control the discharge rate from the pound or
impoundment for a specified design storm.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto a roof surface by incorporating control-flow
roof drains into building design.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
RUNOFF CHARACTERISTICS — The surface components on any watershed
which either individually, or in any combination thereof, directly affect the
rate, amount and direction of stormwater runoff. These may include, but are
not limited to, vegetation, soils, slopes and any type of man-made landscape
alterations.
SCS — Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a
product of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin designed
to retain sediment.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar materials into which surface water is directed for
infiltration into the ground.
SEMI-PERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which permits a limited amount of
vertical transmission of water.
SHEET FLOW — Water flow with a relatively thin and uniform depth.
SOIL-COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation in
NRCS publication "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds," technical
Release No. 55.
SPILLWAY — A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin which
is used to pass peak discharge greater than the maximum design storm
controlled by the pond or basin.
§ 107-9 SEWERS § 107-9
99:201
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.50
STORM DRAIN SYSTEM — Publicly or privately owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm event
occurs on average in a stated period of years.
STORM SEWER — A pipe or conduit, or a system of pipes or conduits, which
intercepts and carries surface stormwater runoff, but excludes sewage,
industrial wastes and similar discharges.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Is
abbreviated as BMPs or SWM BMPs throughout this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT WATERSHED MAP — Appendix
C.51 Defining release rate criteria within the watershed.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management
facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins,
open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — Parts and/or elements of the York
County Integrated Water Resources Plan which incorporate the
requirements of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167), as amended,
and known as the "Storm Water Management Act."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the
developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the development site in accordance with this chapter.
Stormwater management site plan will be designated as "SWM site plan"
throughout this chapter. For all NPDES permitted sites, the stormwater
management site plan shall include, and be consistent with, the erosion and
sediment control plan as submitted to the York County Conservation District
(YCCD) and/or DEP.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A document which
describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented
by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination
at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
50.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
51.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 107-9 JACKSON CODE § 107-9
99:202
stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the
maximum extent practicable.
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert or other structure in excess of
100 feet in length, upstream to downstream, which encloses a regulated
water of this commonwealth.
SUBAREA — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for which
stormwater management criteria have been established in the stormwater
management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts or parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers and/or carries surface
water runoff.
SWM — Stormwater management.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (TC) — The time for surface runoff to travel
from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point of
interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland
flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
WATERCOURSE — A stream of water; river, brook, creek, or a channel or
ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other
surface water of this commonwealth.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WETLAND — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
YCCD — York County Conservation District.
§ 107-9 SEWERS § 107-9
99:203

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 107-10. General requirements.
A. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM site plan is
specifically exempted in § 107-11:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the Township issues
written approval of an SWM site plan which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. SWM site plans approved by the Township, in accordance with
§ 107-26, shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
C. The Township may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures for
meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in this
chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of, and do
not conflict with, state law, including, but not limited to, the Clean
Streams Law.52 The Township shall maintain a record of consultations
with DEP pursuant to this subsection.
(1) DEP is not required to be consulted for waiver of the requirements
within:
(a) Section 107-12, Stormwater management districts.
(b) Section 107-16, Design criteria.
(c) Section 107-17, Regulations governing stormwater
management facilities.
(d) Section 107-18, Calculation methodology.
(e) Section 107-19, Carbonate geology.
(f) Section 107-20, Erosion and sedimentation control
requirements.
D. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities, i.e.,
during construction, to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
52.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 107-10 SEWERS § 107-10
99:205
Program Manual (E&S Manual) 2, No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000),
as amended and updated.
E. For all regulated activities, implementation of the volume controls in
Section 304, is required, unless specifically exempted under Section
301.C., or exempted by an approved modification request as specified in
Section 403.B. of this chapter.
F. Impervious areas:
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in phases.
(2) For development taking place in phases, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
chapter; except that the volume controls in Section 304 and the
peak rate controls of § 107-14 do not need to be retrofitted to
existing impervious areas that are not being altered by the
proposed regulated activity.
G. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
notification of the adjacent property owner(s). Such stormwater flows
shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
H. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property;
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter, as stated in § 107-3,
Purpose, by implementing measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, wooded areas,
and existing vegetation.
(b) Maintain or extend riparian buffers.
(c) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(d) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
(e) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible.
(f) Minimize soil disturbance and compaction. Topsoil, if removed,
shall be replaced to a minimum depth equal to its depth prior
to removal or four inches, whichever is greater. (Additional
topsoil may be needed for vegetation other than sod.)
§ 107-10 JACKSON CODE § 107-10
99:206
(3) To the maximum extent practicable, incorporate the techniques for
low-impact development practices described in the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual).
I. The design of all facilities in areas of carbonate geology or karst
topography shall include an evaluation of measures to minimize
adverse effects, including hydrogeologic studies if required by the
Township.
J. Infiltration BMPs shall be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while
still meeting the other requirements of this chapter. In addition,
infiltration BMPs shall include pretreatment BMPs where appropriate.
K. All natural streams, channels, swales, drainage systems and/or areas of
surface water concentration shall be maintained in their existing
condition unless an alteration is approved by the Township. All
encroachment activities shall comply with the requirements of PA DEP
25 Pa. Code Chapter 105 (Water Obstructions and Encroachments),
Rules and Regulations of PA DEP. Any approvals or permits issued do
not relieve compliance as referenced in § 107-6, Compatibility with
other permit and ordinance requirements.
L. All stormwater management facilities (excluding individual residential
underground infiltration facilities) are considered structures and must
comply with building setback requirements. The outside toe of slope of
the embankment in a fill condition or the top of embankment in a cut
condition shall be considered as the point that must meet the setback
requirements. Individual residential underground infiltration facilities
shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the property line. Discharge of
controlled flows can be no closer to an adjacent property than two times
the length of the required discharge rip-rap apron. This requirement
applies to discharge aprons that do not outlet to a defined waterway or
an existing storm sewer. Minimum distance is 10 feet.
M. All storage facilities shall completely drain both the volume control and
rate control capacities over a period of time not less than 24 hours and
not more than 72 hours from the end of the design storm. However, any
designed infiltration at such facilities is exempt from the minimum
twenty-four-hour standard, i.e., may infiltrate in a shorter period of
time, so long as none of the stormwater flowing into the infiltration
facility is discharged directly into the surface waters of the
commonwealth. (Inordinately rapid infiltration rates may indicate the
presence of large fractures or other conditions for which an additional
soil buffer may be required.)
N. The design storm volumes and precipitation intensities to be used in the
analysis of discharge or runoff shall be obtained from the Precipitation-
Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0,
United States Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service,
§ 107-10 SEWERS § 107-10
99:207
§ 107-11. Exemptions.
Any regulated activity that meets the following exemption criteria is exempt
from the part(s) of this chapter as specified herein. However, the
requirements of the Ordinance shall otherwise remain in effect. The criteria
for exemption in this section apply to the total development proposed,
including instances in which the development is proposed to take place in
phases. The date of enactment of this chapter shall be the starting point
from which future development and the respective proposed impervious
surface computations shall be cumulatively considered and regulated.
Exemption shall not relieve an applicant from implementing such measures
as necessary to meet the intent of this chapter, or compliance with any
NPDES permit requirements.
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland.
NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/
pfds/.
O. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law,53 and the Storm
Water Management Act.54
P. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP Manual.
Q. All work shall be in accordance with the Township's construction and
material specifications.
A. Regulated activities that create DIAs equal to or less than 1,000 square
feet are exempt from the peak rate control and the SWM site plan
preparation requirements of this chapter.
B. Regulated activities that create DIAs greater than 1,000 square feet
and equal to or less than 5,000 square feet are exempt only from the
peak rate control requirement of this chapter.
C. Agricultural activity is exempt from the rate control and SWM site plan
preparation requirements of this chapter, provided the activities are
performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code 102.
Documentation by the applicant shall be provided to the Township to
show proposed activity to be in compliance with the Pa. Code.
D. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the rate
control and SWM site plan preparation requirements of this chapter,
provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of
25 Pa. Code 102. Documentation by the applicant shall be provided to
the Township to show proposed activity to be in compliance with the Pa.
Code.
53.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
54.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 107-10 JACKSON CODE § 107-11
99:208
§ 107-12. Stormwater management districts.
E. Domestic gardening and landscaping are exempt from specific approval
and permitting under this chapter so long as those activities are
associated with one, and only one, dwelling unit and the activities
comply with all other applicable ordinances and statutes.
F. Exemptions from certain provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in § 107-10D through N of this chapter.
G. The Township may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the Township determines poses
a threat to public health, safety, property or the environment.
A. Currently Jackson Township is divided into release rate districts as
shown in Appendix C.55
B. Description of stormwater management districts.
(1) Three stormwater management districts exist within Jackson
Township. They are broken into the receiving water bodies to which
they belong as listed below.
(2) Within a given district, the post-development peak rate of storm
runoff must be controlled to the stated percentage of the
predevelopment peak rate of storm runoff in order to protect
downstream watershed areas.
(3) When a project or land disturbance activity is located in more than
one stormwater management district, stormwater may not be
transferred from a district with stricter stormwater management
criteria to a district with less strict criteria, unless the need for
such a transfer is identified in the regional water quality
management plan Act 167 study. In any district, infiltration and
volume regulations dictated in § 107-13 will be required.
(4) Runoff rate criteria.
(a) District 1: Little Conewago.
(b) District 2: Codorus.
(c) District 3: Conewago West.
(5) Regulated storms for all three districts listed above shall include
one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and one-hundred-year
frequencies. All frequencies shall control their developed peak flow
rate to a maximum rate equal to or less than the corresponding
predeveloped peak rate.
55.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 107-11 SEWERS § 107-13
99:209
§ 107-13. Volume controls.
The low-impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual shall be
utilized for all regulated activities to the maximum extent practicable. Water
volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm Method in
Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B below. For regulated
activity areas equal to or less than one acre that do not require hydrologic
routing to design the stormwater facilities, this chapter establishes no
preference for either methodology; therefore, the applicant may select
either methodology on the basis of economic considerations, the intrinsic
limitations on applicability of the analytical procedures associated with
each methodology, and other factors.
A. The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable to
any size of regulated activity. This method requires detailed modeling
based on site conditions.
(1) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year, twenty-four-hour
duration precipitation.
(2) For modeling purposes:
(a) Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas must be
considered meadow.
(b) For computation of predevelopment runoff volume, 20% of
existing impervious areas, when present, shall be considered
meadow.
B. The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual) provided below is
independent of site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm
Method is not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated
activities greater than one acre or for projects that require design of
stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
(1) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches of
runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
(2) At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious surfaces
shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e., it shall not
be released into the surface waters of this commonwealth. Removal
options for the first one inch of runoff include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration.
(3) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed stormwater runoff shall be infiltrated.
(4) This method is exempt from the requirements of § 107-14, Rate
controls.
§ 107-13 JACKSON CODE § 107-14
99:210
§ 107-14. Rate controls.
§ 107-15. Stormwater management facilities for Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation roadways and associated facilities.
§ 107-16. Design criteria.
A. For computation of predevelopment peak discharge rates, 20% of the
existing impervious area of a project site, when present, shall be
considered meadow.
B. Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment
discharge rates provided in § 107-12B for the one-, two-, five-, ten-,
twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storms. If it
is shown that the peak rates of discharge indicated by the postdevelopment
analysis are less than or equal to the peak rates of
discharge indicated by the predevelopment analysis for one-, two-, five-,
ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour
storms, then the requirements of this section have been met.
Otherwise, the applicant shall provide additional controls as necessary
to satisfy the peak rate of discharge requirement.
A. For the purposes of the Act 167 Stormwater Management (Plan)
elements, contained within the York County Integrated Water
Resources Plan, and this chapter, design policy pertaining to
stormwater management facilities for Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT) roadways and associated facilities is
provided in Section 13.7 (Antidegradation and Post Construction
Stormwater Management Policy) of PennDOT Publication No. 13M,
Design Manual Part 2 (August 2009), as developed, updated, and
amended in consultation with the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources (DEP). As stated in DM-2.13.7.D (Act 167 and
Municipal Ordinances), PennDOT and PTC roadways and associated
facilities shall be consistent with Act 167 Plans. Dm-2.13.7.B (Policy on
Antidegradation and Post Construction Stormwater Management) was
developed as a cooperative effort between PennDOT and DEP.
DM-2.13.7.C (Project Categories) discusses the anticipated impact on
the quality, volume, and rate of stormwater runoff.
B. Where standards in the Act 167 elements of the IWRP and this chapter
are impractical, PennDOT may request assistance from DEP, in
consultation with the Township and county, to develop an alternative
strategy for meeting state water quality requirements and the goals and
objectives of the Act 167 elements within the IWRP.
C. For the purposes of the Act 167 elements in the IWRP and this chapter,
road maintenance activities are regulated under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
102.
A. Off-site areas. Off-site areas which drain through a proposed
development site are not subject to release rate criteria when
§ 107-14 SEWERS § 107-16
99:211
determining allowable peak runoff rates. However, on-site drainage
facilities shall be designed to safely convey off-site flows through the
development site.
B. On-site areas. On-site areas proposed to remain undisturbed as part of
the regulated activity, including previously developed areas, that are
not within the drainage area of any proposed BMPs shall be considered
as existing conditions, without considering any reductions in cover
type.
C. Downstream hydraulic capacity analysis. Any existing downstream
hydraulic capacity analysis shall be conducted in accordance with this
chapter.
(1) All downstream facilities impacted by the total site area of the
regulated activity shall be studied to determine if the facility has
adequate capacity to handle existing and proposed flows. An
impacted downstream facility is one to which the runoff from the
total site area of the regulated activity comprises more than 50% of
the total flow to such a facility. The study shall end at a perennial
stream. Downstream facilities include, but are not limited to, manmade
or natural swales and open channels, pipes, inlets, culverts,
bridges and roadways.
(2) If any public or private facility is found to be undersized or
inadequate, the applicant shall be responsible for alterations to
eliminate the concerns with the undersized or inadequate facility in
coordination with the regulated activity.
D. Regional detention alternatives. For certain areas within the study
area, it may be more cost-effective to provide one control facility for
more than one development site than to provide an individual control
facility for each development site. The initiative and funding for any
regional runoff control alternatives are the responsibility of prospective
developers. The design of any regional control basins must incorporate
reasonable development of the entire upstream watershed. The peak
outflow of a regional basin would be determined on a case-by-case basis
using the hydrologic model of the watershed consistent with protection
of the downstream watershed areas. "Hydrologic model" refers to the
calibrated model as developed for the stormwater management plan.
E. Capacity improvements of local drainage networks. In certain
instances, local drainage conditions may dictate more stringent levels
of runoff control than those based upon protection of the entire
watershed. In these instances, if the developer could prove that it would
be feasible to provide capacity improvements to relieve the capacity
deficiency in the local drainage network, then the capacity
improvements could be provided by the developer in lieu of runoff
controls on the development site. Any capacity improvements would be
designed based upon development of all areas tributary to the proposed
improvement and the capacity criteria specified in § 107-17. In
§ 107-16 JACKSON CODE § 107-16
99:212
§ 107-17. Regulations governing stormwater management facilities.
addition, all new development upstream of a proposed capacity
improvement shall be assumed to implement the applicable runoff
controls consistent with this chapter except that all new development
within the entire subarea(s) within which the proposed development
site is located shall be assumed to implement the developer's proposed
discharge control, if any.
F. Capacity improvements may also be provided as necessary to
implement any regional or subregional detention alternatives.
G. Where the potential for groundwater and/or surface water
contamination exists, based on the proposed use of the regulated
activity, safeguards shall be incorporated into the site.
(1) For industrial or commercial sites where it is possible that toxic or
hazardous substances may come into contact with stormwater
runoff, pretreatment of the first-flush (first 1/2 inch) runoff over
areas where industrial and commercial operations take place shall
be provided. Pretreatment shall include means for separating light
and heavy toxic and hazardous substances from the stormwater
before the stormwater is conveyed to the general stormwater
management facility(ies).
(2) Infiltration systems may be used to handle runoff from commercial
or industrial working or parking areas only after the first-flush
stormwater from these areas has been pretreated for removal of
toxic and hazardous substances.
H. Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or
vegetative BMPs and to the maximum extent practicable satisfy the
criteria for DIAs.
A. Any stormwater facility located on state highway rights-of-way shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT).
B. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
would be located in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth or
wetlands shall be subject to approval by PA DEP through the joint
permit application process or, where deemed appropriate by PA DEP,
the general permit process. When there is a question whether wetlands
may be involved, it is the responsibility of the developer or his agent to
show that the land in question cannot be classified as wetlands;
otherwise approval to work in the area must be obtained from PA DEP.
C. Any stormwater management facility located within the vicinity of a
floodplain shall be subject to approval in accordance with PA DEP 25
Pa. Code Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management) of PA DEP's Rules and
Regulations.
§ 107-16 SEWERS § 107-17
99:213
D. All earthmoving activities must be reviewed and approved by the York
County Conservation District prior to commencing work.
E. The design of all stormwater management facilities shall incorporate
good engineering principles and practices. The Township shall reserve
the right to disapprove any design that would result in the occupancy or
continuation of adverse hydrologic or hydraulic conditions within the
watershed.
F. The existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto
adjacent property shall not be altered without permission of the
adjacent property owner(s) and shall be subject to any applicable
discharge criteria specified in this chapter.
G. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to any
applicable discharge criteria in the general direction of existing
discharge, whether proposed to be concentrated or maintained as
diffused drainage areas, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. If
diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the developer must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding or other harm will result from the concentrated
discharge.
H. Where a development site is traversed by watercourses, drainage
easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such
watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the
placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may adversely
affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the easement. Also,
maintaining of vegetation in a natural state within the easement shall
be required, except as approved by the appropriate governing
authority.
I. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainageways
shall be subject to approval by PA DEP through the joint permit
application process or, where deemed appropriate by PA DEP, through
the general permit process.
J. Roof drains must not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches to promote overland flow and infiltration/
percolation of stormwater where advantageous to do so. When it is
more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, then
it shall be permitted on a case-by-case basis by the Township.
K. Special requirements for areas falling within defined exceptional value
and high quality subwatersheds. The temperature and quality of water
and streams that have been declared as exceptional value and high
quality is to be maintained as defined in Chapter 93, Water Quality
§ 107-17 JACKSON CODE § 107-17
99:214
§ 107-18. Calculation methodology.
Standards, Title 25 of Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection Rules and Regulations. Temperature-sensitive BMPs and
stormwater conveyance systems are to be used and designed with
storage pool areas and supply outflow channels and should be shaded
with trees. This will require modification of berms for permanent ponds
and the relaxation of restrictions on planting vegetation within the
facilities, provided that capacity for volumes and rate control is
maintained. At a minimum, the southern half on pond shorelines shall
be planted with shade or canopy trees within 10 feet of the pond
shoreline. In conjunction with this requirement, the maximum slope
allowed on the berm area to be planted is 10 to 1. This will lessen
the destabilization of berm soils due to root growth. A long-term
maintenance schedule and management plan for the thermal control
BMPs is to be established and recorded for all development sites within
defined exceptional value and/or high quality subwatersheds.
A. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
the Rational Method, Modified Rational Method, or a Soil Cover
Complex methodology.
(1) Any stormwater runoff calculations involving drainage areas
greater than 200 acres, including on- and off-site areas, shall use a
generally accepted calculation technique that is based on the
NRCS Soil Cover Complex Method. It is assumed that all methods
will be selected by the design professional based on the individual
limitations and suitability of each method for a particular site.
(2) The Township may allow the use of the Rational Method or
Modified Rational Method to estimate peak discharges from
drainage areas that contain less than 200 acres.
(3) All calculations consistent with this chapter using the Soil Cover
Complex Method shall us the appropriate design rainfall depths. If
a hydrologic computer model such as PSRM or HEC-RAS is used for
stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration of rainfall shall
be 24 hours. The SCS Rainfall Type II curve shall be used for the
rainfall distribution.
(4) For the purposes of predevelopment flow rate determination,
undeveloped land, including areas to be disturbed as part of the
regulated activity, shall be considered as "meadow" in good
condition, unless the natural ground cover generates a lower curve
number or Rational "C" value (i.e., forest), as listed it Tables 1 and
2, respectively.56
(5) All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall
intensities consistent with appropriate times of concentration for
56.Editor's Note: Tables 1 and 2 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 107-17 SEWERS § 107-18
99:215
overland flow and return periods. Times of concentration for
overland flow shall be calculated using the methodology presented
in Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, NRCS,
TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time to time by NRCS). Time
of concentration for channel and pipe flow shall be computed using
Manning's Equation.
(6) Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed
conditions to be used in the Soil Cover Complex Method shall be
obtained from Table 1.57
(7) Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for
use in the Rational Method shall be obtained from Table 2.58
(8) Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning Equation shall be
used for hydraulic computations such as the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Values for Manning's roughness
coefficient (n) shall be consistent with Table 3.59
(9) The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet
the performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by
routing the design storm hydrograph through these facilities, using
either manual methods or computerized routing. Routing shall be
based upon the modified PULS method; other routing
methodologies shall be subject to the approval of the Township
Engineer.
(10) The stormwater collection system shall be designed using the peak
discharge computed using the Rational Formula.
B. Design standards: water-carrying facilities.
(1) All storm sewer pipes, streets, and inlets (excluding detention and
retention basin outfall structures) shall be designed for a ten-year
storm event. Sole access structures (culverts and bridges) shall be
designed to convey the twenty-five-year flood without overtopping
the roadway.
(a) When a pipe or culvert is intended to convey the discharge
from a stormwater management facility, its required capacity
shall be computed by the Rational Method and compared to the
peak outflow from the stormwater facility for the one-hundredyear
storm. The greater flow shall govern the design of the
pipe or culvert.
(b) When a pipe is part of a storm sewer system and crosses the
roadway, it shall be designed as a storm sewer with the same
design storm as the remainder of the drainage system.
57.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
58.Editor's Note: Table 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
59.Editor's Note: Table 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 107-18 JACKSON CODE § 107-18
99:216
(c) Greater design frequencies may be justified on individual
projects.
(d) A one-hundred-year storm frequency may be required for
design of the stormwater collection system to insure that the
resultant stormwater runoff from the post-development storm
is directed into the management facility.
(2) In general, inlets shall be spaced such that, based upon the
Rational Method, tc = 5 min. and ten-year rainfall intensity, the
area contributing to the inlet shall not produce a peak runoff of
greater than four cfs. Also, inlets shall be spaced so that their
efficiency, based upon efficiency curves published by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, is not less than 65%.
(3) Inlets shall be placed on both sides of the street at low spots and at
the upper side of street intersections to prevent stormwater from
crossing an intersection. Other devices such as high-efficiency
grates or perforated pipe may be required if conditions warrant. All
inlets at low points along the roadway shall have a ten-inch curb
reveal and shall be equipped with pavement base drain extending
50 feet in either direction, parallel to the center line of the roadway.
(4) In all cases where drainage is picked up by means of a headwall,
the pipe shall be designed as a culvert. Inlet and outlet conditions
shall be analyzed. The minimum diameter of culvert shall be 18
inches. The procedure contained in Hydraulic Engineer Circulars
No. 5 and No. 13, as prepared by the U.S. Department of
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, Washington,
D.C., shall be used for the design of culverts. All culverts shall
include concrete headwalls and endwalls.
(5) Guards shall be provided on all intake structures. The guard bars
shall be one-half-inch-diameter galvanized bars on six-inch centers
attached to the structure with three-eighths-inch-diameter
stainless steel anchors.
(6) Manholes, inlets, headwalls, and endwalls shall conform to the
requirements of the PennDOT Publication 408, as modified by the
adopted Township standards.
(7) Proposed channels or swales must be able to convey the increased
runoff associated with a proposed one-hundred-year return period
event within their banks at velocities consistent with protection of
the channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities shall be based
upon criteria included in the PA DEP Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual.
(8) Existing natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to
convey proposed one-hundred-year return period runoff without
creating any hazard to persons or property.
§ 107-18 SEWERS § 107-18
99:217
(9) Stormwater runoff on roadways (i.e., gutter spread, lane
encroachment, etc.) shall be controlled in accordance with
PennDOT Publications 13M, "Design Manual, Part 2" and 584,
"Drainage Manual."
C. Design standards: detention and retention basins.
(1) Permanent detention and retention basins shall be designed to
meet the following standards:
(a) The maximum permitted depth for detention or retention
basins shall be six feet, measured from the bottom of the
emergency spillway to the lowest point in the basin.
(b) The minimum top width of all basin embankments shall be
eight feet.
(c) The maximum permitted side slopes for detention or retention
basins shall be four horizontal to one vertical. In order to
obtain a waiver for slopes steeper than 4:1, the plan must
include a planting schedule to stabilize the embankments. The
proposed vegetation shall be low-maintenance varieties.
(d) Minimum bottom slope. All detention basins shall have a
minimum bottom slope of 2% unless infiltration facilities are
provided.
(e) Outlet control structures. Outlet control shall be accomplished
utilizing (six-inch diameter or six-inch width maximum)
perforations arranged vertically to provide for positive control
of stormwater runoff. Outlet controls shall also provide for
modification of the orifice to a smaller diameter through the
use of removable plates.
(f) Discharge dispersion. Discharges from piping outlets of
stormwater management facilities shall be provided with a
concrete level spreader to convert point discharge back to
simulated sheet flow. The length of the spreader shall be equal
to 10 times the outlet pipe diameter (e.g., an eighteen-inch
discharge pipe would require a fifteen-foot-wide level
spreader).
(g) Any stormwater management facility (i.e., detention basin)
designed to store runoff and requiring a berm or earthen
embankment required or regulated by this chapter shall be
designed to provide an emergency spillway to handle flow up to
and including the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour design
storm at post-development conditions, assuming the principal
outlet structure to be clogged. The height of embankment must
be set as to provide a minimum one foot of freeboard above the
maximum elevation computed for the clogged orifice condition.
Should any stormwater management facility require a dam
§ 107-18 JACKSON CODE § 107-18
99:218
§ 107-19. Carbonate geology.
In areas of carbonate geology, a geologist shall certify to the following:
safety permit under PA DEP 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105, the
facility shall be designed in accordance with PA DEP 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of PA DEP 25
Pa. Code Chapter 105 concerning dam safety which may be
required to pass storms larger than the one-hundred-year
event.
(h) A cutoff trench of impervious material shall be provided within
all basin embankments.
(i) Where a basin embankment is constructed using fill on an
existing fifteen-percent or greater slope, the basin must be
keyed into the existing grade.
(j) All outlet structures and emergency spillways shall include a
satisfactory means of energy dissipation at its outlet to assure
conveyance and flow without endangering the safety and
integrity of the basin and the downstream drainage area.
(k) A concentrated discharge of stormwater to an adjacent
property shall be within a natural drainageway or watercourse,
or an easement shall be required.
(l) Plans for infiltration must show the locations of existing and
proposed septic tank infiltration areas and wells. Unless a
minimum twenty-five-foot separation from on-lot disposal
systems (OLDS) infiltration areas, including replacement
areas, is provided, it will be evaluated by the Township on a
case-by-case basis. However, the separation shall not be less
than 10 feet. Infiltration rates shall be based upon perc and
probe tests conducted at the site of the proposed facility.
A. No stormwater management facility will be placed in, over, or
immediately adjacent to the following features:
(1) Closer than 100 feet to sinkholes.
(2) Closer than 100 feet to closed depressions.
(3) Closer than 100 feet to caverns, intermittent lakes, or ephemeral
streams.
(4) Closer than 50 feet to lineaments in carbonate areas.
(5) Closer than 50 feet to fracture traces.
(6) Closer than 25 feet to bedrock pinnacles (surface or subsurface).
B. Stormwater resulting from regulated activities shall not be discharged
into sinkholes.
§ 107-18 SEWERS § 107-19
99:219
C. If the developer can prove through analysis that the project site is an
area underlain by carbonate geology, and such geologic conditions may
result in sinkhole formations, then the project site is exempt from
recharge requirements as described in § 107-13, Volume Controls.
However, the project site shall still be required to meet all other
standards found in this chapter.
D. It shall be the developer's responsibility to verify if the project site is
underlain by carbonate geology. The following note shall be attached to
all stormwater management plans and signed and sealed by the
developer's geologist: "I, __________, certify that the proposed
stormwater management facility (circle one) is/is not underlain by
carbonate geology."
E. Whenever a stormwater management facility will be located in an area
underlain by carbonate geology, a geological evaluation of the proposed
location by a geologist shall be conducted to determine susceptibility to
sinkhole formation. The evaluation may include the use of impermeable
liners to reduce or eliminate the separation distances listed in the BMP
Manual. Additionally, the evaluation shall, at a minimum, address soil
permeability, depth to bedrock, seasonally high groundwater table,
susceptibility for sinkhole formation, suitability of stormwater
management facilities, subgrade stability and maximum infiltration
capacity in depth of water per unit area.
F. A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be performed to
determine the suitability of recharge facilities. The evaluation shall be
performed by a qualified professional and, at a minimum, address soil
permeability, depth to bedrock, susceptibility to sinkhole formation, and
subgrade stability. The general process for designing the infiltration
BMP shall be:
(1) Site evaluation to determine general areas of suitability for
infiltration practices.
(2) Provide field test throughout the area proposed for development to
determine appropriate percolation rate and/or hydraulic
conductivity. At least one infiltration test must be included in each
soil group, and at least one infiltration test must be conducted for
each five lots proposed for development. Infiltration tests must be
taken at the location and depth of all proposed infiltration
structures.
(3) Design infiltration structure for required storm volume based on all
available data.
G. Extreme caution shall be exercised where infiltration is proposed in
geologically susceptible areas such as strip mine or limestone areas. It
is also extremely important that the design professional evaluate the
possibility of groundwater contamination from the proposed
infiltration/recharge facility and recommend a hydrogeologic
justification study be performed if necessary. Whenever a basin will be
§ 107-19 JACKSON CODE § 107-19
99:220
§ 107-20. Erosion and sedimentation control requirements.
located in an area underlain by limestone, a geological evaluation of
the proposed location shall be conducted to determine susceptibility
to sinkhole formations. The design of all facilities over carbonate
formations shall include measures to prevent groundwater
contamination and, where necessary, sinkhole formation. The
infiltration requirement in the high quality/exceptional waters shall
be subject to the Department's Chapter 93 and anti-degradation
regulations. A detailed hydrogeologic investigation may be required by
the Township, and, where appropriate, the Township may require the
installation of an impermeable liner in detention basins.
A. As required in § 107-10D, whenever the vegetation and topography are
to be disturbed, such activity must be in conformance with PA DEP 25
Pa. Code Chapter 105, Rules and Regulations, Part I, Subpart C,
Protection of Natural Resources, Article II, Water Resources, Chapter
102, Erosion Control, and in accordance with the York County
Conservation District.
B. It is extremely important that strict erosion and sedimentation control
measures be applied surrounding infiltration structures during
installation to prevent the infiltrative surfaces from becoming clogged.
Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and
criteria must be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed and shall
include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase, so as
to maintain their maximum infiltration capacity.
C. Fencing for sedimentation basins or traps must comply with
§ 107-18C(1)(j).
D. The developer shall demonstrate that the post-development hydrograph
flows during erosion and sedimentation control phase are less than or
equal to the predevelopment hydrograph flows to assure the rate and
volume of runoff leaving the site is controlled for the two-, five-, and tenyear
frequency storms. All calculation methodology shall be in
accordance with §§ 107-12. through 107-19.
§ 107-19 SEWERS § 107-20
99:221

ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
§ 107-21. Plan requirements.
A. Although not a requirement of this chapter, prior to proceeding with
SWM site plan preparation and submission, the applicant is encouraged
to request a preapplication meeting with the Township, Township's
Engineer and a staff member of the York County Conservation District
to discuss the plan concept and responsibility for submission of
required documents and information.
B. The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
(1) Applicable sections of the Township's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,60 and other applicable ordinances of the
Township regarding subdivision and land development plan
preparation and plan requirements shall be followed in preparing
all SWM site plans, regardless of whether or not an SWM site plan
involves a subdivision and/or land development plan.
(2) The Township shall not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient
in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion,
and in accordance with this article, when an SWM site plan is found
to be deficient, the Township may either disapprove the
submission, or, in the case of minor deficiencies, the Township may
accept the submission of a revised SWM site plan as noted in
§ 107-24 of this chapter.
(3) Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all
physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as
necessary to implement the operation and maintenance (O&M)
plan discussed in Subsection B(5)(i) below.
(4) The following signature block for the Township:
"(Municipal official or designee), on this date (date of signature),
has reviewed and hereby certifies that the SWM site plan meets
all design standards and criteria of the Township Ordinance No.
(number assigned to the Ordinance)."
(5) The SWM site plan shall also provide the following information:
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project,
including any additional information required for a postconstruction
stormwater management plan (PCSWMP) as
applicable.
(b) A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP
Manual. A detailed site evaluation shall be completed for
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 113.
§ 107-21 SEWERS § 107-21
99:223
projects proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst
topography, as well as for other environmentally sensitive
areas, whether natural or man-made, including floodplains,
streams, lakes, ponds, hydric soils, wetlands, brownfields and
wellhead protection zones.
(c) Stormwater runoff design computations, and documentation as
specified in this chapter, or as otherwise necessary to
demonstrate that the maximum practicable measures have
been taken to meet the requirements of this chapter, including
the recommendations and general requirements in § 107-10.
(d) Expected project time schedule.
(e) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as
prepared for, reviewed, and approved by the York County
Conservation District.
(f) The effect of the project in terms of runoff volumes, water
quality, and peak flows on surrounding properties and aquatic
features, and on any existing stormwater conveyance system
that may be affected by the project.
(g) Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including drainage
structures, pipes, open channels, and swales.
(h) The SWM site plan shall show the locations of existing and
proposed on-lot wastewater facilities and water supply wells.
(i) The SWM site plan shall include an operation and maintenance
(O&M) plan for all existing and proposed physical stormwater
management facilities. This plan shall address long-term
ownership and responsibilities for O&M as well as schedules
and costs for O&M activities.
(j) A description of permanent stormwater management
techniques, including the construction specifications of the
materials to be used for stormwater management facilities.
(k) A notarized signature of the owner of the parcel for which the
SWM site plan is proposed indicating that they are aware of,
and will be responsible for, operation and maintenance of the
facilities.
(l) Existing and proposed land uses.
(m) The location of the proposed regulated activity relative to
streets, municipal boundaries, and other significant man-made
features.
(n) Significant physical features and associated boundary limits,
including flood hazard areas, sinkholes, existing drainage
courses, and areas of natural vegetation.
§ 107-21 JACKSON CODE § 107-21
99:224
(o) The location of existing and proposed utilities, stormwater
facilities, sanitary sewers, and water lines on the parcel and
within 50 feet of property lines.
(p) Proposed changes to the land surface and vegetative cover,
and the type and amount of existing and proposed impervious
area.
(q) Existing and proposed structures, buildings, streets,
driveways, access drives, and parking areas.
(r) Preferred contour intervals of two feet in moderately sloped
areas, and contours at intervals of five feet for slopes in excess
of 15%. Dependent upon site conditions, alternative contour
intervals proposed by an applicant or his designee may be
accepted by the Township.
(s) The name of the development, the name and address of the
owner of the property, and the name and address of the
individual or firm preparing the plan. Also to be included are
the name, address, signature and seal of any registered
surveyor (attesting the accuracy of the boundary survey),
professional engineer, landscape architect, or professional
geologist (for geomorphological assessments) contributing to
and/or with a responsibility for any aspect of the plan where
applicable.
(t) Preferred graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more
than 50 feet. For parcels of 20 acres or more, the preferred
scale is one inch equals no more than 100 feet. Dependent
upon site conditions, an alternative scale proposed by the
applicant or his designee may be accepted by the Township.
(u) North point (arrow).
(v) A map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
subject parcel's boundary lines that will be affected by the
proposed regulated activities.
(w) Horizontal and vertical profiles of all open channels, including
hydraulic capacity.
(x) A note on the plan indicating the location, and responsibility
for maintenance of, SWM facilities and/or easements that
would be located on adjoining properties as a result of
proposed regulated activities, and the location of such facilities
and/or easements.
(y) A hydrogeologic assessment of the effects of stormwater runoff
on sinkholes where present.
(z) The effect of the proposed regulated activity in terms of runoff
volumes and peak flows on adjacent properties and/or any
§ 107-21 SEWERS § 107-21
99:225
§ 107-22. Plan submission.
§ 107-23. Plan review and approval procedure.
existing municipal stormwater collection system that may
receive runoff from the project site.
(aa) Drainage flow pathways.
A. Three copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted as follows:
(1) Two copies to the Township.
(2) One copy to the York County Planning Commission when an SWM
site plan accompanies a subdivision/land development plan
application.
B. Additional copies shall be submitted if requested by PA DEP.
C. The Township shall establish a fee schedule for the review of SWM
plans, the amount of which shall be set by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
A. SWM site plans shall be reviewed by the Township for consistency with
the provisions of this chapter.
B. Modification requests.
(1) When reviewing an SWM site plan, whether or not the SWM site
plan is included in a subdivision and/or land development plan
application, the Township's governing body may, after consulting
with DEP as noted in § 107-10C of this chapter, grant a modification
of the requirements of one or more provisions of this chapter if the
literal enforcement will enact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided that such
modification will not be contrary to the public interest and that the
purpose and intent of the ordinance is observed.
(2) All requests for modifications from an applicant shall be in writing
and shall accompany and be a part of the application for approval
of an SWM site plan and/or a subdivision or land development plan
as applicable. The request shall state in full the grounds and facts
of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based, the
provision or provisions of the ordinance involved and the minimum
modification necessary.
(3) In granting of any modification, the Township may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of the Act 167 Plan and this chapter.
(4) The governing body of the Township shall keep a written record of
all action on requests for modifications. The response of any
consultation and/or review by DEP shall be included as an original
§ 107-21 JACKSON CODE § 107-23
99:226
report if available or otherwise documented in the required written
record.
C. SWM site plan review and approval procedure.
(1) If an SWM site plan does not involve a subdivision and/or land
development, the review of the SWM site, recommendations,
approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval, i.e., the review
and decision period, shall occur within 45 days of submission to the
Township. However, the Township, in its sole discretion, may
extend the review and decision period another 45 days due to the
nature of the application and/or site conditions. If an extension of
another 45 days is imposed or granted by the Township beyond the
first forty-five-day review and decision period designated by this
Subsection C, the Township shall notify the applicant in writing and
deliver such notice to said applicant within 15 days of the decision
to extend the review and decision period by the Township. If no
extension is imposed or granted by the Township beyond the first
forty-five-day review and decision period, and no decision has been
rendered by the Township within that period, the SWM site plan
shall be deemed approved. Similarly, if after a forty-five-day
extension of the review and decision period has been imposed or
granted by the Township, and no decision has been rendered by the
Township within that period, the SWM site plan shall be deemed
approved.
(2) If an SWM site plan involves a subdivision and/or land development
plan, the period of time from the submission to the Township of the
subdivision and/or land development plan application which
includes the SWM plan and the approval, approval with conditions,
or disapproval, i.e., review and decision period, shall be 90 days, in
accordance with the procedure for approval of plats in Section 508
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.61
(3) From the time an application for approval of a plat involving a
subdivision or land development plan, whether preliminary or final,
which includes an SWM site plan, is duly filed with the Township,
no change or amendment of this chapter or other governing
ordinance or plan shall affect the decision on such application in
accordance with the provisions of the governing ordinances or
plans as they stood at the time the application was duly filed, as
specified in Section 508(4)(i) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.62
D. Decision notification procedure. In all cases, the decision of the
Township to approve or disapprove the SWM site plan shall be in
writing and shall be delivered to the applicant no later than 15 days
following the decision. If the SWM site plan is disapproved, the written
61.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
62.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 107-23 SEWERS § 107-23
99:227
§ 107-24. Revision of plans.
A revision to a previously submitted SWM site plan that involves a change
in SWM BMPs, stormwater management facilities, or changes in analytical
techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM BMPs, or
that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the
SWM site plan, as determined by the Township, shall require a resubmission
of the revised SWM site plan in accordance with this Article, including
applicable fees. For NPDES permitted sites, any revised SWM site plan shall
also be resubmitted to the York County Conservation District for review. In
the case of an SWM site plan which contains minor deficiencies, such as a
missing label, omission of a required note or minor construction detail, as
determined by the Township, the Township may accept a resubmission of
such SWM site plan without the requirement of a review fee, or for a lesser
fee as provided for in the Township fee schedule.
§ 107-25. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the Township's concerns as stated regarding the original
submission, to the Township in accordance with this article. The applicable
review fee must accompany the submission of a revised SWM site plan,
unless such fee is waived by the Township. (See § 107-24.)
§ 107-26. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
decision by the Township shall specify the defects in the application,
describe the requirements which were not met, and shall cite the
provisions of the Ordinance relied upon. If the SWM site plan is
approved with conditions, the notification to the applicant shall state
the acceptable conditions for approval and the time limit for satisfying
such conditions. The time limit for satisfying conditions of approval
shall be the time limit prescribed for conditional approval of subdivision
and land development plans as stated in the Township's Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.63
A. SWM site plans independent of subdivision and land development
plans. The Township's approval of an SWM site plan, when such plan is
submitted independent of a subdivision and/or land development plan,
authorizes the regulated activities contained in the SWM site plan for a
maximum term of validity of five years following the date of approval.
The Township may, in its sole discretion, specify a term of validity
shorter than five years in the approval for any specific SWM site plan,
particularly if the nature of the proposed SWM facilities require more
frequent maintenance and/or short-term replacement of certain
components. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the
Township signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If an approved SWM
site plan is not completed according to Section 407 within the term of
63.Editor's Note: See Ch. 113.
§ 107-23 JACKSON CODE § 107-26
99:228
§ 107-27. As-built plans, completion certificate, and final
inspection.
validity, then the Township may consider the SWM site plan
disapproved and may revoke any and all permits. SWM site plans that
are considered disapproved by the Township may be resubmitted in
accordance with § 107-25 of this chapter.
B. SWM site plans included in a subdivision and/or land development plan.
The Township's approval of an SWM site plan, which is a part of a
subdivision and/or land development plan, authorizes that plan and the
regulated activities therein so that no subsequent change or
amendment in this chapter or other governing ordinances or plans shall
be applied to affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence
and to complete any aspect of the approved development in accordance
with the terms of such approval within five years from such approval, as
specified in Section 508(4)(ii) through (vii) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.64
A. The developer shall be responsible for providing as-built plans of all
SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The as-built plans
and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction plans
shall be submitted to the Township.
B. The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion
signed by a designer verifying that all permanent SWM BMPs have
been constructed according to the approved plans and specifications.
C. After receipt of the completion certification by the Township, the
Township may conduct a final inspection to verify compliance with, and
accuracy of, the as-built plans.
D. The financial guarantee, as discussed under § 107-31, shall not be
released by the Township until the items of § 107-27 are completed.
64.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 107-26 SEWERS § 107-27
99:229

ARTICLE V
Construction Inspections
§ 107-28. Schedule of inspections.
A. The Township Engineer or his Township assignee shall inspect phases
of the installation of the permanent stormwater management facilities
as deemed appropriate by the Township Engineer. It is the
responsibility of the permittee to notify the Township Engineer 48 hours
in advance of the beginning of construction of stormwater management
facilities. Individual residential on-lot stormwater management systems
shall be inspected by the Township representative.
B. During any stage of the work, if the Township Engineer determines that
the permanent stormwater management facilities are not being
installed in accordance with the approved SWM site plan, the Township
shall revoke any existing approvals issued under this chapter until a
revised SWM site plan is submitted and approved, as specified in this
chapter.
C. Fee for inspections shall be collected as defined in § 107-33.
§ 107-28 SEWERS § 107-28
99:231

ARTICLE VI
Operation and Maintenance
§ 107-29. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
§ 107-30. Operation and maintenance agreements.
A. The Township shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site
plan. The Township may require a dedication of such facilities as part of
the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a
requirement is not an indication that the Township will accept the
facilities. The Township reserves the right to accept or reject the
ownership, maintenance, and operating responsibility for any portion of
the stormwater management facilities and controls.
B. Facilities, areas, or structures included in the SMW site plan and used
as stormwater management BMPs shall be enumerated as permanent
real estate appurtenances and recorded by the landowner in the York
County Recorder of Deeds Office as deed restrictions/protective
covenants or easements that run with the land. This requirement can be
combined with § 107-29C below.
C. The operation and maintenance (O&M) plan shall be recorded by the
applicant as a restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.
D. The Township may take enforcement actions against an owner for any
failure to satisfy the provisions of this article.
E. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, or structures without the written approval of the
Township, with the exception of necessary maintenance activities such
as mowing.
A. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan, the property owner shall
sign and record an operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (see
Appendix A)65 covering all stormwater control facilities which are to be
privately owned.
(1) The owner, successor and assigns shall maintain all facilities in
accordance with the approved maintenance schedule in the O&M
plan.
(2) The owner shall convey to the Township easements to assure
access for periodic inspections by the Township and maintenance,
as necessary.
(3) The owner shall keep on file with the Township the name, address,
and telephone number of the person or company responsible for
maintenance activities; in the event of a change, new information
65.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 107-29 SEWERS § 107-30
99:233
§ 107-31. Performance guarantee.
For SWM site plans that involve subdivision and land development, the
applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the Township for the timely
installation and proper construction of all stormwater management controls
as required by the approved SWM site plan and this chapter in accordance
with the provisions of Sections 509, 510, and 511 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.66
§ 107-32. Maintenance guarantee.
For SWM site plans that involve the dedication of all or some of the required
improvements following completion, the Township may require the posting
of financial security to secure structural integrity of said improvements as
well as the functioning of said improvements in accordance with the design
and specifications as depicted on the SWM site plan for a term not to
exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of dedication. Said financial
security shall be of the same type as otherwise required in § 107-31 with
regard to installation of such improvements, and the amount of the financial
security shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation of said
improvements in accordance with the provisions of Section 509 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.67
shall be submitted by the owner to the Township within 10 working
days of the change.
B. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the
SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the
Township may perform the services required and charge the owner
appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the
property.
C. The Township is exempt from the requirement to sign and record an
operation and maintenance agreement.
66.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10509, 10510, and 10511.
67.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509.
§ 107-30 JACKSON CODE § 107-32
99:234
ARTICLE VII
Fees and Expenses
§ 107-33. General.
A. The developer shall be required to submit a subdivision/land
development or building permit application prior to any stormwater
management facilities construction. The fee for plan reviews, permit
issuance, and inspections shall be established by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors to defray the following expenses:
(1) The review of the stormwater management/erosion and
sedimentation control plan by the Township Engineer.
(2) The site inspections.
(3) The inspection of stormwater management facilities and drainage
improvements during construction.
(4) The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater
management facilities and drainage improvements presented in
the stormwater management/erosion and sedimentation control
plan.
(5) Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
B. All fees shall be paid by the applicant at the time of application and
shall be included in the required fee for review of subdivision/land
development plans.
C. Any additional costs incurred by the Township in the administration of
this chapter shall be charged to the applicant and shall be paid
promptly by the applicant.
§ 107-33 SEWERS § 107-33
99:235

ARTICLE VIII
Detection and Elimination of Illicit Discharges to Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer System
§ 107-34. Ultimate responsibility.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated by this article are minimum
standards; therefore, this article does not intend nor imply that compliance
by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor
unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 107-35. Prohibition of illicit discharges.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into storm drain
systems or waters of this commonwealth any materials, including, but
not limited to, pollutants or waters containing pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other
than stormwater. Any discharge in violation of this article shall be
considered illicit discharges, except as exempted below.
B. Exceptions.
(1) The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit discharge
to the storm drain system or waters of this commonwealth is
prohibited except as follows:
(a) Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
(b) Potable water sources, including water line flushing.
(c) Irrigation drainage.
(d) Air-conditioning condensate.
(e) Springs.
(f) Water from crawl space pumps.
(g) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or
hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spill
material has been removed) and where detergents are not
used.
(h) Diverted stream flows.
(i) Groundwater infiltration to storm drains.
(j) Dye testing is an allowable discharge (but requires a verbal
notification to the Township 48 hours prior to the time of the
test).
(k) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
§ 107-34 SEWERS § 107-35
99:237
§ 107-36. Prohibition of illicit connections.
The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
§ 107-37. Suspension of MS4 access.
(l) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing
drains.
(m) Lawn watering.
(n) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges (less than one PPM
chlorine).
(o) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(p) Water from individual residential car washing.
(q) Routine external building wash down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(r) Water discharged in well testing for potable water sources.
(s) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(t) Discharges specified in writing by the Township as being
necessary to protect public health and safety.
(2) The above prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater
discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under
the authority of DEP; provided, that the discharge is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order
and other applicable laws and regulations; and, provided, that
written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm
drain system and/or waters of this commonwealth.
C. In the event that the Township or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in § 107-35B significantly contribute to pollution
of the waters of this commonwealth, the Township or DEP will notify the
responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
A. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the
time of connection.
B. A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a
connection to continue.
A. Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The
Township, the commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the United States of
§ 107-35 JACKSON CODE § 107-37
99:238
§ 107-38. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Township prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
§ 107-39. Monitoring of discharges.
America may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to
a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of
persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
or the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension
order issued in an emergency, the Township may take such steps as
deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters
of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States, or to
minimize danger to persons, including, without limitations, entering
the property for the purpose of disconnecting and/or performing
emergency maintenance or repairs to storm sewers. In the event the
Township must disconnect or perform emergency maintenance and/
or repairs, the Township may file and attach a municipal lien on the
property which is causing the illicit discharge.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge or illicit connection.
Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have
their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce
an illicit discharge or illicit connection. The Township will notify a
violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may
petition the Township for a reconsideration and hearing.
C. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior
approval of the authorized enforcement agency.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater
discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The Township shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities
subject to regulation under this article as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger
has security measures in force which require proper identification
and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall
make the necessary arrangements to allow access to
representatives of the Township.
§ 107-37 SEWERS § 107-39
99:239
§ 107-40. Requirements to prevent, control and reduce stormwater
pollutants by the use of BMPs.
The Township will adopt requirements identifying best management
practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or
contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain
system, or waters of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United
(2) Facility operators shall allow the Township ready access to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the
conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the
performance of any additional duties as defined by state and
federal law.
(3) The Township shall have the right to set up on any permitted
facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
Township to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's
stormwater discharge.
(4) The Township has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense.
All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the
Township and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such
access shall be borne by the operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Township access to a
permitted facility are a violation of a stormwater discharge permit
and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with an
NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial
activity commits an offense if the person denies the Township
reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of
conducting any activity authorized or required by this article.
(7) If the Township has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and the Township
representative is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe
that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need
to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and
sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article
or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized
enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from
any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 107-39 JACKSON CODE § 107-40
99:240
States. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at his own expense, reasonable protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm
drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and
nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or
premises which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be
required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and
nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and
conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater
associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be
deemed in compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall
be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for
compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
§ 107-41. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse,
so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 107-42. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain
system, or water of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States,
said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release
of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency
response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In
the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify
the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no
later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be
confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the Township within
three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited
materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the
owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written
record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence.
Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 107-43. Enforcement.
§ 107-40 SEWERS § 107-43
99:241
§ 107-44. Appeals of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the Township. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from
the date of the notice of violation. A hearing on the appeal before the Board
of Supervisors or designated appropriate authority (by resolution) shall take
place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal or the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of Supervisors, whichever
occurs first. The decision of the Township authority or its designee shall be
final.
§ 107-45. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within 15
days of the hearing representative's decision upholding the decision of the
Township, then representatives of the Township shall enter upon the subject
private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary
to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for
any person, owner, agent, or person in possession of any premises to refuse
to allow the Township or designated contractor to enter upon the premises
for the purposes set forth above.
A. Notice of violation. Whenever the Township finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the
Township may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(3) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator or assessed as a municipal lien on the property.
§ 107-43 JACKSON CODE § 107-46
99:242
§ 107-46. Cost of abatement of violation.
§ 107-47. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the Township may petition
for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from
activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to
perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 107-48. Compensatory action.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized
by this article, the Township may impose upon a violator alternative
compensatory actions such as attendance at compliance workshops, creek
cleanup, etc.
§ 107-49. Violations deemed as public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a public nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored
at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 107-50. Criminal prosecution.
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this or any section of
this Article VIII shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent
of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of $1,000 per violation
per day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 90 days.
A. Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including
administrative costs. The property owner may thereafter file a written
protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within 30 days. If the
amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the
decision of the Township or by the expiration of the time in which to file
an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the
property and shall constitute a municipal lien on the property for the
amount of the assessment.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become
liable to the Township by reason of such violation. The liability shall be
paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of 12%
per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the first day
following discovery of the violation.
§ 107-46 SEWERS § 107-51
99:243
§ 107-51. Attorney fees and costs.
The Township may recover all attorney's fees, court costs and other
expenses associated with enforcement of this article, either criminal or civil,
including sampling and monitoring expenses or other costs of investigation.
§ 107-52. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the
discretion of the Township to seek cumulative remedies.
§ 107-51 JACKSON CODE § 107-52
99:244
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 107-53. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Township may enter at
reasonable times upon any property within the Township to inspect the
condition of the stormwater structures and facilities in regard to any aspect
regulated by this chapter.
§ 107-54. Inspection.
SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan shall be inspected
by the landowner, or the owner's designee, including the Township for
dedicated and owned facilities; according to the following list of minimum
frequencies:
§ 107-55. Notification.
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued
hereunder, the Township shall provide written notification of the violation.
Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violations and establish a
time limit for the correction of these violation(s). Failure to comply within
the time specified shall subject such person to the penalty provisions of
this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and do not
prevent the Township from pursuing any and all remedies. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the real property on which any regulated
activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred, to comply with
the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 107-56. Enforcement.
§ 107-57. Suspension and revocation.
A. Annually.
B. During or immediately after the cessation of a storm greater than three
inches in 24 hours.
C. A report of all inspections shall be submitted to the Township annually.
D. All inspection records shall be maintained by the landowner.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity
except as provided in an approved SWM site plan, unless specifically
exempted in § 107-11.
B. It shall be unlawful to violate any section of this chapter.
C. Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan are a
responsibility of the Township.
§ 107-53 SEWERS § 107-57
99:245
§ 107-58. Violations and penalties.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the Township pursuant to this chapter
may be suspended or revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard,
nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life or property of others.
B. A suspended approval shall be reinstated by the Township when the
Township has inspected and approved the corrections to the violations
that caused the suspension.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the Township cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
D. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the Township may provide a limited time
period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the
Township will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a
written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner
to correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation
within the allowed time period, the Township may revoke or suspend
any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision
of this chapter.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a
judgment of not more than $600. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the
District Justice determining that there has been a violation further
determines that there has been a good-faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating the Ordinance to have believed
that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed
to have been only one such violation. The court of common pleas, upon
petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per
diem judgment pending a final adjudication of the violation and
judgment.
§ 107-57 JACKSON CODE § 107-58
99:246
§ 107-59. Appeals.
B. The Township may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any other
appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the Board of
Supervisors within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Township, relevant to the
provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the York County Court of
Common Pleas within 30 days of the Township's decision.
§ 107-58 SEWERS § 107-59
99:247

ARTICLE X
References
§ 107-60. Reference materials.
A. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and updated.
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
Harrisburg, PA.
B. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as amended and updated. Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
C. United States Department of Agriculture, National Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS). National Engineering Handbook. Part
630: Hydrology, 1969-2001. Originally published as the National
Engineering Handbook, Section 4: Hydrology. Available from the NRCS
online at: http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/.
D. United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service. 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington, D.C.
E. United States Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center. 2004-2006. Precipitation-
Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0,
Silver Spring, Maryland. Internet address: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/
hdsc/pfds/.
F. Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 85, No. 247, The Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.68
68.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 107-60 SEWERS § 107-60
99:249
Chapter 109
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 93.
Construction of individual sewage
systems — See Ch. 99, Art. I.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
113.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 127.
§ 107-60 JACKSON CODE § 107-60
99:250
ARTICLE I
Street Access
[Adopted 8-3-1999 by Ord. No. 114-9969]
§ 109-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Jackson Township Street Access
Ordinance."
§ 109-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures to regulate the
location, design, construction, maintenance and drainage of driveways,
access drives, streets and other property within Township street rights-ofway
to ensure the security, economy of maintenance, preservation of proper
drainage and the safe, reasonable access of Township streets.
§ 109-3. Compliance with other requirements.
Issuance of a permit under these regulations does not relieve the permittee
from any additional responsibility to secure other federal, state or local
approvals or permits as may be required by law.
§ 109-4. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the
meanings of the terms used in this article shall be as follows:
ACCESS DRIVE — A private minor vehicular right-of-way, other than a
street, providing access from a street to a property or parking area within
a lot. Access drives shall be required for all commercial, institutional
(including but not limited to schools, hospitals and religious institutions)
and industrial uses, and all multifamily dwellings.
CARTWAY — The portion of a street right-of-way which is paved, improved,
designated or intended for vehicular traffic, exclusive of the sidewalk, curb
or shoulder.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by the center lines of the streets and by a line of
sight between points on their center lines at a given distance from the
intersection of the center lines.
CORNER LOT — A lot abutting upon two streets at their intersection.
DRIVEWAY — An improved surface for vehicular travel which provides
access between a street and a lot. For the purposes of this article, drives
for all residential uses (except multifamily) and all agricultural uses shall be
considered driveways.
69.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. I, Driveway Construction,
adopted 5-4-1970 by Ord. No. 4-70, as amended.
§ 109-1 SEWERS § 109-4
99:251
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
GRADE — The slope expressed in a percent which indicates the rate of
change of elevation in feet per hundred feet.
IMPROVEMENTS — Pavements, curbs, sidewalks, water mains, sanitary
sewers, storm sewers, grading, street signs and plantings, and other items
required for the welfare of the property owners and the public.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
MAINTENANCE — Normal care and upkeep of structures such as
driveways and stormwater conveyance systems. For the purposes of this
article, maintenance shall not include work that results in widening or
relocation of such structures, or in changing the type of surface material of
a driveway (i.e., overlaying a stone driveway with blacktop).
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building containing three or more dwelling
units (such as apartment house and garden apartments). All dwelling units
are located on a single lot and share with other units a common yard area.
OWNER — The owner of record of a parcel of land.
PERFORMANCE BOND — An agreement by and between a contractor and
a bonding company in favor of the developer and the Township Board of
Supervisors guaranteeing the completion of physical improvements.
PERMIT OFFICER — That person appointed by the Jackson Township Board
of Supervisors and given authority to issue building permits and other
permits according to Township ordinances.
MINIMUM USE DRIVEWAY — A driveway normally used for not more
than 25 vehicle trips per day, serving such uses as single-family
dwellings, duplex houses or apartments with five units or less.
A.
LOW-VOLUME DRIVEWAY — A driveway normally used for more than
25 but fewer than 750 vehicle trips per day, serving such uses as office
buildings, schools or car washes.
B.
MEDIUM-VOLUME DRIVEWAY — A driveway normally used for more
than 750 but fewer than 1,500 vehicle trips per day, normally not
requiring traffic signalization, serving such uses as motels, fast-food
restaurants, service stations, small shopping centers or plazas and
schools.
C.
HIGH-VOLUME DRIVEWAY — A driveway normally used for more than
1,500 vehicles per day, often requiring traffic signalization, serving
such uses as large shopping centers, multibuilding apartment or office
complexes and large motels.
D.
§ 109-4 JACKSON CODE § 109-4
99:252
PERMITTEE — A person who has been issued a permit by Jackson Township
under this article.
PERSON — Any natural person or persons, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A legal right of passage across land occupied or intended
to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission
line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade
trees or for another special use. If the right-of-way involves maintenance by
a public agency, it shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat
on which such right-of-way is established.
ROADS — Roads are grouped into the following four categories:
STREET — A public way, excluding driveways and access drives, which
affords the principal means of access to abutting properties, intended to be
used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians. Includes street, avenue, boulevard,
road, highway, freeway, lane, viaduct and any other dedicated and accepted
public right-of-way.
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon which
a lot fronts or, in its absence, the established grade of other streets upon
which the lot abuts at the midway of the frontage of the lot thereon. If there
is no officially established grade, the existing grade of the street at such
midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.
STREET LINE — A line defining the edge of a street right-of-way and
separating the street from abutting property or lots. Commonly known as
the "street right-of-way line."
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
TOWNSHIP — Jackson Township, York County, Pennsylvania.
§ 109-5. Permit required.
ARTERIAL — A highway primarily for fast or heavy traffic between
major population centers.
A.
COLLECTOR — A street which provides traffic movement between
major arterials and minor or local streets.
B.
MINOR — A local street which has little through traffic, but which is
primarily intended to provide direct access to abutting properties.
C.
SERVICE DRIVE or ALLEY — A minor street which is used primarily
for vehicle access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a
street.
D.
A. No driveway, access drive, street, drainage facility or structure shall be
constructed or altered within an existing Township street right-of-way
or easement area, or right-of-way or easement area which has been
offered for dedication to the Township by document, subdivision or land
§ 109-4 SEWERS § 109-5
99:253
§ 109-5.1. Plans required.
All applications for permits shall be submitted to the permit officer and shall
be accompanied by two copies of a plan which illustrates, at a minimum, the
following, including dimensions where applicable:
development plan, whether or not accepted, and no drainage facility of
the Township shall be altered or connected onto without first obtaining
a permit from the Township.
B. Applications for permits shall be submitted at least 10 working days
prior to the anticipated start of work.
C. The provisions of this article shall not be applicable in those instances
where the highway is maintained by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation or its successor.
A. Existing roadway pavement, ditches, rights-of-way and relevant
property lines, roadway appurtenances, utilities, medians and other
significant features that may affect the location of the proposed
driveway.
B. Design features of existing and proposed driveways, curbs, tapers,
acceleration and deceleration lanes, including the following:
(1) Driveway width.
(2) Driveway radii and other points of curvature.
(3) Driveway grade or profile and cross sections.
(4) Driveway angle relative to the roadway.
(5) Driveway surface material.
C. Distance from each existing and proposed driveway to the following:
(1) Nearest street intersection.
(2) Nearest driveway on adjacent properties within the limits of the
safe sight distance.
(3) Locations of streets and driveways opposite the site and within the
limits of safe sight distance.
(4) Relevant property lines and property lines extended to the
driveway.
D. Sight distance in each direction from each proposed driveway.
E. Existing roadside gutters, ditches, swales or stormwater conveyance
structures located between the applicant's property lines which
intersect the roadway.
§ 109-5 JACKSON CODE § 109-5.1
99:254
§ 109-5.2. Review of plans.
§ 109-5.3. Permit fees.
The applicant shall pay to the Township an application fee, as established
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.70
§ 109-5.4. Permit issuance.
§ 109-5.5. Performance of work.
All grading, construction, installation and erection shall be in strict
compliance with the plans and specifications on the basis of which the
permit is granted.
§ 109-5.6. Permits requiring improvements construction guaranty.
When the applicant proposes construction or restoration of improvements
within the Township right-of-way or that will be dedicated to the Township,
the Township may require the applicant to deposit with the Township
financial security in the form of a corporate bond or letter of credit
acceptable to the Township Solicitor in an amount sufficient to cover the
F. Location, depth and size of proposed stormwater swales, pipes or other
appurtenances which will be used to convey stormwater issuing from,
or passing by, the proposed driveway.
G. Property owner's name, address and phone number.
H. Contractor's name, address and phone number.
A. Minimum use driveways. All plans for minimum use driveways shall be
reviewed by the Township Roadmaster or his designee for compliance
with the standards and requirements of this article. In addition, the
Township Engineer shall review all plans involving curbing or piping.
B. All other driveways. The Township Engineer shall review all plans for
low-, medium- and high-volume driveways.
A. General rule. A permit will be issued by the Township if the application
is in compliance with this article and other applicable laws and
ordinances. When appropriate, the permit may be issued subject to
specified conditions.
B. Driveway permits shall be issued in the name of the property owner(s).
C. The Township may alter plans filed with the application and specify any
changes or modifications of any kind which it deems necessary and may
make its approval of the granting of any permits subject to any such
alterations, changes or modifications.
70.Editor's Note: The current fees schedule is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 109-5.1 SEWERS § 109-5.6
99:255
costs of any improvements which may be required for dedication to the
Township. Such bond or other security shall provide for, and secure to the
public, the completion of any improvements which may be required within
this article.
§ 109-5.7. Work to conform to Township standards.
All work performed within the Township right-of-way shall be done at such
time and in such manner as shall be consistent with the safety of the public
and shall conform to the Jackson Township Construction and Materials
Specifications (as amended). If at any time it shall be found by the Township
that the work is not being done or has not been properly performed, the
permittee, upon written notification by the Township, shall, at his own
expense, immediately take the necessary steps to place the work into
conformance with such requirements or standards.
§ 109-5.8. Time limit for commencement of work.
If any work authorized by any permit under this article shall not have been
commenced within six months after the issuance of such permit, the permit
holder must relinquish such unused permit which shall thereupon become
invalid. The permit fee under these circumstances will not be returned or
applied toward any future permit.
§ 109-5.9. Inspection required prior to completion of work.
Within seven days of the completion of the rough grading of any such
improvements and prior to the paving or installation of any stone, the
applicant shall notify the Township Roadmaster or his designee that said
rough grading has been accomplished. Within seven days of this date,
the Township Roadmaster or his designee shall inspect the premises to
determine the compliance with the plans and the grades existing on the
driveway. No further construction activities shall be performed on the
driveway prior to inspection and approval by the Township Roadmaster or
his designee.
§ 109-5.10. Time limit for completion of work.
All driveway improvements shall be completed within 90 days of the
approval of the rough graded driveway by the Township Roadmaster or
his designee; subject, nevertheless, to extension granted by the Board of
Supervisors due to truly extraordinary circumstances, including but not
limited to extended inclement weather making work impractical or
impossible.
§ 109-5.11. Notification of completion of work.
Upon completion of any work authorized by the permit, the holder of such
permit shall report to the Township Roadmaster or his designee, in writing,
within 10 days of the date of completion. The Township Roadmaster or his
§ 109-5.6 JACKSON CODE § 109-5.11
99:256
designee shall make a final inspection within seven days of notification to
determine compliance with permit specifications.
§ 109-5.12. Design standards.
A. Angle of driveway approaches. Driveway approaches used for two-way
operation shall be positioned at right angles (90°) to the street or as
near thereto as site conditions permit. (See Figure Nos. 3 and 4.71)
B. Driveways adjacent to intersections.
(1) There shall be a minimum forty-foot distance between the street
right-of-way line of the intersecting street and the beginning of the
radius of the first permitted driveway or access drive. (See Figure
No. 6.72)
(2) This offset distance shall be considered the minimum distance; in
the case of medium- and high-volume driveways, the Township
Engineer may require additional offset distance as needed to
preserve safe sight distance and traffic flow.
C. Additional offsets.
(1) Driveways may not enter a public street:
(a) Within five feet of a fire hydrant.
(b) Within 25 feet of another driveway on the same property.
(c) Within three feet of an adjoining property line.
(2) All distances shall be measured beginning where the driveway
radius meets the cartway.
D. Curbing. The Township may require the permittee to install curbing to
facilitate drainage, or to prohibit vehicle encroachment upon the
sidewalk area, or as otherwise deemed necessary by the Township.
Where curb installation is required, the Township Engineer shall review
and approve both curbline and grade prior to construction.
E. Sight distance. Driveways shall be located at a point within the property
frontage limits which provides at least the minimum sight distance
computed in accordance with the criteria listed in the Jackson Township
Required Sight Distance Table (Appendix A73). The sight distance shall
be measured along the center line of the street cartway, from a height
of 3.75 feet to the height of an object which is 0.5 foot above the street
cartway. The point shall be 15 feet from the edge of paving on the
intersected street. If sight distance requirements as specified in
Appendix A cannot be met, the Township may:
71.Editor's Note: Figure Nos. 3 and 4 are included at the end of this chapter.
72.Editor's Note: Figure No. 6 is included at the end of this chapter.
73.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 109-5.11 SEWERS § 109-5.12
99:257
(1) Prohibit left turns by exiting vehicles;
(2) Restrict turning movements to right turns in and out of a driveway;
(3) Require installation of a right turn acceleration lane or
deceleration lane;
(4) Require installation of a separate left turn standby lane;
(5) Require alteration of the horizontal or vertical geometry of the
street; or
(6) Deny issuance of the permit.
F. Clear sight triangle. Proper sight lines must be maintained at all street
intersections. Clear sight measured along street center lines from their
point of junction shall be provided at all intersections, and no building,
structure, grade or planting higher than three feet above the center line
of the street shall be permitted within such sight triangles. The
following clear sight distances shall apply:
Class of Street
Distance Along
Major
(feet)
Distance Along
Minor
(feet)
Arterial 150 150
Collector 150 150
Minor 75 75
Driveway 75 25
G. Grade of driveway.
(1) All driveways shall be constructed so as not to impair drainage
within the right-of-way, alter the stability of the improved area or
change the drainage of adjacent areas.
(2) Where a drainage ditch or swale exists deeper than 10 inches, the
permittee shall install a pipe of adequate size under the driveway,
as approved by the Township Engineer. Wherever possible, pipes
under driveways shall be located outside of the Township right-ofway.
(3) No driveway shall be permitted to discharge stormwater directly to
the street, nor shall any driveway obstruct the roadside swale. In
lieu of a pipe, the permittee may be required to construct a swale
across the driveway to permit the unimpeded flow of stormwater
past the driveway.
(4) Cuts. Where a driveway enters a bank through a cut, unless a
retaining wall is used, the slope of the cut may not exceed 50% in
slope within 25 feet of the point at which the drive intersects the
§ 109-5.12 JACKSON CODE § 109-5.12
99:258
§ 109-5.13. Penalties for violation; enforcement.
street right-of-way. The height of the bank must not exceed three
feet within 10 feet of the roadway. (See Figure No. 2.74)
(5) Grade requirements in curbed and uncurbed streets shall conform
to Figure No. 1.75
H. Paving. The portion of a driveway within a street right-of-way, and for a
distance of 25 feet beyond that right-of-way, shall be paved with a
concrete, bituminous or other paving material acceptable to the
Township Engineer to prevent gravel or other loose material from being
carried onto the street. Materials used in the construction of driveways
within the public right-of-way shall conform to the Jackson Township
Construction and Materials Specifications.
A. Any violation of this article shall be enforced by equity suit for specific
performance in the Court of Common Pleas. The owner of the property
shall be responsible for all expenses, including but not limited to court
costs, engineering and attorney's fees incurred by the Township.
B. All judgments, costs and attorney's fees collected for the violation of
this article shall be paid over to the Township.
74.Editor's Note: Figure No. 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
75.Editor's Note: Figure No. 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 109-5.12 SEWERS § 109-5.13
99:259

ARTICLE II
Street Right-of-Way Occupancy
[Adopted 6-6-2006 by Ord. No. 165-0676]
§ 109-6. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Street Right-of-Way
Occupancy Ordinance of Jackson Township."
§ 109-7. Definitions; word usage.
A. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person making written application to the Township
for a right-of-way occupancy permit hereunder.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of the Township
of Jackson, York County, Pennsylvania.
EXCAVATION WORK — The excavation and other work permitted under
a right-of-way occupancy permit and required to be performed under
this article.
PERMIT — A document issued to an applicant by the Township to
authorize occupancy within a Township street, as defined herein.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been granted and has in full force
and effect a right-of-way occupancy permit issued hereunder.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or other organization of any kind, with the exception of any of
the foregoing which is performing work for or on behalf of the Township
or any authority created by the Township.
SPECIFICATIONS — The requirements set forth in the most current
version of the Construction and Material Specifications for Land
Development adopted by the Board of Supervisors of Jackson Township
from time to time.
STREET — Any Township public right-of-way occupied by a road, lane,
court, street, highway, alley, avenue, pedestrian walk or other public
way in the Township.
76.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Excavations by Utilities,
adopted 7-1-1974 by Ord. No. 4-74, as amended.
§ 109-6 SEWERS § 109-7
99:261
§ 109-8. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, dig up, break, excavate, tunnel
under, undermine or in any manner damage any street or to make or cause
to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street for any
purpose or to join any private driveway or road to any street or to place,
deposit or leave upon any street any earth, stone, concrete, asphalt or other
excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of
the street, or to place poles and cables in such street unless such person
shall first have obtained a permit therefor from the Township as herein
provided.
§ 109-9. Permit application.
No permit shall be issued unless a written application for the issuance of
same is submitted to the Township. The written application shall state the
name and address of the applicant; the nature, location and purpose of
the right-of-way; the date of commencement and date of completion of the
work; proof of PA One-Call Compliance and other data as may reasonably
be required by the Township. The application shall be accompanied by plans
showing the extent of the proposed work, the dimensions and elevations of
both the existing ground prior to said work and of the proposed restored
surfaces, the location of the work and such other information as may be
prescribed by the Township. If, in the opinion of the Township Engineer,
the work to be undertaken by the permittee is such that it will affect the
use of the properties abutting or adjoining the project, the permittee, at the
permittee's sole cost and expense, shall notify the affected property owners
or tenants of the proposed work to be done.
§ 109-10. Commencement of work and expiration of permits.
Work for which a permit has been issued pursuant to this article shall
commence within 30 days after the issuance of the permit therefor. If not
so commenced, the permit shall automatically be terminated. Every permit
issued hereunder shall expire at the end of the period of the time specified
in the permit. If the permittee shall be unable to complete the work within
the specified time, he shall, prior to the expiration of the permit, present
in writing to the Township a request for an extension of time, setting forth
therein the reasons for the requested extension. If, in the opinion of the
Township Engineer, such an extension is necessary and has been brought
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Jackson or its authorized employee,
agent or delegee.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — The Township Engineer or Acting Township
Engineer of the Township of Jackson.
UTILITY — Any public provider regulated by the PA PUC of water,
sanitary sewer, gas, electric, cable TV or internet service, telephone or
other utility service.
§ 109-7 JACKSON CODE § 109-10
99:262
about by no fault of permittee, the permittee may be granted additional time
for the completion of the work.
§ 109-11. Permit fees.
Before any permit shall be issued, the applicant shall pay to the Township
a permit fee as established by resolution from time to time by the Board of
Supervisors for any operation requiring a permit hereunder. No fee shall be
returned by the Township under any circumstances.
§ 109-12. Security.
The Township shall require the applicant to execute an agreement or
provide security, or both, as a prerequisite to issuance of the permit. If
security is required, it shall be delivered to the Township in a form and
amount acceptable to the Township and shall guarantee restoration and
maintenance of the street for a period of at least two years after the
acknowledged completion of the permitted work. If the security is executed
by a company registered and authorized to do business in this
commonwealth, the following documents are acceptable forms of security:
§ 109-12.1. Insurance.
§ 109-12.2. Routing of traffic.
The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that, during the
performance of the work, traffic conditions, as close to normal as
practicable, shall be maintained at all times so as to cause as little
A. An individual or blanket bond, in a form satisfactory to the Township
Solicitor, executed by the applicant and naming the Township as
obligee.
B. An irrevocable letter of credit, in a form satisfactory to the Township
Solicitor, signed by a bank officer naming the Township as sole
beneficiary, to be honored upon presentment.
C. An escrow account in a form acceptable to the Township Solicitor.
D. Cash deposit.
A. A permittee, prior to the commencement of work hereunder, shall
furnish the Township satisfactory evidence in writing that the permittee
has in force and will maintain in force during the performance of the
work and the period of the permit, public liability insurance of not less
than $500,000, for any one person, and $1,000,000 for any one
accident, and property damage insurance of not less than $250,000
duly issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. This section shall not apply to the joining of private driveways or roads
to any streets.
§ 109-10 SEWERS § 109-12.2
99:263
inconvenience as possible to the occupant of the abutting property and to
the general public, provided that the Township may permit the closing of
streets to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by it if, in its opinion,
it is necessary. The permittee shall route and control traffic, including its
own vehicles, as directed by the Police Department serving the Township.
The following steps shall be taken before any highway may be closed or
restricted to traffic:
§ 109-12.3. Clearance for fire equipment.
The work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with
access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Materials or obstructions shall not
be placed within 15 feet of fire hydrants.
§ 109-12.4. Protection of traffic.
The permittee shall utilize and maintain suitable trench stabilization to
reduce risk of collapse of trenches or other excavations in order to keep
potential damage to streets and risks to traffic at a minimum. The permittee
shall construct and maintain adequate and safe crossings over excavations
and across streets under improvement to accommodate vehicular and
pedestrian traffic at all street intersections. Vehicular crossings shall be
constructed and maintained of steel plates of adequate size secured in
place to accommodate vehicular traffic safely. Compliance with Township
specifications shall be required.
§ 109-12.5. Removal and protection of utilities.
A. At least 48 hours prior to rerouting of traffic, the permittee shall notify
the applicable Fire Department, Police Department, School District and
Township Public Works Department of any street proposed to be closed.
B. Upon completion of construction work, the permittee shall notify the
Township, the Police Department, Fire Department and School District
before traffic is moved back to its normal flow so that any necessary
adjustments may be made.
C. In all cases, flagmen shall be furnished by the permittee at its own
expense. Through traffic shall be maintained without the aid of detours,
if possible. In instances in which this would not be feasible, the
Township shall designate detours, which must be appropriately signed
and posted by the permittee at the permittee's expense. The Township
shall maintain roadway surfaces of existing highways designated as
detours without expense to the permittee, but in case there are no
existing highways, the permittee shall construct all detours at its
expense and in conformity with the specifications of the Township
Engineer. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage caused to
any street by the operation of its equipment.
A. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the
written consent of the Township and the utility company or person
§ 109-12.2 JACKSON CODE § 109-12.5
99:264
§ 109-12.6. Protection of adjoining property.
The permittee shall at all times and at his or its own expense preserve and
protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations
and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where in the protection
of such property it is necessary to enter upon private property for the
purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall
obtain written permission from the owner of such property for such
purpose. The permittee shall at its own expense shore up and protect all
buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the
progress of the work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or
private property or streets resulting from its failure properly to protect
and carry out said work. Whenever it may be necessary to trench through
any lawn area, compliance with Township specifications is required. All
construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated
to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as
nearly as possible to that which existed before such work began. The
permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which
exist in parking strip areas or easements across private property without
first having notified and obtained the consent of the property owner or, in
the case of public property, the Township.
§ 109-12.7. Protective measures.
The permittee shall erect such fence, railing or barriers about the site of
the work as shall prevent danger to persons using the Township streets
owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to remove an existing utility,
this shall be done by the utility. The cost of moving utilities shall be
borne by the permittee unless it makes other arrangements with the
person owning the utility. The permittee shall support and protect by
timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus
which may be in any way affected by the excavation work and do
everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over,
along or across said work. In the event any of said pipes, conduits,
poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, they shall be repaired by
the agency or person owning them and the expense of such repairs shall
be charged to the permittee, and his or its bond and cash deposit shall
be liable therefor. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage
done to any public or private property by reason of the breaking of
any water pipes, sewer, gas pipe, electric conduit or other utility and
its bond and cash deposit shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall
inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities
and protect the same against damage.
B. In the event a utility must be relocated due to work of the Township or
Township Authority, the owner of the utility shall relocate the same
within 120 days of written notification from the Township or Township
Authority. The utility shall bear the costs of relocation pursuant to
applicable law.
§ 109-12.5 SEWERS § 109-12.7
99:265
or sidewalks, and such protective barriers shall be maintained until the
work shall be completed or the danger removed. At twilight there shall
be placed upon such place of work and upon any excavated materials or
structures or other obstructions to streets suitable and sufficient lights
which shall be kept burning throughout the night during the maintenance
of such obstructions. It shall be unlawful for anyone to remove or tear down
the fence or railing or other protective barrier or any lights provided there
for the protection of the public.
§ 109-12.8. Construction specifications.
All work shall be in conformance with the Township specifications, which
may be amended by the Township Board of Supervisors from time to time.
§ 109-12.9. Restoration requirements.
A. Permanent restoration of the street shall be made by the permittee in
strict accordance with the Township specifications.
B. If the permittee opens pavement having bituminous concrete surface
and the Township's wearing course is less than five years old, the
permittee shall, in addition to the restoration conditions outlined in the
permit and in this section, overlay the pavement in accordance with the
following conditions:
(1) When any openings have been made by the permittee within the
paved area, the permittee shall overlay the traffic lanes in which
the openings were made, for 100 feet in either direction from the
edges of excavation.
(2) If disturbed lanes adjacent to shoulders are overlayed, the shoulder
shall be raised, with material and in a manner authorized by the
Township for the type of existing shoulder, so that the overlaid
pavement and shoulder edges are at the same elevation.
C. Regardless of the age of the wearing course:
(1) When any openings have been made by the permittee within the
paved area, the permittee may be required, at the sole discretion of
the Township, to overlay the traffic lanes in which the openings
were made, for 100 feet in either direction from the edges of
excavation.
(2) If disturbed lanes adjacent to shoulders are overlayed, the shoulder
may be required to be raised, at the sole discretion of the Township,
with material and in a manner authorized by the Township for the
type of existing shoulder, so that the overlaid pavement and
shoulder edges are at the same elevation.
D. Acceptance or approval of any work by the Township shall not prevent
the Township from asserting a claim against the permittee under the
cash deposit hereunder for incomplete or defective work if discovered
§ 109-12.7 JACKSON CODE § 109-12.9
99:266
§ 109-12.10. Failure to restore surface; responsibility for
maintenance.
§ 109-12.11. Trenches in pipe laying.
No more than 500 feet measured longitudinally shall be opened in any
street at any one time until the surface of the street is restored to a
condition safe and convenient for travel. Trenches shall be braced and
sheathed according to generally accepted safety standards for construction
work as prescribed by the Township. No timber bracing, lagging, sheathing
or other lumber shall be left in any trench.
§ 109-12.12. Noise, dust and debris.
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out the excavation work in such
manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the
general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall
take appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable, in
the performance of the excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris
and during the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall not use, except with
the express written permission of the Township or in case of an emergency
as herein otherwise provided, any tool, appliance or equipment producing
noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the
neighboring property.
§ 109-12.13. Urgent work.
If, in its judgment, traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the
traveling public or the public interest require that the excavation work be
performed as emergency work, the Township shall have full power to order,
within 24 months from the completion of the work. The Township's
presence during the performance of any work shall not relieve the
permittee of its responsibilities hereunder.
A. If the permittee shall have failed to restore the surface of the street to
its original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time fixed by
such permit or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation
work covered by such permit, the Township, if it deems it advisable,
shall have the right to do all work and things necessary to restore the
street and to complete the excavation work. The permittee shall be
liable for the actual cost thereof plus 15% of such cost in addition for
general overhead and administrative expenses. The Township shall
have a cause of action for all fees, expenses, including but not limited to
reasonable attorney's fees, as well as any other amounts paid out and/or
due it for such work and shall apply in payment of the amount due it any
funds of the permittee deposited as herein provided.
B. It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the site
of the excavation work in the same condition it was prior to the
excavation for two years after restoring it to its original condition.
§ 109-12.9 SEWERS § 109-12.13
99:267
at the time the permit is granted, that a crew of men and adequate facilities
be employed by the permittee 24 hours a day until the completion of such
excavation work so that it may be completed as soon as possible.
§ 109-12.14. Emergency action.
In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit or utility in
or under any street breaks, bursts or otherwise is in such condition as to
immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any individual,
the person owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit or utility,
without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit hereunder,
shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the
dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health and safety
of individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such facility
shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next
succeeding day during which the Township office is open for business
and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an
excavation permit hereunder.
§ 109-12.15. Preservation of monuments.
The permittee shall not disturb any surface monuments or hubs found on
the line of work until ordered to do so by the Township.
§ 109-12.16. Inspections.
The Township, or its agents, shall make such inspections as are reasonably
necessary in the enforcement of this article. The Township shall have the
authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and
regulations as may be reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out the
intent of this article.
§ 109-12.17. Drawings and maps.
Users of subsurface street space shall maintain accurate drawings, plans
and profiles showing current and abandoned installations. Corrected maps
shall be filed with the Township within 60 days after new installations,
changes or replacements are made.
§ 109-12.18. Applicability of provisions.
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to any work under the
direction of competent Township authorities by employees of the Township
or by any contractor of the Township performing work for and on behalf of
the Township or the Township Sewer Authority necessitating openings or
excavations in streets.
§ 109-12.19. Liability of Township.
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the Township or
any official or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any
§ 109-12.13 JACKSON CODE § 109-12.19
99:268
person injured by the performance of any work for which a permit is issued
hereunder; nor shall the Township or any official or employee thereof be
deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason
of inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit or the
approval of any work.
§ 109-12.20. Revocation of permits.
§ 109-12.21. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be determined
guilty and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not
exceeding $1,000 or, in default of the payment thereof, be imprisoned in the
county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder.
A. Any permit issued under this article may be revoked by the Township
after notice for violation of any condition of the permit or violation of
any provision of this article or any other applicable ordinance or law
relating to the work.
B. In the event that any work performed by or for a permittee shall, in the
opinion of the Township, be unsatisfactory and the same shall not be
corrected in accordance with its instructions within the time fixed by it
or in the event that the work for which the permit was granted is not
completed within the time fixed by the Township, the Township may
proceed to correct such unsatisfactory work or complete or cause to be
completed any such work not completed and charge the costs thereof,
plus 15% of such costs, to the permittee or his surety. Written notice of
such violation shall be served upon the person to whom the permit was
granted or his agent or employee engaged in the work. Such notice
shall also contain a brief statement of the reasons for revoking such
permit. Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the
person to be notified or by United States Mail addressed to such person
to be notified.
§ 109-12.19 SEWERS § 109-12.21
99:269

ARTICLE III
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 6-6-2000 by Ord. No. 121-00]
§ 109-13. Removal from sidewalk required.
§ 109-14. Violations and penalties; enforcement. [Amended
5-3-2016 by Ord. No. 208-16]
Any person, partnership, business, corporation or other entity violating
the provisions of this article may be ticketed for violating the provisions
of this article and, upon the issuance of a citation and conviction by a
District Justice, shall be guilty of a summary offense and shall pay a fine
of not less than $25 nor more than $600. Each day a violation exists shall
be considered a separate violation, subject to the same fines as set forth
above. It shall not be necessary to issue a separate citation for each day
of violation, but one citation shall be sufficient to cover multiple days of
obstructions. The Board of Supervisors hereby authorizes the Township
Manager, Township Public Works Foreman, Township Zoning Officer,
Township Code Enforcement Officer and any police officer serving the
Township to issue citations for violations of this Article III.
A. It shall be the duty of each and every owner or occupier of property in
the Township to remove any snow, ice or slush from the entire width of
sidewalks and around all fire hydrants in front of, alongside of or
adjoining their property.
B. Whenever a sidewalk continues to the curb on a property which is on
the corner of the intersection of two Township streets or alleys, the
obligation of the owner of that property shall include shoveling a path,
the width of the sidewalk, to the point at which the sidewalk meets the
cartway of the street or alley. The snow, ice or slush which is removed
from the property shall not be deposited, blown, thrown, placed or
strewn on any street, avenue or roadway within the Township.
C. The removal of the snow, ice and slush shall be completed within 24
hours after the fall of snow or other frozen precipitation shall cease.
When it is impossible to remove ice from sidewalks, antiskid material
shall be placed on a temporary basis. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner to keep the sidewalks and fire hydrants clear in accordance with
this section due to drifting, blowing, melting and refreezing, or as the
result of snow removal equipment redepositing snow in the process of
clearing roadways.
§ 109-13 SEWERS § 109-14
99:271

ARTICLE IV
Maintenance and Clearance of Streets and Sidewalks
[Adopted 6-3-2008 by Ord, No. 175-08]
§ 109-15. Duties of property owners.
It shall be the duty of the owners of every property located in Jackson
Township, York County, Pennsylvania, to do the following:
§ 109-16. Notice; action by Township.
A. To keep all public street cartways (paved area) and public sidewalks/
pedestrian paths free from obstructions such as fallen trees and/or
branches, recreational equipment, trailers that are not hitched to
properly licensed and inspected tow vehicles, and motor vehicles that
are not currently licensed or inspected.
B. To keep all trees on or in front of their property, with branches
extending over the cartway (paved area) of any public road or street,
trimmed or cut and kept trimmed or cut, such branches and limbs
thereof so extending, so as to maintain a clearance of at least 16 feet
above the cartway.
C. To keep all trees on such property with branches extending over any
public sidewalk or pedestrian path trimmed or cut and kept trimmed or
cut, such branches and limbs thereof so extending, so as to maintain a
clearance of at least eight feet above the sidewalk or path.
D. To keep all trees, shrubs, hedges or other vegetation trimmed or cut
and kept trimmed or cut so as not to obstruct the vision of motorists on
any public street bordering such property.
E. To keep all trees, shrubs, hedges or other vegetation trimmed or cut at
all intersection of streets, private roads and/or access drives in order to
maintain clear sight distances.
A. Any officer or employee of Jackson Township is hereby authorized to
give notice, by personal service or by United States Postal Service mail,
to the property owner, as the case may be, of any violation of the
provisions of this article, directing said owner to correct or conform to
the requirements of this article within 10 days after the service of said
notice by personal service or the mailing of said notice by United States
Postal Service mail.
B. In the event that the owner shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with
such notice within the period of time stated therein, the Township may
remove obstructing objects and/or trim obstructing trees, branches,
shrubs, hedges or other vegetation; and the cost thereof, together with
any additional penalties authorized by law, may be collected from the
owner by the filing of a municipal lien or by an action in assumpsit or in
§ 109-15 SEWERS § 109-16
99:273
§ 109-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of § 109-15 of this article shall be guilty
of a summary offense and shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary
proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 and not more
than $600, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof,
shall be imprisoned in the York County jail for a period not exceeding 30
days. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
any other manner provided by law for the enforcement and collection
of municipal claims.
§ 109-16 JACKSON CODE § 109-17
99:274
Chapter 113
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 47.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 69.
Sewers — See Ch. 99.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 107.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 109.
Zoning — See Ch. 133.
§ 109-17 SEWERS § 109-17
99:275

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 113-1. Title.
This chapter is titled “An ordinance of Jackson Township, York County,
Pennsylvania, providing for the regulation and control of the subdivision of
lots and the development of land; the approval of plans, plots, or replots
of land laid out in building lots; standards for the design of streets, lots,
easements, blocks and other improvements; certain minimum
improvements and construction standards on streets and improvements;
financial security requirements for improvements; the administration of
this chapter by the Jackson Township Planning Commission and Board of
Supervisors; and penalties for the violation of this chapter.”
§ 113-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "the Jackson Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance" of 2008.
§ 113-3. Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to create conditions favorable to the
health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens by:
§ 113-4. Applicability; compliance with other provisions.
A. Assisting in the orderly and efficient integration of subdivisions;
B. Ensuring conformance of subdivision plans with the public
improvements plans of the Township;
C. Ensuring sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation;
D. Facilitating the efficient movement of traffic and avoiding traffic
hazards and congestion;
E. Securing equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing
uniform procedures and standards;
F. Improving land records by establishing standards for surveys and
plans;
G. Safeguarding the interests of the public, the homeowner, the subdivider
and the municipality;
H. Preserving natural and historic features; and
I. Carrying out the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan and
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.77
77.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 113-1 SEWERS § 113-4
99:277
§ 113-5. Exemptions.
§ 113-6. Interpretation.
A. No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract, or parcel of land
shall be made, and no street, sanitary sewer main, water main or other
improvements required in connection with a proposed subdivision or
land development shall be constructed, opened or dedicated for use of
the public or the occupants of the proposed subdivision or land
development, and no building that first needs land development
approval shall be constructed, except in accordance with this chapter.
B. A lot or parcel that was not a legal lot of record prior to adoption of this
chapter shall not be created, sold or transferred, and no land
development may occur on a lot, unless and until:
(1) The subdivision of the lot and/or the approval of the land
development, as applicable, has been granted final plan approval
and any subdivision has been recorded; and
(2) Either of the following occurs, as provided in § 113-43:
(a) The Township has been assured by means of a development
agreement and guaranties acceptable to the Board of
Supervisors that the improvements will subsequently be
installed; or
(b) The required improvements in connection therewith have been
entirely completed.
C. Landowner. No subdivision or land development shall be submitted to
the Township for review except by the landowner of such land or his/her
specifically authorized agent (see definition of "landowner" in Article II,
which includes equitable owner).
D. Zoning. All subdivisions and land developments shall comply with
Chapter 133, Zoning, and other relevant Township codes and
ordinances.
A. Agriculture. The subdivision by lease of land solely for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new road
or easement of access or residential dwelling, shall be exempted from
the regulations of this chapter.
B. Revisions to Township regulations after submittal of an application.
Section 508(4) of the State Municipalities Planning Code shall apply.78
A. Standards.
78.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4).
§ 113-4 JACKSON CODE § 113-6
99:278
§ 113-7. Modifications and waivers.
(1) The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted and applied as
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, convenience and general welfare.
(2) Where provisions, standards, and specifications of this chapter
conflict with those of any state statute, other ordinance or
regulations, the more-restrictive requirement shall apply,
regardless of its source, unless specified to the contrary.
B. Illustrations. The illustrations in this chapter are for general illustrative
purposes and are not part of the regulations of this chapter.
A. An applicant seeking a modification or waiver to this chapter shall
submit to the Township staff a request, in writing, that states:
(1) The specific section(s) involved;
(2) The reasons for the request, indicating the grounds and facts of
unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based; and
(3) The minimum modification necessary.
B. The staff shall provide the request to the Planning Commission for a
recommendation. After the Planning Commission has had an
opportunity for review at a meeting, the Board of Supervisors may, in
writing, grant a waiver or modification to the specific requirements of
this chapter. The Planning Commission recommendation may be
provided in meeting minutes.
(1) This section is established under Sections 503(8) and 512.1 of the
State Municipalities Planning Code,79 which authorize waivers and
modifications "when the literal compliance with mandatory
provisions is shown to the satisfaction of the" Board of Supervisors
“to be unreasonable, to cause undue hardship or when an
alternative standard can be demonstrated to provide equal or
better results."
C. The applicant must prove that the request will meet the following
conditions:
(1) The modification will not be contrary to the public interest, and the
purpose and intent of this chapter is observed;
(2) It will avoid an undue hardship that was not self-created and that is
not financial in nature and that results from the peculiar and
uncommon conditions of the property; or
(3) It will allow an alternative standard that is clearly proven by the
applicant to provide equal or better results.
79.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10503(8) and 10512.1.
§ 113-6 SEWERS § 113-8
99:279
§ 113-8. Fees.
§ 113-9. Alternate plans; revisions and resubdivisions.
A. The Board of Supervisors has established a schedule of fees,
requirements for escrow accounts, and a collection procedure for all
applications and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The applicant
shall pay the reasonable charges by the Township's Engineer and other
professional consultants for review of the proposed project and for
related preparation of reports and meeting time. At the time of
submittal of a final plan, the applicant shall also be required to deposit
funds into the escrow account to pay the anticipated costs of the
Township's Engineer and other professional consultants to oversee the
system of financial security of improvements and for inspections. This
schedule of fees may be amended by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
B. The applicant is also required to pay any review fees and/or permits
required by the York County Planning Commission, the Township Sewer
Authority and the York County Conservation District, as well as any
other applicable agencies.
C. Plans shall not be considered filed until all fees are paid and the
applications are properly signed as required.
D. If the expenses of the Township for reviews of a subdivision or land
development exceed the total fees that have been paid or placed in
escrow by an applicant, additional funds shall be required to be
deposited by the applicant. If expenses exceed the amount placed into
escrow, such excess expenses shall be paid by the applicant prior to
release of the final plans by the Township for recording. If the funds
exceed the amount of the expenses, the excess shall be refunded to the
applicant.
E. If the applicant disputes the fees, the applicant can appeal in
accordance with Sections 503 and 510 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.80
A. Alternate plans. Only one plan concerning any one area of land shall be
before the Township for review at any one moment in time.
Simultaneously submitted alternate plans will not be considered.
B. Revisions and resubdivisions.
(1) Until a submission is approved or rejected by the Board of
Supervisors, the applicant may withdraw the submission and
submit a revised plan following the submission and review
procedures which apply to that plan. For any submittal of a revision
of a previously submitted plan, the Township may require the
80.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10503 and 10510.
§ 113-8 JACKSON CODE § 113-9
99:280
§ 113-10. Amendments to this chapter; required reviews.
§ 113-11. Appeals.
Decisions of the Board of Supervisors may be appealed in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
§ 113-12. Enforcement.
applicant to submit additional fees if needed based upon the
Township's expenditures on the review up to that time.
(2) A revision or resubdivision of a recorded plan or a final plan
approved by the Board of Supervisors shall be considered as a new
subdivision and shall comply with all of the regulations of this
chapter.
(3) If the Township staff determines that a revision of a previously
approved plan is only to correct erroneous data or minor omissions
or revise engineering details or supporting documentation, the
plan may be submitted under the simplified requirements and
procedures of § 113-40.
A. The regulations set forth in this chapter may, from time to time, be
amended by the Board of Supervisors, following the procedures of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, including a
Supervisors' public hearing (with public notice as required by the
Municipalities Planning Code).
B. Reviews. The Township shall submit each proposed amendment (other
than an amendment prepared by or under the direction of the Planning
Commission) to the Planning Commission for recommendations at least
30 days prior to the date set for the Supervisors' public hearing. The
Township shall submit any proposed amendment to the County
Planning Commission at least 30 days before the public hearing on such
amendment.
A. Inspectors. The Board of Supervisors shall authorize one or more
persons, which may include the Zoning Officer, Codes Administrator
and the Township Engineer and his/her representatives, to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and the accompanying design standards and
improvement specifications.
B. Inspection. Any action under this chapter is subject to on-site inspection
by the Township or its authorized representatives to ensure compliance
with this chapter, other Township ordinances and the approved plans.
C. Remedies. Any action inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to an enforcement notice, which may include a ceaseand-
desist order, and other appropriate measures by the Board of
Supervisors or its authorized representatives.
§ 113-9 SEWERS § 113-13
99:281
§ 113-13. Violations and penalties.
§ 113-14. Liability.
Neither the approval nor the granting of any building permit, floodplain
permit, site plan review, subdivision approval, land development approval,
zoning permit, erosion review, stormwater runoff review, wetland
delineation or wetland review, steep slope review or any other review or
permit of this chapter, involving any land governed by the provisions of
this chapter, by an officer, employee, consultant or agency of the Township
shall constitute a representation, guaranty or warranty of any kind by
the Township or its employees, consultants, officials or agencies of the
practicality or safety of any structure, use or subdivision and shall create no
liability upon nor a cause of action against any Township body, consultant,
official or employee for any damage that may result pursuant thereto.
§ 113-15. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that:
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated any
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Board of Supervisors
or its authorized representatives, pay a judgement of not more than
$500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred
by the municipality as a result thereof, unless a higher penalty is
established under state law. This shall include but not be limited to any
person, partnership or corporation that accomplishes any act listed
under § 113-4, Applicability; compliance with other provisions, without
following the applicable procedures of this chapter.
B. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or
other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
C. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice determining that there
has been a violation further determines that there was a good-faith
basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter to
have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice, and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. Imprisonment shall not be authorized as
a penalty under this chapter.
D. See also the "remedies" provisions of § 113-13C of this chapter. All fines
collected for such violations shall be paid over to the Township.
§ 113-13 JACKSON CODE § 113-15
99:282
§ 113-16. Repealer.
All other Township ordinances or parts thereof that were adopted prior
to this chapter and are clearly in conflict with this chapter, including the
preexisting Jackson Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, as amended, except any provisions that are specifically
referenced by this chapter, are hereby repealed.
§ 113-17. Municipalities Planning Code amendments.
The provisions of this chapter that only repeat, summarize or reference
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code81 shall be
deemed to be automatically superseded and replaced by any applicable
amendments to such provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code at the date such amendments become effective as state law.
§ 113-18. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective five days after enactment by the Board
of Supervisors.
§ 113-19. Enactment date.
This chapter is enacted and ordained into an ordinance this third day of
February 2009.
A. If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provisions of this
chapter to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of such
decision shall be limited to those provisions which are expressly stated
in the decision to be invalid or ineffective, and all other provisions of
this chapter shall continue to be separately and fully effective.
B. The Board of Supervisors hereby declares that it would have passed this
chapter and each section or part thereof irrespective of the fact that
any one or more sections or parts thereof be declared invalid.
81.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 113-15 SEWERS § 113-19
99:283

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 113-20. General interpretation.
§ 113-21. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the following meanings, unless expressly stated otherwise or unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ACCESS DRIVE — A private minor vehicular right-of-way, other than a
street, providing access from a street to a property or parking area within
a lot. Access drives shall be required for all commercial, institutional, and
industrial uses, and all multifamily dwellings.
ALLEY — A minor right-of-way, privately or publicly owned, primarily for
vehicular access to the rear of properties.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as defined in this section, who has
filed an application for development, including his/her heirs, successors,
and assigns.
AUTHORITY — Unless otherwise stated, the Jackson Township Sewer
Authority, or its successor agency.
AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC VOLUME — The total number of motor vehicles
traveling on a road or street during an average weekday, other than a
Friday, Saturday or Sunday.
BLOCK — An area of land or a lot or group of lots bounded by roads, public
parks, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses or bodies of water, boundary
lines of the Township or by any combination of the above.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of Jackson
Township.
BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT — The same meaning as "lot line
adjustment."
A. For the purposes of this chapter, words and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as listed in § 113-21 of this chapter.
B. If a word is not defined by this chapter but is defined by Chapter 133,
Zoning, as amended, then the Zoning Ordinance definition shall apply
to this chapter.
C. The word "includes" shall mean to specifically include an item but not
necessarily be limited to such items.
D. Any word or term not defined in this article or Chapter 133, Zoning,
shall have a meaning of standard usage as determined by the
Subdivision Administrator, within the context of the word's use within
the applicable section of this chapter.
§ 113-20 SEWERS § 113-21
99:285
CARTWAY — The paved portion of a highway improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the sidewalk or shoulder.
This term is also referred to as a “travelway” or “roadway.”
CHAPTER, THIS — The Jackson Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, as amended, and any provisions thereof, enacted
by the Board of Supervisors.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision in both
directions from a driveway, access drive or street intersection as viewed by
a driver. Said area is measured along the center lines of the intersecting
streets, driveways or access drives to a given distance point from their
intersection point. The third side of the triangle is a line access the corner
of the lot joining the ends of the other two sides.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A residential development that meets the
provisions for such a development in Chapter 133, Zoning, and that includes
the permanent preservation of substantial areas of common open space. See
also the requirements of § 113-65.
COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Jackson Township.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land, or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water, within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development,
including squares, greens, neighborhood parks, public parks, playgrounds,
tot lots, linear environmental corridors, and similar areas, but not including
the following:
COMMUNITY SEWER SYSTEM — A central sewage disposal system that
serves a given area and is not publicly owned.
COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM — A central water supply system that serves
a given area and is not publicly owned.
CONDOMINIUM — A type of ownership arrangement, not a land use,
wherein parts of a building typically are owned separately by persons, and
other parts, such as halls, stairs, and recreation areas, are owned jointly by
such persons. A condominium may be residential, commercial, or industrial
in nature. See also the definition in the State Uniform Condominium Act.82
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The York County Conservation District.
CONTOUR LINE — A line on a topographical map connecting points of like
elevation.
A. Streets/roads;
B. Off-street parking areas;
C. Stormwater facilities; and
D. Areas set aside for nonrecreation public facilities.
82.Editor's Note: See 68 Pa. C.S.A § 3101 et seq.
§ 113-21 JACKSON CODE § 113-21
99:286
CROSS SECTION — A profile of existing ground at right angles to the center
line.
CROWN — The height of the center of a roadway surface above its edges.
CULVERT — A pipe, conduit or similar structure, including appurtenant
works, which carries surface water.
CURB — The raised edge of a pavement that confines surface water to the
pavement and protects the abutting land from vehicular traffic.
CUT — To lower the level of the surface of an existing grade, or the vertical
distance from the existing ground surface to the planned grade line at a
given point.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and its
successor agencies.
DEVELOPER (or SUBDIVIDER) — Any landowner, agent of such landowner,
or tenant with the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to
be made a subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the
placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling operations and the
subdivision of land, as well as sewage disposal systems and water supply
systems.
DRIVEWAY — An improved surface for vehicular travel that provides access
between a street and a residential (except multifamily) or an agricultural
use lot.
DWELLING TYPES — The definitions in Chapter 133, Zoning, shall apply.
EASEMENT — A limited right of use granted on private land for public or
private use by another party or parties, or a protective condition, as in the
case of drainage easements for protection and/or preservation of a specified
area.
ENGINEER, PROFESSIONAL — A person licensed to practice as a
professional engineer in Pennsylvania.
ENGINEER, TOWNSHIP — The registered professional engineer
designated by the Board of Supervisors to perform all duties required of the
Township Engineer by the provisions of this chapter.
FINISHED GRADE — The proposed elevation of the land surface of a site
after the completion of all site preparation work.
FLOOD-PRONE AREA — A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a
stream, river or watercourse that is subject to partial or complete
inundation; or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or
runoff of surface waters from any source.
§ 113-21 SEWERS § 113-21
99:287
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas required to carry and discharge a flood of a given magnitude.
GRADE — The elevation of ground or paving.
GRADING — All construction operations between site clearing and building
or paving. Grading includes excavating, hauling, spreading and compacting
operations.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES — Paved surfaces that do not absorb
precipitation. This term shall include but not be limited to the following:
parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, patios, and any similar areas
of concrete, brick, or asphalt shall be considered impervious surfaces. In
addition, all buildings and structures shall be considered as impervious
surfaces for computations of lot coverage.
IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT — An agreement, in a form and manner
acceptable to Township, requiring a developer to install the improvements
required by this chapter or which appear on the official approved plans.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
Shall include any of the following activities, unless such definition
is revised by a later amendment of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code:
The improvement of one or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving either or both of the
following:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single principal
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups, or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
A.
The following activities are excluded from the definition of “land
development” only when such land development involves the following:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
(1)
The addition of an accessory structure, including a farm building,
on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(2)
B.
§ 113-21 JACKSON CODE § 113-21
99:288
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any conditions), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or any other person having
a proprietary interest in land.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed, or built upon as a
unit.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT — The revision or deletion of one or more lot lines
in such a way that all of the following are true:
LOT, REVERSE-FRONTAGE — A lot extending between and having frontage
on a local street and either an arterial or collector street, with vehicular
access solely from the local street. The front setback regulations of the
zoning district in which the lot is located shall apply to both street
frontages.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — An agreement, in a form and manner
acceptable to the Board of Supervisors, requiring the developer of required
improvements to make any repairs or reconstructions and to maintain such
improvements for a certain period.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Financial security which is acceptable to
the Township to secure the promise made by a developer in the
maintenance agreement that required improvements shall be maintained
by the developer. (NOTE: These guaranties typically include acceptable
letters of credit, performance bonds, escrow agreements, and other similar
collateral or surety agreements).
MAJOR AND MINOR SUBDIVISIONS — See “subdivision, major” and
“subdivision, minor.”
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise that would be considered an amusement park.
For purposes of this subsection, an “amusement park” is defined
as a tract or area used principally as a location for permanent
amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to
newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans
for the expanded area have been approved by proper authorities.
(3)
A. No new lots will be created beyond what was previously approved;
No additional road/street segments or significant changes in alignment
are proposed other than what was previously approved;
B.
No additional nonconformities will be created under Chapter 133,
Zoning; and
C.
No new land development will occur other than a land development that
was previously approved or buildings to support crop farming.
D.
§ 113-21 SEWERS § 113-21
99:289
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land that has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME SALES LOT — An open lot for the outdoor display of new
or used mobile homes.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — The Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.83
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
occur every 100 years (such as that has a one-percent chance of occurring
each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
OPEN SPACE — The area of a lot unoccupied by principal or accessory
structures, streets, driveways, or parking areas, but which may include
areas occupied by walkways, picnic pavilions, play equipment and other
noncommercial outdoor recreation facilities.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — See “common open space.”
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — Common open space owned by a government
agency or the Township for public recreation.
PATHWAY — A pedestrian accessway which is not adjacent to a road/street
or access drive and conforms with this chapter.
PennDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Financial security which is acceptable to
the Board of Supervisors to ensure that the developer will install required
improvements. (NOTE: This typically includes irrevocable letters of credit,
performance bonds, escrow agreements, and other similar collateral or
surety agreements).
PLAN — A map of a land development or subdivision and accompanying
notations.
SKETCH PLAN — An informal plan, identified with the title "sketch
plan" on the map, indicating the general layout of the proposed
subdivision or land development.
A.
83.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 113-21 JACKSON CODE § 113-21
99:290
PLANNING COMMISSION — Unless otherwise stated, the Jackson
Township Planning Commission.
PROFILE — A line on a drawing which shows elevations of points along a
selected route. A profile usually shows both ground elevations and grade
elevations.
PUBLIC MEETING, REGULAR PLANNING COMMISSION — A regular
meeting of the Township Planning Commission at which such Commission
is authorized to conduct official action and which has been scheduled based
upon an annual meeting schedule (as may be adjusted by the Chairperson)
and which is not a workshop meeting or the official public meeting on an
ordinance amendment.
PUBLIC NOTICE — As defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code. (NOTE: As of 2008, this included the following definition: "Notice
published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. Such notice shall state the time and
place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered
at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the
second publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing.")
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewage disposal system that is owned and operated by
a local government authority or by a local public utility company controlled
by a government authority.
PUBLIC WATER — A water supply system that is owned and operated by a
local government authority or by a local public utility company controlled
by a government authority.
RECREATION LAND — Land intended for noncommercial recreation by
residents of a development or by the general public and which meets the
requirements of § 113-65.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A legal right of passage across land occupied or intended
to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric or
telecommunication transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main,
sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or for another special use.
If the right-of-way involves maintenance by a public agency, it shall be
dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way
is established.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A system designed to collect, treat and
dispose of sewage from users in compliance with regulations of the PADEP
and the Township.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — A complete plan, identified with the title
"preliminary plan," accurately showing proposed roads/streets and lot
layout and such other information as required by this chapter.
B.
FINAL PLAN — A complete and exact plan, identified with the title
"final plan," including the plan prepared for official recording as
required by this chapter.
C.
§ 113-21 SEWERS § 113-21
99:291
SIDEWALK — A pedestrian accessway which is adjacent to a road/street or
access drive and conforms to the regulations of this chapter.
SOIL SURVEY — The latest version of the Official Soil Survey of York
County, published by the United States Natural Resource (formerly "Soil")
Conservation Service, or more updated and detailed information prepared
by such agency.
STATE or COMMONWEALTH — The government of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania (PA) and its relevant subparts.
STATE PLANNING CODE — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.84
STEEP SLOPE — An area of 15% or greater slope calculated by determining
the vertical difference in feet per 100 feet of horizontal distance.
STREET — A public or private way, excluding driveways, alleys, and access
drives, that affords the principal means of access to abutting properties,
intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians. It includes street,
avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, viaduct, and any other
dedicated and accepted public right-of-way or private right-of-way. The
terms "street" and "road" shall have the same meaning.
STREET CLASSIFICATIONS — The functional classifications of streets shall
follow the Transportation Plan Map in the Comprehensive Plan. Such
classifications may be amended through an amendment of the
Comprehensive Plan or an amendment of this chapter.
CENTRAL SEWAGE SERVICE — Service by a sewage disposal system
which collects, treats and disposes of sewage from more than one lot.
PUBLIC SEWAGE SERVICE — Service by public sewer, as defined
above.
(1)
COMMUNITY SEWER SERVICE — Service by a community sewer
system, as defined above.
(2)
A.
ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage disposal system which collects,
treats and disposes of sewage or holds sewage from only one lot.
B.
ARTERIAL STREET — A street that primarily provides connections to
areas with a population of 25,000 persons and over. An arterial street
is typically owned and maintained by the state and typically has an
average daily traffic exceeding 3,500 vehicles. Arterials within Jackson
Township are divided into the following types:
RURAL PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL STREET — A non-interstate
principal arterial highway that is located outside of major
urbanized areas and that serves a higher amount of traffic than a
rural minor arterial street.
(1)
A.
84.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 113-21 JACKSON CODE § 113-21
99:292
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A type of street which is terminated at one end
by a permitted turnaround and which intersects another street at the other
end.
STREET, CUL-DE-LOOP OR P-STREET — A street that turns into and
reconnects with its main axis, with lot area remaining between the two
segments of street, and which has a single point of access from the cul-deloop
street to any preexisting street.
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon which
a lot fronts or, in its absence, the established grade of other streets upon
which the lot abuts at the midway of the frontage of the lot thereon. If there
is no officially established grade, the existing grade of the street at such
midpoint shall be the street grade.
RURAL MINOR ARTERIAL STREET — An arterial street that forms
a network to link cities and towns (and other generators that
are capable of attracting travel over similarly long distances) and
that forms an integrated network providing primarily intercounty
service.
(2)
COLLECTOR STREET — A street that collects traffic from local streets
and directs that traffic to arterial streets. A collector street typically
is designed to eventually serve 1,500 to 3,500 vehicles per day. All
existing collector streets within Jackson Township are currently
classified by the Comprehensive Plan as rural minor collectors.
Collector streets within Jackson Township are divided into the following
types:
MAJOR COLLECTOR STREETS — This type of collector street
is designed to provide service to towns that are not served by
streets with a higher classification and to other traffic generators
of equivalent intercounty importance and then to link this traffic
with nearby larger towns and routes of higher classification. This
type of street also serves important intercounty travel corridors.
(1)
MINOR COLLECTOR STREETS — This type of collector street
is designed to be spaced at intervals, consistent with population
density, to collect traffic from local streets and bring all developed
areas within a reasonable distance of a collector street. This type of
street also provides service to the remaining smaller communities
and links locally important traffic generators with the rural
hinterland.
(2)
B.
LOCAL STREET or LOCAL ACCESS STREET — This type of street
primarily is designed to provide access to adjacent land and provide
travel over relatively short distances, compared to collector streets.
C.
ALLEY — A minor right-of-way, privately or publicly owned, primarily
for vehicular access to the rear of properties.
D.
§ 113-21 SEWERS § 113-21
99:293
STREET LINE — A line defining the edge of a street right-of-way and
separating the street from abutting property or lots. This is commonly
known as the street "right-of-way line."
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS — A type of local street which is parallel
and adjacent to collector or arterial streets and provides access to abutting
properties.
STREET, PRIVATE — A street that is not owned or maintained by the state
or the Township.
STREET, PRIVATE ACCESS — A vehicle accessway that connects residential
lots to an approved street where the residential lots do not abut the
approved street. A private access street shall have a minimum right-of-way
of 20 feet. Construction and maintenance of a private access street shall be
the sole responsibility of owners benefitted by the use of the street and shall
not be offered to the municipality for public maintenance.
SUBDIVIDER — See "developer."
SUBDIVISION —
SUBDIVISION ADMINISTRATOR or PLAN ADMINISTRATOR — The staffperson(
s) charged by the Board of Supervisors with the responsibility of
administering the subdivision application submission procedure. Said staff
persons shall be the Township Engineer and Zoning Officer of Jackson
Township, unless the Board of Supervisors designates an alternative person.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — A subdivision involving:
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision involving five lots or fewer and
which involves no new streets or other public improvements, except curbs
and street widening required along a public street.
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE — The Jackson Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, as amended.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — In the judgment of the Township
Engineer, at least 90% (based upon the cost of the required improvements
for which financial security was posted) of those improvements required
The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means
into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to
heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development.
A.
The subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into a parcel
of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or residential dwellings, is not a subdivision.
B.
A. Six or more lots; or
Five or fewer lots and requiring new streets or other public
improvements (other than curbs and street widening required along a
public street).
B.
§ 113-21 JACKSON CODE § 113-21
99:294
as a condition for final approval have been completed in accordance with
the approved plan, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or
operated for its intended use.
TOWNSHIP — Jackson Township, York County, Pennsylvania. Unless
otherwise stated, this shall mean the Board of Supervisors and its
authorized agents.
USGS — United States Geological Survey, or its successor agency.
VEHICLE TRIP — A vehicle movement in one direction, with the origin or
destination within the study area.
WALKWAY — A strip of land, including a right-of-way, dedicated to public
use in order to facilitate pedestrian access through or into a block.
WATER, CENTRAL SYSTEM OR SERVICE — Service by a water system
which transmits water from a common source to more than one lot.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial waterway, stream, river, creek,
ditch, channel, millrace, canal, conduit, gully, ravine or wash in which water
flows in a definite direction or course, either continuously or intermittently,
and which has a definite channel and bed, and shall include any area
adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow of floodwaters.
WATER, ON-LOT SYSTEM OR SERVICE — Service by a water system which
transmits water from a source on the lot to only one lot.
COMMUNITY WATER SERVICE — Service by a community water
system, as defined above.
A.
PUBLIC WATER SERVICE — Service by a public water system, as
defined above.
B.
§ 113-21 SEWERS § 113-21
99:295

ARTICLE III
Overview of General Procedures
§ 113-22. Purpose.
This article summarizes the general procedures for the submission and
review of proposed subdivisions and land developments. This article is only
a general explanation and is not binding on the Township or an applicant.
See the actual provisions of the other articles of this chapter.
§ 113-23. General procedure for subdivisions and land
developments.
A. Review and approval stages. Three types of plan submissions are
established: sketch, preliminary, and final, as outlined below.
Type of Proposed Subdivision or Land
Development*
Stage
Article of
this Chapter
Land
Development
Major
Subdivision
Minor Subdivision
or Lot Line
Adjustment
Sketch plan Article IV Recommended Recommended Recommended
Preliminary
plan***
Article V Required**** Required*** Not required
Final plan Article VI Required Required Required**
Guaranty of
improvements
installation
See Article VIII
Recording of
final plan
See Article IX
NOTES:
* See definitions in Article II.
** See Article VII for minor subdivision final plan submission and review
requirements. See § 113-40 for submission requirements for a lot line
adjustment.
*** At its option, the Board of Supervisors may grant combined preliminary/final
plan approval if the preliminary plan submission meets the requirements of a
final plan submission and if the Board of Supervisors determines that there are
no outstanding matters.
**** Except where exempted by § 113-29.
B. Sketch plan. While a sketch plan is not required, it is strongly
recommended that it be filed to allow the applicant to consult early and
informally with the Planning Commission before preparing a
preliminary plan. This will often avoid expensive redesign and delay to
the applicant.
§ 113-22 SEWERS § 113-23
99:297
§ 113-24. General plan submission procedures.
C. Preliminary plan. Preliminary plans are required to be submitted for
any major subdivision and for certain land developments, as described
above.
D. Final plan. After approval of the preliminary plan of a major subdivision
or certain land developments, and to obtain approval of a minor
subdivision, the applicant files a final plan. A final plan must be
approved by the Township Board of Supervisors prior to recording of
the plans at the County Recorder of Deeds' office and prior to the sale of
any lots or the construction of any buildings. (See Article IX.)
E. Guaranty of improvements installation. Where improvements are
required by this chapter, in most cases, the Township will require that
the applicant enter into a development agreement and/or require the
posting of financial security sufficient to guarantee the costs of any
improvements which may be required. (See Article VIII).
A. Submission. Sketch, preliminary and final plans and all required
accompanying information are required to be submitted to the
Township staff by delivery in person.
B. Attendance. The applicant or his/her duly authorized representative
should endeavor to attend the Commission meeting to discuss the filed
plans. If the applicant fails to appear at a meeting where the plans will
be considered, it may result in plan disapproval, if the Township
determines that it resulted in insufficient information to render
approval.
C. Action by the Commission and the Board of Supervisors. The Planning
Commission advises the Board of Supervisors on proposed plans. The
Board of Supervisors has the authority to approve or deny those plans.
There are time limits in state law for approval of a subdivision or land
development, unless the applicant grants a time extension.
§ 113-23 JACKSON CODE § 113-24
99:298
ARTICLE IV
Sketch Plan
§ 113-25. Pre-plan consultation.
Prior to submitting a sketch plan, applicants for developments are
encouraged to informally discuss their proposal with the Zoning Officer and/
or other appropriate Township staff. See also discussion of a site tour in
§ 113-28.
§ 113-26. Sketch plan submission requirements.
Prior to the submission of a preliminary plan, applicants are very strongly
encouraged to submit a sketch plan. A sketch plan review often allows an
applicant to save substantial time and engineering costs, because many
concerns about layout and issues concerning Township ordinances can be
resolved prior to detailed engineering. This can often reduce the need
for future redesign at a more-detailed stage, thereby saving the applicant
significant money and time. When submitted, sketch plans shall include the
following information:
A. Submission requirement. If submitted, seven print copies of the sketch
plan and the accompanying application should be submitted to the
Township staff prior to a regular Township Planning Commission
meeting. It is requested that a sketch plan be provided at least seven
days before a Planning Commission meeting where it will be discussed.
B. Drawing requirements. Any sketch plan shall be drafted to approximate
scale and is recommended to include the following, as applicable:
(1) Boundary line of the development.
(2) Existing resources and site analysis map: the approximate location
of the following:
(a) Any concentrations of steeply sloped lands (such as 15% to
25%, and greater than 25%).
(b) Locations of watercourses (with any name), natural springs,
ponds, lakes and suspected wetlands. (NOTE: Applicants are
requested to review the locations of hydric soils in the York
County Soil Survey to provide an initial indication of areas that
are likely to include some wetland areas.)
(c) Any known sinkholes and topical depressions.
(d) Any areas within the one-hundred-year floodplain.
(e) Suggestions from the applicant regarding possible locations of
any proposed common open space or recreation land or
whether the applicant seeks to pay recreation fees, if
applicable.
§ 113-25 SEWERS § 113-26
99:299
(f) Any major easements or proposed recreation trails, existing
trails and trail easements.
(g) Major existing utility easements/rights-of-way that might affect
development layout.
(h) Approximate locations of tree lines and existing forested areas.
(3) Conceptual proposed lot and street layout with approximate areas
of lots (such as "two acres").
(4) Site data, including:
(a) Acreage of the entire tract.
(b) Number of lots and types of dwelling units (if residential).
(c) Zoning district and major applicable lot area and setback
requirements.
(5) North point and scale and a tentative name of the project (may be
the developer's name).
(6) Approximate proposed locations of any nonresidential buildings (if
known) and statement of the general proposed types of any
nonresidential uses.
(7) A map showing the general location of the project in relation to
nearby roads/streets and creeks (may be a photocopy of USGS or
Township base map or a commercial map).
(8) Tentative approximate locations of any stormwater detention
basins and any major stormwater drainage channels.
(9) Note stating the general methods of providing water and sewer
service.
(10) Names of any adjacent nonresidential uses and any zoning district
boundaries in the area.
(11)Name and address of person responsible for the preparation of the
plan and the date of preparation.
C. Site design process. See § 113-32, which requires applicants for certain
subdivisions and land developments to submit maps showing how their
project follows the site design process. If this provision is not met at the
sketch plan stage, then it must be met at the preliminary plan
submission.
(1) Applicants are strongly encouraged to submit these maps as part of
the sketch plan process, to avoid delays to the applicant in
preliminary plan approval. Submittal at the sketch plan stage will
greatly increase the likelihood that all issues will be able to be
resolved in a timely manner.
§ 113-26 JACKSON CODE § 113-27
99:300
§ 113-27. Sketch plan review procedures.
A. No official action shall be taken on a sketch plan. The Township shall
not be bound by comments made or not made as part of a sketch plan
review.
B. The Township should distribute copies of the sketch plan to the
Township Engineer, the relevant Township staff person and the
Planning Commission for advisory reviews.
C. The sketch plan should be reviewed by the Planning Commission and
the Board of Supervisors, with any comments reported to the applicant
or his/her representative. It is recommended that the following matters
be emphasized in a review of a sketch plan:
(1) The suitability of areas proposed for development and areas
proposed as open space, considering the process of § 113-32.
(2) The most suitable methods of providing street access, including
access points onto existing streets, and possible interconnections
with existing streets or streets within approved developments.
(3) Methods to reduce the total percentage of the site that will be
regraded, paved or deforested.
D. County review. The Township may forward a copy of the sketch plan to
the York County Planning Commission for any informal review if the
Township believes it may have significant impacts.
§ 113-27 SEWERS § 113-27
99:301

ARTICLE V
Preliminary Plans for Major Subdivisions and Certain Land
Developments
§ 113-28. Initial steps.
§ 113-29. Submission and review procedure.
A. Presubmission consultation. As described in § 113-25, applicants are
encouraged to informally discuss their proposals with applicable
Township staff persons or other Township officials before preparing
engineered plans.
B. Site tour. Applicants are very strongly encouraged to cooperate in an
on-site tour of the property by Township officials. See the language in
the application form that requests permission for a site tour. This site
tour should be scheduled as soon as possible after the applicant has
provided copies of a map of existing conditions. At best, this would
occur after a sketch plan has been submitted but before preliminary
plans have been completed.
(1) This site tour is intended to informally:
(a) Familiarize Township officials with the property's existing
features, particularly including scenic views and the site's
relationship to surrounding areas;
(b) Identify potential site design issues that will need to be
addressed; and
(c) Discuss site design concepts, including the general layout of
proposed development and open spaces.
(2) Comments made during the site visit shall not be binding upon the
Township, and no formal action or recommendation shall be made
during the site visit.
C. Sketch plan. Prior to the submission of a preliminary plan, applicants
are very strongly encouraged to submit a sketch plan. A sketch plan
review often allows an applicant to save substantial time and
engineering costs, because many concerns about layout and issues
concerning Township ordinances can be resolved prior to detailed
engineering. This can often reduce the need for future redesign at a
more-detailed stage, thereby saving the applicant significant money
and time.
(1) No official action is required on a sketch plan, so it will not delay
the submittal of a preliminary plan.
A. Preliminary plan submission required.
(1) A preliminary plan submission for a major subdivision or land
development [except as provided in Subsection A(2) below]
§ 113-28 SEWERS § 113-29
99:303
meeting all of the requirements of this article shall be filed by the
applicant and reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
(2) A preliminary plan submission is not required for the following
applications, which instead shall meet the requirements in Article
VII:
(a) A minor subdivision (as defined in Article II);
(b) A submission that only involves a lot line adjustment (as
defined in Article II) or minor adjustments to a previously
approved plan as specified in § 113-40 or a merger or
consolidation of lots (also referred as reverse subdivision); or
(c) A land development that involves only one principal
nonresidential building or addition of less than 3,000 square
feet of building floor area on one lot without any additional
dwelling units.
B. Filing and distribution.
(1) The applicant shall file with the Township staff, at least 25 calendar
days prior to a regular Township Planning Commission meeting
(not including a workshop meeting): the required fees and the
information and plans required under § 113-30.
(a) Any subsequent submittal of revised plans shall be submitted
at least seven calendar days before a Planning Commission
meeting where the plans are intended to be reviewed, unless
permission is granted for a later submittal by the Township
Engineer, particularly when a revision only involves minor
technical changes or corrections.
(b) If the Planning Commission determines that a submittal is
significantly incomplete, it may recommend to the Board of
Supervisors that the application be denied. An application may
be denied if it is significantly incomplete.
(2) The Township staff shall forward applicable plans and documents
to the following persons or agencies to seek their comments prior
to preliminary plan approval:
(a) Sewer Authority (if applicable).
(b) Township Fire Marshal.
(c) The Township Planning Commission, provided prior to the first
regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting after a
complete submission.
(d) United States Postal Service and York County 911.
§ 113-29 JACKSON CODE § 113-29
99:304
(3) Applicant's distribution. The applicant is fully responsible for the
following:
(a) Contacting the appropriate utility authorities/companies, as
appropriate, including the water supplier, to determine
availability of service.
(b) Seeking at least an informal review by PennDOT of any
proposed access onto a state road and providing PennDOT with
sufficient information for such a review.
(c) Determining whether any permits or approvals are needed
from any agency outside of the Township, including the DEP
(including any obstruction to a waterway) and the Army Corps
of Engineers (including determining whether any wetland will
be disturbed).
(d) Providing a copy of the sedimentation and erosion control
plans to the York County Conservation District, together with
its required review fees, if any earth disturbance is proposed,
unless the applicant states, in writing, in a signed letter to the
Township, that earth disturbance will not occur until approval
of the final plan (in which case the erosion control plan may be
submitted at the final plan stage).
(e) Adjacent municipalities. If any portion of a major subdivision or
land development is proposed within 200 feet of the boundary
of another municipality or would clearly have a regional impact
upon another municipality, as determined by the Township
Planning Commission, then the applicant shall provide a copy
of the layout plan to that municipality for an advisory review.
(f) Providing a copy of the plans and required fees to the York
County Planning Commission.
(g) Providing copies and making submittals to the Township and
review agencies as required under the Pennsylvania DEP's
sewage planning module process, if applicable.
(h) Providing materials needed by the Sewage Enforcement
Officer, if applicable.
(4) Notice to adjacent landowners. At the time of initial submittal of a
preliminary plan for any land development or major subdivision,
the applicant shall mail written notice of the proposal to all owners
of property that is contiguous or directly across a road from the
subject property. Such notice shall include the date, time and place
of the first Planning Commission meeting at which the application
is expected to be reviewed, with the phone number of the Township
Building. Such notice shall include a brief description of the
location of the proposed subdivision or land development and state
that copies of the proposal may be reviewed at the Township
§ 113-29 SEWERS § 113-29
99:305
Building. The notice shall state that meetings of the Township on
the proposal are open to the public.
(a) Such notices shall be mailed by United States mail with return
receipt requested at the applicant's expense. The applicant
shall furnish the Township with return receipts or other
evidence of compliance with this section prior to final plan
approval.
(5) Each preliminary plan and supporting documents should seek to
incorporate any revisions recommended by the Township and York
County Planning Commissions, the Township Engineer and other
appropriate Township officials during any sketch plan review.
(6) Colored layout plan. It is suggested that the applicant provide one
copy of the layout plan that is lightly colored to highlight major
features (such as paving, trees, waterways, streets, wetlands and
building locations, if known) to allow clear understanding by the
general public at public meetings.
(7) Revisions. A detailed list of revisions from a previously submitted
plan shall be provided whenever a revised plan is submitted. The
developer's plan preparer shall certify that the list of revisions is
complete.
C. Review by Township Engineer.
(1) After the plans are duly submitted for review (unless the plans are
significantly incomplete), the Township Engineer should review the
engineering considerations of the preliminary plan and prepare a
report on such considerations to the Planning Commission.
(2) The Township Engineer may make additional reports and
recommendations to the Commission and the Board of Supervisors
during review of the plan.
(3) The applicant and/or his/her engineer should make reasonable
efforts to resolve technical engineering considerations outside of
and prior to Planning Commission meetings.
(4) A copy of findings of the Township Engineer shall be sent or handed
in person to the applicant or his/her representative.
D. Review by Commission. The Planning Commission shall accomplish the
following within the time limitations of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (unless the applicant grants a written time extension),
while allowing a sufficient number of days within this deadline for a
decision by the Board of Supervisors:
(1) Review applicable reports received from any official reviewing
agencies.
§ 113-29 JACKSON CODE § 113-29
99:306
(2) Provide a recommendation regarding whether the preliminary plan
submission meets the requirements of this chapter and other
applicable ordinances.
(3) Recommend any revisions to the submission that are needed to
comply with this chapter or that would generally improve the plan.
(4) Recommend approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the
preliminary plan submission in writing, via Commission minutes to
the Board of Supervisors, that should: specify any recommended
conditions for approval, identify defects found in the application,
describe requirements which have not been met, and cite the
provisions of the ordinance relied upon.
E. Review and action by Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors
shall:
(1) Review the recommendation of the Commission and any reports
that have been received from reviewing agencies.
(2) Determine whether the preliminary plan submission meets the
requirements of this chapter and other ordinances.
(3) Approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the preliminary plan
submission within the time limits required by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code. (As of adoption date of this chapter,
this law requires:
(a) The Board of Supervisors to act not later than 90 days
following the date of the first regular meeting of the
Commission held after the preliminary plan has been properly
filed for review; but in no case shall the Board of Supervisors'
decision be made later than 90 days following the date the
submission was accepted as being filed for review, unless the
applicant grants a written extension of time; and
(b) That no subdivision or land development shall be granted final
approval until a report is received from the County Planning
Commission or until the expiration of 30 days from the date the
application was forwarded to the County Planning
Commission, whichever comes first.)
F. Decision by Board of Supervisors.
(1) The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing and
shall be communicated to the applicant personally or by mail at his/
her last known address not later than 15 days following the
decision.
(2) Approval of the preliminary plan submission shall constitute
approval of the subdivision or land development as to the character
and intensity but shall not constitute approval of the final plan or
authorize the sale of lots or construction of buildings.
§ 113-29 SEWERS § 113-29
99:307
§ 113-30. Preliminary plan requirements.
See § 113-29A regarding when a preliminary plan is required.
(3) If the preliminary plan submission is disapproved, the decision
shall: specify defects found in the submission, describe
requirements which have not been met and cite the provisions of
the statute or ordinance relied upon in each case.
(4) At the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, the Board may grant
combined preliminary/final plan approval if the preliminary plan
submission also meets all of the requirements of a final plan
submission and the Board determines that there are no significant
outstanding matters regarding the plan.
(5) Acceptance of conditions. If conditions are placed upon an
approval, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant or his
authorized representative, in writing, to accept or reject the
conditions within a maximum of 30 days after the date of the
decision. If the applicant fails to accept or reject the conditions
within such time period, then it shall be presumed that the
applicant has accepted all of the conditions upon the approval. If
the applicant rejects any condition within such time period, then
the approval shall be rescinded, unless a decision of a court
determines such condition was not valid.
(a) The applicant shall be required to show compliance with all the
conditions upon the final plan approval within one year after
the date of the decision by the Board of Supervisors, unless a
written extension is granted by the Board of Supervisors.
G. Final plan submission deadline.
(1) An applicant shall file a final plan within five years from the date of
the approval of the preliminary plan by the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Failure to comply with this requirement shall render the
preliminary plan null and void, and a new preliminary plan
submission and approval shall be required.
H. Development in stages. See § 113-34H.
A. All of the following information and materials listed in this section are
required as part of all preliminary plan submissions for any land
development and any major subdivision. This list of requirements shall
serve both to establish the requirements and as a checklist for the
applicant and the Township to use to ensure completeness of
submissions. The applicant shall submit completed photocopies of the
checklist in § 113-30C as part of the application.
§ 113-29 JACKSON CODE § 113-30
99:308
§ 113-31. Certification.
All certifications shall comply with the state professional licensing laws. All
subdivisions of land shall be certified and stamped by a registered land
surveyor. At least one set of all plans provided to the Township, including
revisions, shall bear original signatures and original seals of plan preparers,
which shall be marked as a "Township file copy."
§ 113-32. Site design process.
As part of the submittal of a sketch plan or preliminary plan, whichever
comes first, for a major subdivision or land development that involves over
10 acres of land for a nonresidential project or 20 or more dwelling units for
a residential project, the applicant shall provide the following mapping and
prove to the Planning Commission that the following process was followed
in designing the proposed development:
B. The required information listed in this section may be combined or
separated onto different sheets, provided that all information is clearly
readable.
C. Checklist and List of Submittal Requirements.85
A. Applicants are strongly encouraged to submit these sketches as part of
the sketch plan process, to avoid delays to the applicant in preliminary
plan approval. Submittal at the sketch plan stage will greatly increase
the likelihood that all issues will be able to be resolved in time to meet
the standard ninety-day time clock for approval of a preliminary plan
without needing time extensions.
B. This process is intended to show everyone how the special features of
the property relate to resource areas on adjacent lands and how the
development will properly relate to the features of the land that are
most worthy of conservation. See the "existing resources and site
analysis map" provisions in § 113-30C, Part D. Existing conditions shall
be accurately mapped. For the sole purposes of meeting this section,
the mapping of proposed development may be at a sketch plan level of
detail.
(1) Delineation of open space. Using the map of existing resources and
site analysis map, the applicant shall delineate areas that are
proposed to be preserved as common open space (if required by
§ 113-65 of this chapter, in a cluster development or other sections
of Chapter 133, Zoning) and/or otherwise through conservation
easements.
(a) If common open space in a development is proposed, then the
applicant shall show compliance with the applicable
85.Editor's Note: The Checklist and List of Submittal Requirements is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 113-30 SEWERS § 113-32
99:309
requirements of Chapter 133, Zoning, including but not limited
to the following:
[1] Providing calculations of the minimum percent and
acreage of required common open space, which shall be
submitted at the sketch plan stage or the preliminary plan
stage, whichever submission occurs first.
[2] Proposed common open space shall be designated using
the existing resources and site analysis map as a base
map. The applicant shall prove compliance with applicable
provisions of Chapter 133, Zoning, and § 113-65 of this
chapter. The following areas shall be shown: one-hundredyear
floodplains, wetlands and slopes over 25%.
[3] The proposed common open space shall maximize
opportunities to interconnect open spaces with important
natural features and common open space on neighboring
properties (see the context map in § 113-30C, Part C). The
applicant should consider the Future Greenways and
Recreation System Map in the Joint Comprehensive Plan,
unless or until a more-detailed map is prepared for Jackson
Township.
[4] The applicant shall then prioritize natural resources on the
parcel in terms of highest to least suitabilities for inclusion
in the proposed common open space in consultation with
the Planning Commission and in accordance with § 113-71
of this chapter and applicable sections of Chapter 133,
Zoning,.
[5] On the basis of those priorities and practical
considerations given to the parcel's configuration, its
context in relation to resource areas on adjoining and
neighboring properties, and the applicant's subdivision
objectives, priority areas for conservation shall be
delineated to meet at least the minimum area percentage
requirements for common open space and in a manner
clearly indicating their boundaries as well as the types of
resources included within them.
(b) If open space in a development is not proposed, the applicant
shall show measures that will be used to minimize impacts
upon important natural features. The applicant shall show that
every reasonable effort has been made to locate development
to avoid the over-25% slopes and one-hundred-year floodplain
and wetlands and to minimize impact upon other natural and
historic resources. In addition to meeting any requirement for
common open space, important natural features should also be
protected as part of individual lots (such as large rear yards
and/or through conservation easements).
§ 113-32 JACKSON CODE § 113-32
99:310
(2) Potential development areas concept map. Based upon
consideration of the existing features map and the process
described above, the potential development areas shall be mapped.
These Potential development areas are areas that are best suited
for the majority of the development on the parcel.
(3) Location of home sites. In respect of the process described above,
the approximate proposed locations of new homes/principal
buildings shall then be selected. It is recognized that on-lot septic
system suitability needs to influence these choices, when septic
systems are used. It is also recognized that some intrusions into the
natural and historic resources may be necessary to allow
reasonable uses of the land, provided that such development is
carefully located and designed to minimize impacts upon valuable
resources and features.
(a) While the mapping of existing features required by this section
is required to be accurate and to scale, the locations of
proposed home sites, lot lines, roads and trails may be at a
sketch plan level of detail for the purposes of complying with
this section.
(b) The applicant shall provide a written and graphic analysis of
how the proposed development will respect and incorporate
the important resources of the site and be coordinated with
resources, open space/trail corridors and views on surrounding
properties. This may involve an overlay map that shows
important natural features and proposed development.
(4) Layout of streets and trails. A sketch of the tentative street layout
shall then be designed to serve the appropriate building sites.
Trails should also be considered to link together common open
spaces, clusters of homes and other destinations (such as nearby
stores, parks and schools). Building sites should be clustered
together to minimize expensive wetland and creek crossings by
roads.
(5) Drawing the lot lines. Tentative lot lines should then be drawn on
the site to encompass the proposed building sites, to result in a
development concept plan. Once this sketch is prepared, then
more-detailed engineering may be completed.
§ 113-32 SEWERS § 113-32
99:311

ARTICLE VI
Final Plans for Subdivisions and Certain Land Developments
§ 113-33. Applicability.
This article lists the requirements for final plans for a major subdivision or
any land development, except that a land development that only involves
the following may be submitted under the simplified requirements of Article
VII:
§ 113-34. Submission and review procedure.
A. A lot line adjustment;
B. A single nonresidential building or addition of up to 3,000 square feet of
building floor area with no new dwelling units on an existing lot;
C. Minor corrections or minor revisions to a previously approved plan as
specified in § 113-40; or
D. A merger or consolidation of lots (also referred to as “reverse
subdivision”).
A. Final plan submission required.
(1) A final plan submission for each major subdivision or land
development must be filed by the applicant and reviewed in
accordance with the provisions of this Article VI.
(2) A final plan shall only be submitted after a preliminary plan has
been approved by the Board of Supervisors, if a preliminary plan is
required.
B. Final plan submission deadline. An applicant shall file a final plan
submission within five years from the date of the approval of the
preliminary plan by the Board of Supervisors. Failure to comply with
this requirement shall render the preliminary plan submission null and
void, and a new preliminary plan submission must be filed under any
currently applicable ordinances.
C. Filing and distribution.
(1) The applicant shall file with the Township staff, at least 25 calendar
days prior to a regular Township Planning Commission meeting
(not including a workshop meeting), the required fees and the
information and plans required under § 113-35. Any subsequent
submittal of revised plans shall be submitted at least seven
calendar days before a Planning Commission meeting where the
plans are intended to be reviewed, unless permission is granted for
a later submittal by the Township Engineer.
§ 113-33 SEWERS § 113-34
99:313
(2) The Township staff shall forward applicable plans and documents
to the following persons or agencies to seek their comments prior
to final plan approval:
(a) The Sewer Authority.
(b) The Township Fire Marshal.
(c) The Township Planning Commission, with such information
provided before the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
Commission.
(3) Applicant's distribution. It is the applicant's responsibility to:
(a) Make agreements with the appropriate utility companies to
guarantee applicable provision of service.
(b) Submit a complete application to PennDOT for any needed
permit for access to or work within a state road right-of-way.
(c) Provide information to the DEP or other agencies for any
permits that might be required.
(d) Submit a copy of the soil erosion and sedimentation plan to the
York County Conservation District, and pay its required review
fees, if earth disturbance is proposed and if such erosion
control plan was not approved at the preliminary plan level.
(e) Provide a copy of the plans to the York County Planning
Commission, with any required fee.
(f) If a sewage facility planning module is required by the DEP, the
applicant shall submit two complete copies for Township use
plus shall submit copies of the module and plans to various
agencies as required under state regulations. A sewage
planning module shall be completed and fully approved prior to
final plan approval.
(g) Provide information needed by the Sewage Enforcement
Officer, if applicable.
(4) The filing of the final plan shall conform with the approved
preliminary plan and any conditions and changes recommended by
the Township during the preliminary plan review.
(5) Revisions. A detailed list of revisions from a previously submitted
plan shall be provided whenever a revised plan is submitted. The
developer's plan preparer shall certify that the list of revisions is
complete.
D. Review by Township Engineer.
(1) The Township Engineer should review the submission and provide
a report to the Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors.
§ 113-34 JACKSON CODE § 113-34
99:314
(2) The applicant and/or his/her plan preparer should make reasonable
efforts to resolve technical engineering considerations outside of
and prior to Planning Commission meetings.
(3) A copy of findings of the Township Engineer should be sent or
handed in person to the applicant or his/her representative.
E. Review by Planning Commission. The Township Planning Commission
shall accomplish the following within the time limitations of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (unless the applicant grants
a written time extension), while allowing a sufficient number of days
within this deadline for a decision by the Board of Supervisors:
(1) Review applicable reports received from official review agencies.
(2) Consider whether the final plan submission meets the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances.
(3) Recommend some/all of any needed revisions needed for the
submission to conform to this chapter or that would generally
improve the plan.
(4) Recommend approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the
final plan submission in writing via commission minutes to the
Board of Supervisors. The Planning Commission may recommend
conditions for approval or describe requirements which have not
been met.
F. Review by Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall:
(1) Review the recommendation of the Planning Commission and any
reports received from official reviewing agencies.
(2) Determine whether the final plan submission meets the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances.
(3) Approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the final plan
submission within the time limits established by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code. (As of the adoption date of this
chapter, state law requires:
(a) The Board of Supervisors to act on the application and render
its decision and communicate it to the applicant not later than
90 days following the date of the regular meeting of the
Township Planning Commission next following the date the
application is filed, or after a final order of the court remanding
an application; provided that, should the said next regular
meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing of the
application or the final order of the court, the said ninety-day
period shall be measured from the 30th day following the day
the application has been filed.
§ 113-34 SEWERS § 113-34
99:315
(b) No subdivision or land development shall be granted final
approval until a report is received from the York County
Planning Commission or until the expiration of 30 days from
the date the application was forwarded to the York County
Planning Commission, whichever comes first.)
G. Decision by Board of Supervisors.
(1) Notice to applicant. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall
be in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant
personally or mailed to him/her at his/her last known address not
later than 15 days following the decision.
(2) Dedications.
(a) The approval of the final plan by the Board of Supervisors shall
not by itself constitute an acceptance of the dedication of any
street or other proposed public way, space, or area, unless
such acceptance is specified at such time.
(b) Any such acceptance of dedication shall only occur after formal
action of the Township at such time.
(c) As part of an improvements agreement, if the Board of
Supervisors elects to accept lands offered for dedication, the
submission shall be accompanied by duly executed instruments
of conveyance to the Township. Such instruments shall state
that the title thereof is free and unencumbered.
(d) The Board of Supervisors may require that a subdivider
provide title insurance.
(3) Disapproval. When a final plan submission is disapproved, the
decision shall specify defects found in the submission, shall
describe requirements which have not been met, and shall cite the
provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon in each case.
(4) Conditions. The Board of Supervisors may attach reasonable
conditions to an approval to ensure the carrying out of this chapter,
other Township ordinances and state laws and regulations. If
conditions are placed upon an approval, it shall be the
responsibility of the applicant or his authorized representative, in
writing, to accept or reject the conditions within a maximum of 30
days after the date of the decision by the Board of Supervisors. If
the applicant fails to accept or reject the conditions within such
time period, then it shall be presumed that the applicant has
accepted all of the conditions upon the approval. If the applicant
rejects any condition, then the approval shall be rescinded, unless a
decision of a court determines such condition was not valid.
(a) The applicant shall be required to show compliance with all the
conditions upon the final plan approval within one year after
§ 113-34 JACKSON CODE § 113-34
99:316
§ 113-35. Final plan requirements.
the date of the decision by the Board of Supervisors, unless a
written extension is granted by the Board of Supervisors.
H. Development in stages.
(1) If requested by the applicant, the Board of Supervisors may permit
the undertaking of the required improvements and the preparation
of the final plan to be completed in a series of sections or stages,
each covering a portion of the proposed subdivision or land
development as shown on the preliminary plan.
(2) If final plans are to be filed in sections or stages, each section or
stage shall provide sufficient access, utilities and amenities to allow
the development to properly function if future stages are not built.
(3) The boundaries of phases and the timing of related improvements
shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
I. Statement of approval. At the request of the applicant, the Township
shall furnish the applicant with a signed copy of a resolution indicating
approval of the applicant's final plan, contingent upon the applicant
providing a satisfactory financial security. The final plan will not be
signed by Township officials until a satisfactory financial security is
presented. The resolution of contingent approval shall expire and be
deemed to be revoked if the financial security agreement is not
provided within 90 days, unless a written extension is granted by the
Township.
A. All of the information and materials listed in this section are required as
part of all final plans for a major subdivision or a land development.
This list of requirements shall serve as both a list of requirements and
as a checklist for the applicant and the Township to ensure completion
of submissions. The applicant shall submit completed photocopies of
this section as part of the application.
B. The required information listed in this section may be combined or
separated onto different sheets, provided that the plans will be clearly
readable. If a particular plan or item was submitted at the preliminary
plan stage and is still complete and accurate, then the applicant may
reference that submittal in the final plan submission instead of
providing additional copies.
C. Checklist and List of Submittal Requirements.86
86.Editor's Note: The Checklist and List of Submittal Requirements is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 113-34 SEWERS § 113-36
99:317
§ 113-36. Certification.
All certifications shall comply with the state professional licensing laws. All
subdivisions of land shall be certified and stamped by a registered land
surveyor, as required by state law. At least one set of plans provided to the
Township (including revisions) shall bear original signatures and original
seals of plan preparers and shall be marked as a "Township file copy."
§ 113-36 JACKSON CODE § 113-36
99:318
ARTICLE VII
Minor Subdivisions, Certain Land Developments and Lot Line
Adjustments
§ 113-37. Purpose.
This article provides simplified procedures for submitting and reviewing
minor subdivisions, certain land developments, and lot line adjustments.
§ 113-38. Submission and review procedure.
The following submission and review process shall apply for minor
subdivisions, lot line adjustments, merger or consolidation of lots (also
referred to as “reverse subdivision”), land developments involving only a
single nonresidential building or addition of less than 3,000 square feet of
building floor area with no additional dwelling units, and what the Township
determines to be minor corrections or minor revisions of previously
approved plans under § 113-40.
A. Final plan submission required. A final plan submission for each
application under this section shall be filed by the applicant and
reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this Article VII. A
preliminary plan is not required for a submittal under this Article VII.
B. Filing and distribution.
(1) The applicant shall file with the Township staff, at least 25 calendar
days prior to a regular Township Planning Commission meeting
(not including a workshop meeting), the required fees and the
information and plans required under this Article VII. Any
subsequent submittal of revised plans shall be submitted at least
seven calendar days before a Planning Commission meeting where
the plans are intended to be reviewed, unless permission is granted
for a later submittal by the Township Engineer.
(2) If a state road is involved, the applicant shall forward the required
information to PennDOT and apply for a highway occupancy
permit. If such permit is not granted prior to final plan approval,
then it shall automatically be a condition of final plan approval, and
the plans shall not be signed or released for recording by the
Township until the PennDOT permit is granted.
(3) Each final plan filed for minor subdivisions shall provide the
information required by § 113-39. Plans for lot line adjustments
shall provide the information required by § 113-40.
(4) The applicant shall provide a copy of the plans for review to the
York County Planning Commission, with the required county review
fees. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be
provided to the York County Conservation District.
C. Initial actions by the staff.
§ 113-37 SEWERS § 113-38
99:319
(1) The staff shall review the submission items filed against a checklist
for completeness and shall report such review to the Commission at
its next regularly scheduled meeting.
(2) The staff shall retain in the Township's files one file copy of all
materials submitted by the applicant.
(3) The staff shall forward the applicable submission information to the
Township Engineer and the Township Planning Commission before
the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission.
D. Review by Township Engineer. The Township Engineer should review
the engineering considerations in the plan and prepare an initial report
on such considerations to the Planning Commission. The Township
Engineer may make additional reports and recommendations to the
Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors during review of the
plan.
E. Review by Planning Commission. The Township Planning Commission
should accomplish the following within the time limitations of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (unless the applicant grants
a written time extension):
(1) Review all applicable reports received from the appropriate review
agencies and officers.
(2) Determine whether the final plan submission meets the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances.
(3) Review the final plan submission and recommend any needed
revisions so that the submission will conform to this chapter and
other applicable ordinances.
(4) Recommend approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the
final plan submission, in writing, to the Board of Supervisors, which
may include recommending conditions for approval or describing
requirements which have not been met.
F. Review by Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall:
(1) Review the recommendation of the Commission and any reports
received from any other official reviewing agencies.
(2) Determine whether the final plan submission meets the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances.
(3) Approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the final plan
submission within the time limits established by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code. (As of the adoption date of this
chapter, state law requires:
(a) The Board of Supervisors to act on the application and render
its decision and communicate it to the applicant not later than
§ 113-38 JACKSON CODE § 113-38
99:320
90 days following the date of the regular meeting of the
Township Planning Commission next following the date the
application is filed, or after a final order of the court remanding
an application; provided that, should the said next regular
meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing of the
application or the final order of the court, the said ninety-day
period shall be measured from the 30th day following the day
the application has been filed.
(b) No subdivision or land development shall be granted final
approval until a report is received from the York County
Planning Commission or until the expiration of 30 days from
the date the application was forwarded to the York County
Planning Commission, whichever comes first.)
(4) County Planning Commission Review. No subdivision or land
development shall be granted final approval until a report is
received from the York County Planning Commission or until the
expiration of 30 days from the date the application was forwarded
to the County Planning Commission, whichever shall occur first.
G. Decision by Board of Supervisors.
(1) The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing and
shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to
him/her at the last known address not later than 15 days following
the decision.
(2) a. The approval of the final plan by the Board of Supervisors shall
not by itself constitute an acceptance of the dedication of any street
or other proposed public way, space or area, unless such
acceptance is specifically made at such time.
(a) Any such acceptance of dedication shall be specifically stated,
along with the signatures required for approval.
(b) If the Board of Supervisors elects to accept lands offered for
dedication, the submission shall be accompanied by duly
executed instruments of conveyance to the Township. Such
instruments shall state that the title thereof is free and
unencumbered. The Board of Supervisors may require an
applicant to provide title insurance.
(3) If a final plan submission is disapproved, the decision shall specify
defects found in the submission, shall describe requirements which
have not been met, and shall cite the provisions of the statute or
ordinance relied upon in each case.
(4) Conditions. If conditions are placed upon an approval, it shall be
the responsibility of the applicant, in writing, to accept or reject the
conditions within a maximum of 30 days after the date of the
decision by the Board of Supervisors. If the applicant fails to accept
§ 113-38 SEWERS § 113-38
99:321
§ 113-39. Final plan requirements for minor subdivision and certain
land developments.
All of the following information and materials listed in this section are
required as part of all minor subdivision submissions, other than lot line
adjustments or submittals under § 113-40. This list of requirements shall
serve as both a list of requirements and as a checklist for the applicant
and the Township to ensure completion of submissions. The applicant shall
submit completed photocopies of this section as part of the application.
§ 113-40. Lot line adjustments, merger or consolidation of lots, and
minor revisions of approved plans.
or reject the conditions within such time period, then it shall be
presumed that the applicant has accepted all of the conditions
upon the approval. If the applicant rejects any condition, then the
approval shall be rescinded, unless a decision of a court determines
such condition was not valid.
(a) The applicant shall be required to show compliance with all the
conditions upon the final plan approval within one year after
the date of the decision by the Board of Supervisors, unless a
written extension is granted by the Board of Supervisors.
A. Checklist and List of Submittal Requirements.87
A. The reduced submission requirements listed in this section shall apply,
together with the procedural requirements of § 113-38, if either of the
following apply:
(1) The proposal will meet the definition of a lot line adjustment;
(2) The proposal only involves a merger or consolidation of lots (also
referred to as “reverse subdivision”), including two or more lots
merging into one; and/or
(3) In the determination of the Township staff, which may be based
upon the advice of the Township Engineer, the proposal will involve
revisions to a previously approved plan and those revisions only
involve changes in the supporting documentation or engineering
details or to correct erroneous data or minor omissions concerning
a plan previously granted final plan approval.
B. The list of requirements on the following page shall serve as both a list
of requirements and as a checklist for the applicant and the Township to
ensure completion of submissions. The applicant shall submit
completed photocopies of this section as part of the application. The
required information listed in this section may be combined or
87.Editor's Note: The Checklist and List of Submittal Requirements is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 113-38 JACKSON CODE § 113-40
99:322
§ 113-41. Certification.
All certifications shall comply with the state professional licensing laws. All
subdivisions of land shall be certified and stamped by a registered land
surveyor. At least one set of all plans provided to the Township, including
revisions, shall bear original signatures and original seals of plan preparers,
which shall be marked as a "Township file copy".
§ 113-42. Recording plans.
Article IX shall apply.
separated onto different sheets, provided that the plans will be clearly
readable.
C. Additional information. The Planning Commission may require that a
plan under this section include the submission of specific additional
information that would be required if the plan would be a final minor
subdivision plan, if such specific information is necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter.
D. A merger or consolidation of lots (also referred to as “reverse
subdivision”) under this section shall result in the formation of one new
lot with one new recorded deed for that new lot.
E. Checklist and List of Submittal Requirements.88
88.Editor's Note: The Checklist and List of Submittal Requirements is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 113-40 SEWERS § 113-42
99:323

ARTICLE VIII
Improvements Guaranties
§ 113-43. Guaranty of improvements installation required.
§ 113-44. Improvements to be provided by the applicant;
inspections.
§ 113-45. Development agreement.
A. Before approving any subdivision or land development plan for
recording, the Board of Supervisors shall require that the Township be
assured by means of a proper development agreement and performance
guaranty that the improvements required by this chapter and the
improvements appearing on the plan will be installed in strict
accordance with the standards and specifications of this chapter.
B. Purpose of security. The security required by this article shall stand as
security for compliance with all Township ordinances, other laws,
covenants, stipulations, conditions and rules applicable to the
subdivision or land development for which it is filed.
C. No construction of permanent buildings or sales of any individual lot or
condominium unit shall occur within a subdivision or land development
unless:
(1) There is on file with the Township current duly executed and
approved security; or
(2) All rough grading is complete and all required public
improvements, utilities, streets, drainage facilities, sewers and
streetlights have been completed and accepted by the Board of
Supervisors.
A. In all cases, the subdivider or land developer shall be responsible for
the installation of all improvements required by this chapter.
B. The Township Engineer or other Township designee shall make such
inspections of the required improvements at such intervals as may be
reasonably necessary to assure compliance with this chapter. The
reasonable costs of such inspection shall be borne by the subdivider or
land developer.
A. Development agreement required.
(1) All applicants proposing any subdivision or land development
which provides for the installation of improvements required by
this chapter or any improvements or amenities which appear on the
final plan shall be required to enter into a legally binding
development agreement with the Township prior to recording of
the final plan, unless the applicant agrees to meet § 113-43
§ 113-43 SEWERS § 113-45
99:325
concerning the construction of all improvements prior to the
construction of any buildings or the sale of any lots or home sites.
(2) The development agreement shall guarantee the installation of said
improvements in strict accordance with all Township requirements.
B. Terms of development agreement. The development agreement shall be
acceptable in legal form to the Township Solicitor and shall be
acceptable in content to the Township Board of Supervisors. The
Township may require that a development agreement include any of the
following items, where applicable, and such additional items as are
necessary to carry out this chapter:
(1) The construction depicted on the approved plans, listed in itemized
format, including all approved streets, drainage facilities, utility
lines and other improvements.
(2) A work schedule setting forth the beginning and ending dates of
such work, tied to the construction of the development, and
provisions to allow proper inspection by the Township Engineer.
(3) The provision of a performance guaranty for completion of required
improvements in compliance with § 113-46, including a detailed
breakdown of the estimated costs of the improvements, including
the total amount of the performance guaranty.
(4) Provisions concerning the developer's responsibilities for damage
to other property, including maintenance by the developer of public
liability insurance for the duration of improvements construction,
with a hold-harmless clause to protect the Township from liability
related to such work. A copy or other evidence of such liability
coverage shall be provided to the Township prior to such work.
(5) Provisions requiring that the applicant and/or other responsible
entities ensure that erosion, sedimentation and stormwater
management plans are complied with.
(6) Provisions for the dedication of streets, water and sewer lines and
any other easements or improvements proposed to be dedicated.
(7) See § 113-51 concerning the requirement for a record plan.
(8) Provisions for the developer to reimburse the Township for all
reasonable engineering costs directly related to the review,
construction and inspection of the proposed development and to
the review and preparation of the development agreements.
(9) Provisions concerning any violations of the development
agreement.
(10) Any other lawful terms which the Board of Supervisors may require
to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
§ 113-45 JACKSON CODE § 113-45
99:326
§ 113-46. Performance guaranty.
The performance guaranty for completion of required improvements shall
meet the following requirements:
(11) Signatures. The development agreement shall be signed by all
responsible landowners and/or developers.
C. Ownership of land and guaranty.
(1) A certificate of ownership, in the form of Appendix B,89 shall be
executed in the exact name in which title is held. If the developer(s)
is someone other than the landowner(s), the developer shall also
execute this affidavit, along with a security agreement.
(2) Change in ownership or developer. Any conveyance of all or a
substantial portion of the unimproved lots or public improvements
or streets of any subdivision or land development or change in
developers, whether voluntary or by action of law or otherwise,
shall require the prior approval of the Board of Supervisors to
guarantee validity of the approved plan and conditions. The Board
of Supervisors shall require that such new landowner and/or
developer, in writing, fully assume all applicable responsibilities
under the development agreement, including providing required
financial security.
D. Utility agreements. If a development will connect into a public water or
public sanitary sewage system, the applicable authority, agency or
company may also require separate development agreements.
A. Security.
(1) The guaranty shall be secured by the credit of any of the following:
(a) An irrevocable and unconditional letter of credit of a federal- or
state-chartered lending institution;
(b) A restrictive or escrow account in a federal- or state-chartered
lending institution; or
(c) Such other financial security approved by the Board of
Supervisors (which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld), but not including a second or third mortgage on the
unimproved lands.
(2) Such approved security shall provide for, and secure to the public,
the completion of any improvements which may be required within
one year of the date fixed in the development agreement for the
completion of such improvements.
89.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 113-45 SEWERS § 113-46
99:327
§ 113-47. Approval of improvements.
(3) Such financial security shall be posted with a federally issued or
state-chartered lending institution chosen by the party posting the
financial security, or such other approved entity, provided that such
institution or entity is authorized to conduct such business within
the state.
(a) The Board of Supervisors may require that evidence be
provided that such institution or entity has sufficiently
adequate and secure assets to cover the security.
(b) The Township shall be the authorized signatory on any account
in which the escrow funds are held.
B. Amount of security.
(1) The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of
the required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of
completion, estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled
for completion by the developer in the official development
schedule, and within the process for increases to cover inflation as
permitted by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
(2) The cost of the improvements shall be established by an estimate
prepared by a Pennsylvania Registered professional engineer,
which shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer, within the
arbitration process permitted by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
(3) If the party posting the financial security requires more than one
year from the date of posting of the financial security to complete
the required improvements, the amount of financial security may
be increased by a maximum of an additional 10% for each one-year
period beyond the first anniversary date from posting of financial
security or to an amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of
completing the required improvements, as reestablished on or
about the expiration of the preceding one-year period by using the
above procedure.
(4) Inspection fees. The amount of financial security shall also include
an additional 5% of the estimated cost of completion of the work to
guarantee payment of inspection fees and related engineering
costs.
C. Multiyear or multistage development. In the case where development is
projected over a period of years, the Board of Supervisors may
authorize submission of final plans by phases/stages of development,
subject to such requirements or improvement guaranties concerning
future improvements as it finds necessary for the proper functioning of
each phase and for the eventual development as a whole.
§ 113-46 JACKSON CODE § 113-47
99:328
A. Advance notice by developer of construction of improvements.
(1) Meetings. Prior to construction or installation of improvements in
any new phase or any major facet of construction, the developer or
his/her representative shall contact the Township Engineer to
determine whether a preconstruction meeting is needed. The
Township Engineer may require that such meeting be attended by
the responsible contractor(s) and responsible representatives of
the developer. In addition, meetings may be required with the
utility companies as needed.
(2) The developer or his/her representative shall provide a minimum of
three business days' prior notice to the Township staff prior to
beginning each major facet of construction, in order to allow the
scheduling of inspections.
(3) The developer should notify the Township in writing when 1/3 and
2/3 of the total dollar value of the improvements are completed,
and a list of those items completed.
(4) See § 113-48A(1)(a) concerning improvements completed without
proper Township inspection.
B. Request for release of security. When an improvement has been
completed, the party posting the financial security shall notify the
Township and request, in writing, to the Board of Supervisors, by
certified or registered mail, release of related financial security. The
developer shall send a copy of that letter to the Township Engineer at
the same time.
C. Engineer's report.
(1) Within 30 days of a receipt under § 113-47B, the Township
Engineer shall submit a written report certifying which
improvements have been completed in accordance with the
approved plan to the Board of Supervisors and mail a copy of such
report by certified or registered mail to the developer or his/her
representative at his/her last known address.
(2) This report shall be based on the inspections made according to the
approved inspection schedule included in the development
agreement and shall recommend approval or rejection of the
improvements, either in whole or in part.
(3) If the Township Engineer finds any or all of the improvements to be
not as required, he/she shall include a statement of the reasons for
recommending their rejection in the report.
D. Release of security.
(1) After receiving the Township Engineer's report (but not later than
45 days from the receipt of the request) the Township staff shall
review the Township Engineer's report and shall authorize release
§ 113-47 SEWERS § 113-47
99:329
§ 113-48. Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
of an amount as estimated by the Township Engineer fairly
representing the value of the improvements completed.
(2) Until final release (completion of all improvements), the Township
may require retention of a maximum of 10% of the cost of each
completed improvement.
(3) The Township shall notify the developer, in writing, by certified or
registered mail, of the decision.
E. Completion of unaccepted improvements. The developer shall complete
any required improvements that the Board of Supervisors determines
are not satisfactory or complete. Upon completion, the applicant may
request approval in conformance with the procedures specified in
§ 113-47.
F. Final release.
(1) When the developer has completed all of the required and
necessary improvements, the developer shall request final release
in conformance with the procedures specified in § 113-47. See time
limitations and procedures in Section 510 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.90
(2) Such final release shall include all moneys retained under
§ 113-47D(2).
G. Appeal. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the developer's right
to contest or question, by legal proceedings or otherwise, any
determination of the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer.
H. Certificates of use and occupancy and completion of improvements.
(1) A temporary or final certificate of use and occupancy shall not be
issued and a structure shall not be occupied unless all principal
buildings have access to a clearly permanently passable street with
at least a complete paving base course and any required curbing
installed.
(2) In addition to Subsection H(1) above, no final certificate of use and
occupancy shall be issued until the structure is completed as
approved with service by all required utilities and with all access
onto a street completed to required standards, if applicable.
A. Enforcement of security.
(1) The Township shall have the authority to use remedies to effect
completion of required improvements as provided in Section 511 of
90.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10510.
§ 113-47 JACKSON CODE § 113-48
99:330
§ 113-49. Maintenance guaranty.
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.91 In addition, the
Township may pursue civil prosecution of a violation of this chapter.
(a) Construction without inspection. If required improvements
have been completed without providing the Township Engineer
or his/her representatives with proper opportunity for
inspection, and as a result the Township Engineer cannot
determine whether the improvements were properly
constructed, then the Board of Supervisors may require that
the developer, at the developer's expense, remove, replace,
sample, test or reconstruct such improvements as necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter and other applicable
Township standards.
(2) Rate of construction. Failure of a developer to construct streets and
other public improvements approximately at the same time or prior
to the construction of the buildings served by those streets or
public improvements, and at the same rate in time at which
buildings are completed, shall be a violation of this chapter and a
cause for default of the security.
B. Completion by Township. If the proceeds of such security are
insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections
to all the improvements covered by said security, the Board of
Supervisors may, at its option, install or replace part of such
improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land development and
may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the
moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the improvements.
C. Proceeds for installation of improvements. The proceeds from use of the
security and/or from any legal or equitable action brought against the
developer shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements
covered by such security and directly related administrative costs.
A. Maintenance guaranty required. All applicants proposing any
subdivision or land development which provides for the dedication of
improvements required by this chapter shall be required to provide a
legally binding maintenance guaranty to the Township prior to
acceptance of dedication of the improvements by the Township. In most
cases, this guaranty will be part of the security agreement.
B. Terms of maintenance guaranty. The maintenance guaranty shall be
acceptable in legal form to the Township Solicitor and in content to the
Board of Supervisors and shall include all of the following:
(1) That the applicant make any repair or reconstruction of any
improvement stipulated in the maintenance agreement which is
91.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10511.
§ 113-48 SEWERS § 113-49
99:331
specified by the Board of Supervisors if needed because of faulty
construction, workmanship, or materials, prior to acceptance of
such improvement by the Township;
(2) That the applicant maintain, at his/her own cost, all improvements
stipulated in the maintenance agreement, up to a maximum period
of 18 months from the date of completion, except for any specialpurpose
escrow or maintenance agreements required by the
Township; and
(3) That the applicant post financial security to secure structural
integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning of said
improvements in accordance with the design and specifications as
depicted on the final plan, for a maximum term of 18 months from
the date of completion.
C. Public utilities and authorities. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines,
or both, and related apparatus or facilities are to be installed under the
jurisdiction and under the rules and regulations of a public utility or
municipal authority, financial security to assure proper completion and
maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with the regulations
of the controlling public utility or municipal authority. This amount of
financial security shall not also be required by the Township if it is
required by such utility or authority.
D. Type of security. The maintenance guaranty shall be secured by the
same form of security as is permitted for the improvements guaranties.
E. Terms. Such maintenance guaranty shall be in the form approved by the
Township Solicitor and Board of Supervisors, payable to the Township,
to guarantee the maintenance and repair of the streets and other public
improvements in the subdivision or land development for 18 months
from the date of completion. The applicant shall prove to the
satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that there will be an acceptable
system for the long-term maintenance of any stormwater detention
basins.
F. Amount. The amount of the maintenance guaranty shall be determined
by the applicant's engineer, conditioned upon acceptance by Board of
Supervisors, but shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation
of such improvements.
G. Release. After a maximum of 18 months from the date of acceptance of
dedication of said improvements, the Township shall release the
maintenance guaranty to the developer (or party that posted the
guaranty) if all improvements are in satisfactory condition, as
determined by the Township.
§ 113-49 JACKSON CODE § 113-49
99:332
ARTICLE IX
Recording of Final Plan
§ 113-50. Recording of final plan.
§ 113-51. Record plan.
The applicant shall provide to the Township one signed reproducible and
four signed paper clear and legible copies of the record plan, unless the
County Recorder of Deeds office may require a different format. The
Township copies shall be made after recording and shall be exact copies of
those portions of the approved final plan that the Township requires to be
recorded. Such record plan, at a minimum, shall include all of the following:
A. Deadline.
(1) The applicant is responsible to ensure that the final plan for any
subdivision or land development as approved by the Board of
Supervisors is provided to the Township Engineer in a form ready
for recording within 90 days after such final approval. The
Township Engineer or his/her designee shall then record the final
plan.
(2) If the final plan approval included official conditions that must be
met prior to recording, then the plan shall be recorded within 90
days following the compliance with such conditions, up to a
maximum total of one year following the final plan approval.
B. The applicant shall be required to compensate the Township for costs of
the recording.
C. The final plan shall not be recorded unless the applicant proves that it
has met all required conditions that the Township staff and/or Township
Engineer determines would impact the recorded final plan, including
but not limited to issuance of any required PennDOT highway
occupancy permit.
D. Failure to record the final plan within the specified time periods shall
cause the approval to become null and void.
A. Street rights-of-way;
B. Common open spaces;
C. Easements, and any covenants that the Township required to be placed
on the final plan;
D. Lot lines and lot dimensions;
E. Water lines, sanitary and storm sewer lines and stormwater drainage
facilities;
§ 113-50 SEWERS § 113-51
99:333
§ 113-52. Effect of recording.
F. The required signatures of Township officials and the York County
Planning Commission staff and the date of Township approvals;
G. Notations stating whether the streets, any common open space and
other proposed improvements are to be offered or not offered for
dedication to the Township; and
H. Additional information from the complete final plan that the Township
may require be shown.
A. Private improvements. Every street, park, or other improvement shown
on a subdivision or land development plan that is recorded, as provided
herein, shall be deemed to be a private street, open space, or
improvement until such time as it may be offered and officially accepted
for dedication to the Township or is duly condemned.
B. Dedication of improvements. The record plan shall state by formal
notation whether the streets, any common open space and other
proposed improvements are proposed to be offered or not offered for
dedication to the Township.
§ 113-51 JACKSON CODE § 113-52
99:334
ARTICLE X
Design Standards and Required Improvements
§ 113-53. Streets.
A. Access to streets.
(1) All proposed subdivisions and land developments shall have
adequate and safe access to the public street system.
(2) Frontage.
(a) Any lot created under this chapter shall have frontage and
access onto a public street (which may be required to be
improved as necessary under § 113-53J).
(b) If a residential lot is adjacent to two streets, it shall only have
vehicle access onto the street with the lesser classification.
Such limitation shall be stated on the plan.
B. Street continuations.
(1) Stub street right-of-way. Where deemed necessary by the Township
for efficient movement of traffic, a subdivision or land development
shall include the extension of a street right-of-way to the boundary
line of the parcel proposed for development to provide for an
eventual extension into the adjacent tract for efficient circulation of
traffic throughout the area. If a stub street is constructed, see
§ 113-53H, which addresses temporary turnarounds.
(a) Where a stub street exists on an adjacent property, a
connection to that stub street is required to be built by the
applicant/developer.
(2) Widening. Where a subdivision or land development abuts or
contains an existing street of inadequate cartway or right-of-way
width, additional right-of-way and/or cartway width shall be
required conforming with Table 10.1, Design Standards for Streets.
See § 113-53J(3) concerning right-of-way and fees in lieu of
widening.
C. Intersections.
(1) The center lines of streets shall intersect at right angles.
(2) Alignment of street intersections.
(a) No more than two streets shall intersect at one point.
(b) Where a proposed street or access drive intersects an existing
cross street, such proposed street or access drive shall be
aligned with any street intersecting on the other side of the
cross street.
§ 113-53 SEWERS § 113-53
99:335
(c) If a proposed street cannot intersect at the same location as a
street on the other side of the cross street, then the proposed
street shall be offset by the following minimum distances from
the nearest intersection of streets:
[1] One hundred fifty feet along a local street.
[2] Four hundred feet along a collector street.
[3] Eight hundred feet along an arterial street.
(d) Measurement. The minimum distances of this subsection shall
be measured between the points where the center lines of the
rights-of-way of the intersecting streets intersect with the
center line of the cross street.
(3) At street intersections, curblines shall be rounded by arcs with the
radii listed below, whichever is most restrictive. The right of way
shall be maintained at least 10 feet from the inside of the curbline
or edge of pavement.
Type of Street
Minimum Radius of Arc
at Intersection of
Pavement Edge or
Curbline
(feet)
Any street within an industrial
district or that provides truck access
to an industrial district
55
At least one arterial street, other
than above
40
At least one collector street, but no
arterial street, other than above
35
Local streets, other than above 25
D. Arterial and collector street frontage. Where a subdivision or land
development abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial or
collector street, the Township shall require:
(1) The minimization of the number and length of driveway cuts or
street intersections onto an arterial or collector street, which may
include requiring the use of shared access drives between adjacent
uses or lots;
§ 113-53 JACKSON CODE § 113-53
99:336
(2) The restriction of ingress and egress involving left-hand turns onto
or off of the arterial or collector street with Township-approved
medians, signage and/or other devices to prevent unauthorized
turns; and/or
(3) The prohibition of driveways from individual dwellings entering
directly onto an arterial or collector street. If there is no alternative
to this, each driveway entering onto an arterial or collector street
shall have adequate turnaround space for vehicles provided within
the lot so that vehicles do not back onto the street.
E. Street design standards.
(1) Minimum street design standards shall be as shown in Table 10.1,
unless PennDOT establishes a more-restrictive requirement along a
state road. The definitions of types of streets in Article II shall
apply.
(2) Shoulders. In addition to the cartway widths stated above, any
street that does not have curbs shall include appropriate six-footwide
shoulders along each side of the cartway of an arterial street
and four-foot-wide shoulders on each side of the cartway of any
other street. See the Township Construction and Materials
Specifications.92
(3) Horizontal curves shall connect street lines with deflections.
Vertical curves shall be used at all changes of grade. The length of
the vertical curve shall be determined by the required site distance
specified in Table 10.1.
(4) All approaches to intersections shall have a leveling area not
greater than 4% grade for a minimum distance of 25 feet,
measured from the nearest edge of the cartway of the intersecting
street.
(5) The minimum grade of any street gutter shall be 1.0%.
(6) A minimum tangent of 100 feet, measured from the edge of the
cartway, shall be required between a curve and a street
intersection where one of the intersecting streets is a collector or
an arterial street.
(7) Second access to development. Any subdivision or land
development of more than 250 trips shall have at least two means
of vehicle access into the development.
(8) See § 113-53J regarding improvements to existing streets.
F. Street crown.
92.Editor's Note: The Township Construction and Materials Specifications are on file in the
Township offices.
§ 113-53 SEWERS § 113-53
99:337
(1) With the exception of alleys and divided streets, streets shall be
constructed with a center-crowned cross section with a minimum
slope of 2% and a maximum slope of 4% from the street center line,
unless required otherwise by PennDOT for a state road.
(2) An alley may have an inverted crown.
Table 10.1
Design Standards for Streets
(all dimensions in feet unless specified)
Type of Street
Design Specifications Arterial Collector Local
Right-of-way width 80 60 50
Cartway width:
With curbs on both sides and
no on-street parking
32 32 N/A
With curbs on both sides and
on-street parking on 1 side
32 32 32
With curbs on both sides and
on-street parking on 2 sides
N/A N/A 32
Plus acceleration/deceleration
lane width (where determined
to be needed by the Board of
Supervisors or PennDOT)
11 11 N/A
Minimum tangent between
reverse curves, measured along
the street center line.
200 100 100
Minimum center line radii for
horizontal curves
500* 300 200
Maximum grade** 6% 8% 10%
Minimum grade 1.0% 1.0% 1.0%
NOTES:Minimum sight distances shall be required as provided in
§ 113-53G.
* Larger radii may be required as determined to be
needed by the Township Engineer or PennDOT. The
Township may approve reduced horizontal curve
requirements if the applicant proves that the curve
would not typically cause vehicles to cross the center
line and if such reduction is proven to be necessary
because of the unique conditions of the property.
** Up to 400 feet of length of a local street may have a
maximum grade of 12% if the Township determines a
less-steep grade is not feasible.
§ 113-53 JACKSON CODE § 113-53
99:338
G. Clear sight triangle; minimum sight distance.
(1) Clear sight triangle.
(a) See the clear sight triangle requirements in § 133-26C of
Chapter 133, Zoning.
(2) Sight distances.
(a) Unless a differing standard is specifically required by PennDOT
along a state road, intersections must be designed to provide
the minimum sight distances listed in Table 10.2, Required
Sight Distance Table. The driver's eye shall be measured 10
feet back from the edge of the cartway. The height of the
driver's eye shall be 3.5 feet above the road surface, and the
height of the object shall be 3.5 feet.
Table 10.2
Required Sight Distance Table
(distance in feet)
Speed
(V)
(miles
per
hour) Average Grade (G) Percent
Positive
Grades 0.0 +1.0+2.0+3.0+4.0+5.0+6.0+7.0+8.0+9.0+10.0
25 147 145 144 143 142 140 139 138 137 136 135
30 196 194 191 189 187 185 183 182 180 178 177
35 249 245 242 239 236 233 231 228 226 224 221
40 314 309 304 299 295 291 287 284 280 277 274
45 383 376 370 364 358 353 348 343 339 334 330
50 462 453 444 436 429 422 415 409 403 397 392
55 538 527 517 508 499 490 482 475 468 461 454
Speed
(V)
(miles
per hour) Average Grade (G) Percent
Negative
Grades 0.0 -1.0 -2.0-3.0 -4.0-5.0-6.0 -7.0-8.0 -9.0-10.0
25 147 148 150 151 153 155 157 159 161 164 166
30 196 199 201 204 207 210 214 217 221 226 230
35 249 252 256 260 265 269 275 280 286 292 299
§ 113-53 SEWERS § 113-53
99:339
Speed
(V)
(miles
per hour) Average Grade (G) Percent
Negative
Grades 0.0 -1.0 -2.0-3.0 -4.0-5.0-6.0 -7.0-8.0 -9.0-10.0
40 314 319 325 331 338 348 352 360 369 379 389
45 383 390 398 406 415 425 435 447 459 472 487
50 462 471 481 492 504 517 531 546 563 581 600
55 538 550 562 576 590 606 622 641 661 682 706
(b) If the applicant proves to the Township that it is not possible to
meet the required sight distances that are stated in PennDOT
regulations, then the intersection shall be located at the point
of maximum sight distances that are achievable within the
street length of the property.
(c) In the event that turning movements from an intersection are
to be restricted, the applicant shall provide a detailed design of
the proposed intersection and an engineering analysis of the
anticipated impacts resulting from such restricted turning
movements. The design and analysis shall be prepared by a
professional engineer with expertise in traffic engineering and
shall address the following:
[1] The impacts on other lots and streets within the vicinity
that may be used by motorists for turnarounds.
[2] The impacts on public safety, considering sight distance
and types of vehicles.
[3] The provision of appropriate methods to ensure
compliance with the turning restrictions, such as
channelization, alignment, and signage. Such methods
must meet applicable standards of PennDOT.
H. Cul-de-sac streets.
(1) Cul-de-sac, cul-de-loop and P-streets shall be permitted with a
maximum length of 800 feet and a minimum length of 250 feet.
(a) Cul-de-sac streets shall be provided with a turnaround with a
minimum paved radius of 40 feet to the face of the outside curb
and a minimum radius of 50 feet to the legal right-of-way.
(2) The circular right-of-way of the cul-de-sac shall maintain a
minimum ten-foot width between the edge of paving and the edge
of the right-of-way. The circular paving of the cul-de-sac shall be
§ 113-53 JACKSON CODE § 113-53
99:340
connected to the approach paving by an arc having a radius of not
less than 50 feet.
(3) No street shall dead end without an approved turnaround at the
end of the street. Temporary stub streets shall be required to
include at least a temporary cul-de-sac, if the stub would be longer
than 150 feet or serve more than two dwellings or lots. In such
case, the temporary cul-de-sac land area that is excess shall revert
to the adjacent landowners after the turnaround is no longer used.
(4) The maximum cross slope on the circular part of a cul-de-sac shall
be 6%.
(5) A cul-de-sac street shall serve a maximum of 25 dwelling units or
250 trips per weekday for nonresidential uses.
(6) A snow storage easement shall be established at the end of the culde-
sac, which shall provide for proper drainage as the snow melts.
This easement shall be located so that a snowplow can push snow
relatively straight from the street to the far end of the cul-de-sac.
This snow storage easement shall be located clear of any driveways
and mailboxes and have a minimum width of 40 feet and minimum
depth of 20 feet. The easement shall be grassed and maintained by
the owner of the lot on which the easement is located.
(7) The Township may require that a cul-de-sac street near the edge of
a subdivision or land development include provisions to allow the
street to be extended in the future onto an adjacent tract. This shall
include provisions for a public street right-of-way to the edge of the
tract. In such case, the construction costs to extend the street shall
be borne by the adjacent developer in the future.
I. Street design standards.
(1) Streets (and alleys, where provided) shall be graded, improved and
surfaced to the grades and dimensions shown on plans, profiles and
cross sections submitted by the developer and as approved by the
Board of Supervisors and shall meet applicable Township
standards.
(2) Right-of-way grading.
(a) The right-of-way shall be graded according to the approved
cross-section and grading plan.
(b) The finished street surface shall be crowned in conformance
with the Township specifications.
(c) A proper superelevation (banked curves) shall be provided on
arterial and collector streets when required by AASHTO
Design Standards.
(3) Grading beyond right-of-way.
§ 113-53 SEWERS § 113-53
99:341
(a) The subdivider or developer may be required to grade beyond
the right-of-way line in order to provide continuous slope from
the right-of-way line to the proposed elevation of the abutting
property.
(b) Such grading beyond the right-of-way shall generally maintain
the original directions of slope, except where stormwater
runoff designs dictate changes.
(c) Approved plans, either preliminary or final, showing proposed
grading, shall be binding upon all future lot owners.
(d) In no case shall the required street grading extend onto an
adjoining property with a different landowner, unless the other
adjoining property owner gives a written agreement to the
developer to accomplish such work. A copy of such agreement
shall be provided to the Township.
(4) Stormwater design. Drainage of streets shall comply with Chapter
107, Stormwater Management.
(5) Street construction standards. All materials, construction
procedures and other specifications shall be in conformance with
the Jackson Township Construction and Materials Specifications.93
(6) Guide rails. Streets shall be designed with geometric features that
minimize the need for guide rails. Guide rails shall only be installed
where the result of striking an object or leaving the roadway would
be more severe than the consequence of striking the guide rail.
(a) Guide rails shall be installed by the developer where necessary
to meet the guide rail standards in the PennDOT publication
entitled "Guidelines for Design of Local Roads and Streets."
Guide rails shall meet the construction standards of PennDOT
Publication 408 and PennDOT Standards for Roadway
Construction.
(7) The Township will require an applicant to provide traffic and
engineering studies for all proposed traffic control signs.
J. Required transportation improvements.
(1) Purpose. In recognition of Sections 503(2)(ii) and 503(3) of the
Municipalities Planning Code,94 this section is primarily intended to
ensure that streets bordering a subdivision or land development
are coordinated and of such widths and grades and in such
locations as deemed necessary to accommodate prospective traffic
and to facilitate fire protection and to ensure that the access into
and out of subdivisions and land developments is sufficiently safe.
93.Editor's Note: The Construction and Materials Specifications are on file in the Township
offices.
94.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503.
§ 113-53 JACKSON CODE § 113-53
99:342
(2) Process. This Subsection J shall be carried out through
determinations of the Board of Supervisors, after considering any
recommendations of the Planning Commission, the Township
Engineer, the applicant, the applicant's professional
representatives, any comments from PennDOT that may be
provided regarding a state road, and any professional traffic
studies that may have been submitted.
(3) On-site/abutting traffic improvements. If, in the determination of
the Board of Supervisors, there is a reasonable relationship
between the need for an on-site improvement and the traffic
created by a proposed subdivision or land development, the
applicant for such subdivision or land development shall be
required to complete the needed improvement or fund his/her fair
share of the cost of such transportation improvement and to
dedicate sufficient street right-of-way for needed improvements.
(a) On-site improvements include all street improvements
constructed on the applicant's property or the improvements
constructed on the property abutting the applicant's property
necessary for the ingress or egress to the applicant's property.
(b) On-site improvements may include but are not limited to a new
or upgraded traffic signal, land dedication to improve an
abutting intersection, realignment of an abutting curve in a
road or the widening of the abutting cartway and right-of-way.
(c) Widening of abutting street. An applicant for any land
development or subdivision shall be required to widen, pave
and improve any abutting street and provide additional rightof-
way as needed to meet current Township standards.
(d) Existing streets with insufficient right-of-way. Where a public
street exists with a right-of-way of less than the width required
by this section, then, as part of any new subdivision or land
development, additional right-of-way shall be dedicated to
bring the adjacent street segment into conformance. For
example, if a street has a thirty-three-foot-wide right-of-way,
and a fifty-foot-wide right-of-way is required, and a subdivision
only involves one side of the street, then the applicant shall
dedicate 8.5 feet of additional right-of-way so that there is at
least 25 feet of right-of-way from the original center line of the
street.
(e) Any improvement to a state road shall meet all PennDOT
standards.
(f) Fee in lieu of street improvements. Where this chapter would
require widening of a street and/or the construction of curbing,
and where the applicant desires to not complete such
improvements, and where the applicant proves to the
satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that such widening
§ 113-53 SEWERS § 113-53
99:343
and/or curbing is not essential at that location at the present
time, then the Board of Supervisors may offer the option of a
fee in lieu of the street widening or curbing.
[1] The Township Engineer shall provide a review of the need
for and cost of the street widening or curbing to the Board
of Supervisors. The fee shall be equal to 100% of the
estimated costs of the street widening and/or curbing,
unless another fee is established by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors.
(4) Funding. In place of completing a required street improvement as a
condition of final approval, an applicant may enter into a legally
binding development agreement with the Township for the
applicant to fund the improvement, or his/her fair share of such
improvement, as determined by the Board of Supervisors.
(5) Staging. Any completion or funding of a required improvement may
occur in stages in relationship to the stages of the development, if
so stated in a legally binding development agreement and/or as a
condition of final plan approval.
K. Traffic impact studies.
(1) Purposes:
(a) To enable the Township to assess the impact of a proposed
development on the transportation system.
(b) To ensure that proposed developments do not adversely affect
the transportation network.
(c) To identify any traffic problems associated with access from
the site to the existing transportation network.
(d) To delineate solutions to potential problems and propose
improvements to be incorporated into the proposed
development.
(2) Applicability.
(a) A traffic impact study shall be required for any subdivision or
land development that at build-out after completion of all
phases is projected to generate 250 or more average daily trip
ends. "Trip ends" shall mean the total number of trips both
entering and exiting the proposed development. These
projected trip ends shall be based on the latest edition of the
publication titled “Trip Generation,” published by the Institute
of Transportation Engineers, or upon traffic studies conducted
within the last five years at comparable developments that are
acceptable to the Township Engineer. The ITE land use codes
shall be stated.
§ 113-53 JACKSON CODE § 113-53
99:344
[1] The traffic impact study requirements of this section shall
still be met even if PennDOT requires a separate traffic
impact study. However, the Township Engineer shall
require technical adjustments in the traffic impact study
provisions so there are not inconsistencies between the
two sets of requirements. See PennDOT's HOP Handbook,
Publication 282.
(b) The traffic impact study shall consider the entire development
at build-out. If a development is proposed to be submitted in
phases, the initial traffic study shall consider a reasonable
estimate of the likely development in later phases, in addition
to the current phase.
(c) The boundaries of the study area to be analyzed shall include
those existing and proposed streets and intersections which
may be affected by the proposed subdivision or land
development. If there is any dispute as to whether existing and
proposed streets and intersections may be affected or not, the
final discretion shall rest with the Township Engineer or
designated traffic engineer.
(d) In lieu of submitting a traffic impact study, under the
provisions of § 113-7, the Board of Supervisors may accept a
fee from an applicant to be put towards the cost of a larger,
more-comprehensive traffic study or to accept a developer
making an improvement to a street that otherwise would not
be required by the Township or PennDOT. For a larger traffic
study, the Township shall have the authority to select a
consultant or request that PennDOT conduct a study.
(e) Prior to preparing a traffic impact study, the applicant is
requested to meet with the Township Engineer, Township staff,
officials of PennDOT and York County Planning Commission
(YCPC) staff.
(3) Traffic impact study contents.
(a) Site description. This section shall include the location,
proposed land uses, acreage, construction staging and
completion date of the proposed land development. Types of
dwelling units and number of bedrooms shall be included for
residential developments, and gross and usable floor area for
nonresidential developments. A brief description of
surrounding land uses and other proposed land developments
within the study area shall be provided. A study area map
should also be included.
(b) Transportation facilities description.
[1] The study shall describe the proposed internal
transportation system, including vehicular, bicycle, bus
§ 113-53 SEWERS § 113-53
99:345
and pedestrian circulation, all internal roadway widths
and rights-of-way, parking conditions, traffic
channelizations and any traffic controls within the site. If
the site will be served by public transit, the study shall
describe any benches, shelter or transit signs that will be
provided.
[2] The study shall describe the location and design of
proposed access, including sight distance limitations and
distance from adjacent driveways and intersections.
[3] The report shall describe the external roadway system
within the study area. Major intersections in the study
area shall be identified and mapped. Pedestrian and
bicycle facilities on abutting properties shall also be
documented. All proposed or approved roadway
improvements within the study area shall be noted.
[a] As applicable, the study shall also assess transit
service, rail freight operations, potential ride-sharing
services and other modes of transportation and their
impacts. The potential for a bus shelter at a public
transit stop should be considered. The design of any
new public transit stop or bus shelter shall be
forwarded to the local public transit agency for
comment.
[b] The study shall also consider whether any
improvements are needed to encourage bicycle or
pedestrian access.
[4] The report shall list the proposed timing of construction of
transportation improvements, including current
scheduling on the York Area Metropolitan Planning
Organization (YAMPO) Transportation Improvement
Program. If construction bid, let and completion dates
have been determined, they shall be noted. If there are any
conflicts between the scheduled completion of external
road improvements versus transportation improvements
to be completed within the development, the conflict shall
be evaluated, with recommendations to resolve any
conflicts. This section shall also consider the scheduled
timing of any external public transit, rail or recreation trail
improvements.
(c) Existing traffic conditions.
[1] Existing traffic conditions shall be documented for all
streets and intersections in the study area. Traffic volumes
shall be recorded for existing average daily traffic, for
existing peak-hour traffic and for traffic during the
development's peak hour. Complete traffic counts at all
§ 113-53 JACKSON CODE § 113-53
99:346
intersections in the study area shall be conducted,
encompassing the peak hours of the development and
roadway. If the use will not be open during a peak hour of
adjacent traffic, that hour does not need to be evaluated.
If a use/development will have a peak hour of traffic
generation that is different from the peak hour of adjacent
traffic, that peak hour for the use/development shall also
be considered. A volume capacity analysis using the
procedures of the current Highway Capacity Manual and
based upon existing volumes shall be performed during
the peak hour(s) of the development for the peak hour(s)
of all roadways and major intersections in the study area.
Levels of service shall be determined for each location.
[2] The study shall include information on traffic accidents at
intersections in the study area for the previous five years,
if such information is available from PennDOT or local
police. Safety conditions shall be assessed. Accident
frequency per year should be noted.
(d) Traffic impact of the development.
[1] Estimation of vehicular trips to result from the proposal
shall be completed for the peak hour(s) of both the street
system and the development. Acceptable source(s) and
methodology shall be followed. Data sources and study
methodology shall be referenced in the report. These
generated volumes shall be distributed to the study area
and assigned to the existing streets and intersections
throughout the study area. The report shall describe the
basis for distributing trips in various directions.
Documentation of all assumptions used in the distribution
and assignment phase shall be provided. Traffic volumes
shall be assigned to all access points.
[2] Safety issues for any pedestrian crossings shall be
described, including any need for improvements and
whether the applicant proposes to fund such
improvements.
[3] The method of calculating trip generation shall be
included. Any characteristics of the site that will cause trip
generation rates that vary from the most current ITE
Manual are subject to approval by the Township Engineer.
[4] Calculations performed in the study analysis shall be
included in an appendix of the report.
[5] The distribution of trips and the assignment of
percentages and volumes shall be presented in graphic
form for each major intersection, along with an
explanation of their derivation.
§ 113-53 SEWERS § 113-53
99:347
(e) Analysis of traffic impact.
[1] The study shall project future traffic conditions if the
proposed subdivision/land development would not be built.
This demand shall consist of the combination of the
existing traffic expanded to the completion year through
the use of an accepted background growth rate and the
traffic generated by other proposed developments in the
study area. To assist in determining the background
growth rate, the Annual PennDOT Traffic Report shall be
considered. A compound interest rate shall be used to
calculate yearly estimate increases in background traffic.
[2] The total future traffic demand based on full occupancy of
the proposed subdivision or land development shall be
calculated for the existing and proposed streets and
intersections.
[3] A volume/capacity analysis shall also be conducted using
the total future demand and the future roadway capacity.
This analysis shall be performed using the peak hour(s) for
all streets and major intersections in the study area. The
Township Engineer may also require this analysis to be
conducted for the peak hour(s) of the development.
Volume/capacity calculations shall be completed for all
movements at major intersections. Levels of service for all
streets and intersections shall be listed.
[4] The study shall consider the opening year for the
development. If the development will be phased, the study
shall consider the year the first phase will be completed
and the year when the entire development will be
complete. The study shall also evaluate a time period 10
years after the opening year.
[5] In addition to intersection analysis, the Township may
require level-of-service analysis of a road corridor if a
particular concern exists.
[6] As applicable, the study shall analyze traffic signal
warrants, traffic signal optimization, turn lane needs, right
turn lane/deceleration lane needs, intersection gap
analysis and queue analysis.
[7] The analysis shall use the latest version of the Highway
Capacity Manual software or its equivalent.
[8] The study shall be conducted for improvements proposed
to mitigate the traffic deficiencies that were identified,
such as a new traffic signal.
§ 113-53 JACKSON CODE § 113-53
99:348
[9] Pedestrian circulation and transit service shall also be
evaluated.
(f) Conclusions and recommended improvements.
[1] Any movements on streets and intersections within the
study area showing a Level of Service E or worse, based on
the latest edition of the Highway Capacity Manual, shall be
considered deficient. Specific recommendations for the
elimination of these problems shall be listed. Unsignalized
intersections shall be evaluated for a signal warrant.
Highway capacity evaluations shall consider not only the
overall intersection level of service but also each approach
and movement to identify any substandard values which
need to be improved.
[2] At all locations where the level of service for the
completion year of the development is deficient without
the proposed development, the study shall determine
improvements which would provide a level of service and
delay no worse than future conditions without the subject
development. These improvements may include street and
intersection design and improvements, traffic signal
installation and operation, traffic signal timing and other
improvements. The study shall also provide an analysis to
determine improvements which would eliminate all
deficient levels of service.
[3] Actions to facilitate use of bus or van service and
carpooling should be included, if applicable.
[4] The listing of recommended improvements for both streets
and transit shall include, for each improvement, the party
responsible for the improvement, a preliminary cost
estimate and funding of the improvement, and the phase of
development during which the improvement is proposed to
be completed. Any roadway improvement which requires
increased right-of-way shall be identified. The study should
estimate the applicant's fair share of the costs of the
needed improvements. Calculations to support a fair-share
allocation of costs shall be included in the appendix of the
report.
[5] The traffic impact study may be used as a basis for a
Township requirement under § 113-53J or another section
of this chapter
[6] Improvement plans should not be submitted to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT)
before they are submitted to the Township. Approval of a
site access plan by PennDOT does not guarantee approval
by the Township and vice versa.
§ 113-53 SEWERS § 113-53
99:349
§ 113-54. Access drives and driveways.
[7] This section shall also address any pedestrian, bicycle,
transit and rail freight issues. Any proposed railroad
sidings or crossings shall be described, as well as any
related safety issues.
[8] See also the airport safety zones' provisions in Chapter
133, Zoning.
(g) Preparation and review. The preparer of the traffic impact
study shall be a professional engineer or transportation
planner. The developer shall reimburse the Township for
reasonable fees and expenses incurred by the Township
Engineer or traffic engineer for the review of the developer's
traffic impact study and plans.
(h) Data sources and methodology shall be included in the report.
A. Construction standards. See the Township Construction and Materials
Specifications.95
B. Access; state roads. A state highway occupancy permit is required for
all access onto or work within the right-of-way of a state road. A
Township driveway permit shall be obtained before any vehicle access
is allowed from a state road or Township-owned street.
(1) The applicant shall comply with any requirement of PennDOT to
provide advance notice to the York County Planning Commission of
a driveway highway occupancy permit application.
C. Additional requirements. See §§ 133-34 and 133-35 of Chapter 133,
Zoning.
D. Drainage. The developer shall make adequate provisions to maintain
uninterrupted parallel drainage along a street where intersected by an
access drive or driveway. Access drives and aisles within parking lots
shall be graded and drained to keep the primary travel lane free of
stormwater.
E. Shoulder. The grade of the shoulder of a road shall be maintained along
its length and shall not be filled in to allow the construction of a
driveway or access drive at a higher grade.
F. Shared driveways. A shared driveway serving more than one lot shall
only be approved if a variance is secured from the Township Zoning
Hearing Board.
G. Turnarounds. For lots abutting collector or arterial streets, driveways
shall be designed with a location on the lot to turn a vehicle around, so
95.Editor's Note: The Township Construction and Materials Specifications are on file in the
Township offices.
§ 113-53 JACKSON CODE § 113-54
99:350
§ 113-55. Off-street parking connections.
§ 113-56. Sidewalks, pathways and driveway aprons.
as not to require a vehicle to back out onto that collector or arterial
street.
A. Interconnected parking lots. Adjacent to a collector or arterial street
where two lots that are each intended for current or future business
uses will be contiguous to each other, the following shall apply:
(1) When two contiguous business uses or lots are in common
ownership at the time of subdivision or land development
application, the parking lots shall include an interconnection to
allow motorists and pedestrians to travel from one business to
another business without needing to reenter a public street.
(2) Where two contiguous lots involving current or future businesses
are not in common ownership, the applicant for a subdivision or
land development shall seek permission from the abutting lot
owner to allow a vehicle interconnection between the parking lots.
Unless the abutting property owner refuses to permit the
interconnection, the subdivision or land development shall include
the construction of a vehicle and pedestrian interconnection
between the parking areas.
(a) If the abutting property owner refuses to permit the
interconnection or the interconnection is currently not
feasible, the Board of Supervisors may require that the
subdivision or land development include an easement allowing
a future interconnection and/or construct the interconnection
as a stub up to the applicant's property line.
(3) Where an interconnection is required or planned between two uses
or lots, the subdivision or land development shall include a suitable
cross-easement that permits vehicles and pedestrians from one use
or lot to have access through the parking lot and driveway of the
adjacent use or lot.
A. Sidewalks built to Township specifications shall be required, unless the
Board of Supervisors determines they are not necessary for safe
pedestrian movement or unless the applicant proves that sidewalk
construction is not feasible considering the topography or other natural
limitations. In any case, sidewalks shall not be required along singlefamily
detached dwelling lots of greater than 20,000 square feet in lot
area, unless the Board of Supervisors determines that a situation exists
that is exceptionally hazardous to pedestrians and/or is within close
proximity to a public school or is needed to tie into an existing walkway
system.
§ 113-54 SEWERS § 113-56
99:351
(1) An applicant may propose an alternate system of pathways that
serve the same purposes as sidewalks and which guarantee public
access but which are not necessarily within a street right-of-way.
B. Pathway or bikeway.
(1) If deemed necessary for the convenient and safe circulation of
bicycles and pedestrians, the Board of Supervisors, upon the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, may require that a
major subdivision or land development include the construction of
a pathway or bikeway.
(2) A bikeway/pathway shall have a minimum width of eight feet and a
maximum width of 12 feet. It may be required to be placed within a
street right-of-way in place of a sidewalk or may be placed
elsewhere on a lot within an easement or other right-of-way.
C. Location and width of sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalks, where required or provided, shall be located within the
street right-of-way and should be no closer than four feet from the
curbline. Any area between the sidewalk and curb shall be planted
in an attractive vegetative ground cover, such as grass. This strip
shall only be paved at driveway entrances.
(2) Any required sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five feet
along arterial streets or along routes used to access primary or
secondary schools and four feet along collector or local streets in
other locations.
D. Construction.
(1) Sidewalks shall meet construction specifications in the Township
Construction and Materials Specifications.96
(2) Bikeways/pathways shall be constructed of a one-inch bituminous
surface course, a one-and-five-tenths-inch bituminous binder
course, and six inches of compacted gravel or crushed stone, unless
an alternative standard is preapproved by the Township. To the
maximum extent feasible considering topography, pathways should
be accessible to persons in wheelchairs. Stop signs shall be posted
along bikeways where they meet streets. Pedestrian advisory signs
shall be posted along streets where they meet bikeways/pathways.
E. Accessibility requirements. Federal ADA requirements shall be met.
F. Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of adjacent landowners to
maintain, plow snow and remove ice off of and repair sidewalks.
96.Editor's Note: The Township Construction and Materials Specifications are on file in the
township offices.
§ 113-56 JACKSON CODE § 113-57
99:352
§ 113-57. Illumination.
Where a use involves exterior lighting, the lighting must be so located and
shielded that no objectionable illumination or glare is cast upon adjoining
properties or any adjacent public street. To allow performance evaluation, a
lighting plan is required.
A. Applicability.
(1) Outdoor lighting shall be required for safety and personal security
for uses that operate or have activity during hours of darkness
where there is public assembly and traverse, including but not
limited to the following uses: residential developments containing
lot sizes of less than 20,000 square feet, residential developments
of greater than 10 lots, multifamily residential developments, and
commercial, industrial, municipal, recreational and institutional
developments.
(2) The Township Supervisors may require that lighting be
incorporated for other uses or locations or restrict lighting in any of
the above uses when deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes
of this chapter.
(3) The glare-control requirements herein contained apply to lighting
in all above-mentioned uses, as well as but not limited to sign,
architectural, landscape, recreational and residential lighting.
(4) Temporary decorative lighting may be exempt from the
requirements of this chapter when approved by the Zoning Officer
for periods of short duration.
B. Criteria.
(1) Illumination levels.
(a) Lighting, where required or permitted by this chapter, shall
have intensities and uniformity ratios in accordance with the
current recommended practices of the Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America (IESNA), as contained in
the IESNA Lighting Handbook or separately in IESNA
Recommended Practices.
(b) Future amendments to said recommended practices shall
become a part of this chapter without further action of the
Township.
(c) Examples of intensities for typical outdoor applications, as
extracted from the Lighting Handbook, are presented below
but are not all inclusive.
§ 113-57 SEWERS § 113-57
99:353
Use/Task
Maintained
Footcandle
Uniformity
Ratio
[1] Streets, local commercial 0.9 avg. 6:1
avg:min
Streets, local residential 0.4 avg. 4:1
avg:min
[2] Parking, multifamily residential
Low vehicular/pedestrian
activity
0.2 min. 4:1
avg:min*
Medium vehicular/pedestrian
activity
0.6 min. 4:1
avg:min*
[3] Parking, industrial/commercial/
institutional/municipal
High activity, e.g., regional
shopping centers/fast-food
facilities, major athletic/civic/
cultural events
0.9 min. 4.1
avg:min*
Medium activity, e.g.,
community shopping centers,
office parks, hospitals,
commuter lots, cultural/civic/
recreational events
0.6 min. 4:1
avg:min*
Low activity, e.g.,
neighborhood shopping,
industrial employee parking,
schools, church parking
0.2 min. 4:1
avg:min*
[4] Sidewalks, walkways, and
bikeways
Commercial 1.0 avg. 5:1
avg:min
Residential 0.5 avg. 5:1
avg:min
[5] Building entrances, commercial,
industrial, institutional
5.0 avg. —
[6] Service station pump islands 20:0 avg. 4:1
avg:min
[7] Car dealerships 20.0 avg. 5:1
max:min
§ 113-57 JACKSON CODE § 113-57
99:354
Notes:
1. Illumination levels are maintained horizontal
footcandles on the task, e.g., pavement or area surface.
2. Uniformity ratios dictate that average illuminance
values shall not exceed minimum values by more than
the product of the minimum value and the specified
ratio, e.g., for high-activity commercial parking, the
average illuminance shall not exceed 3.6 footcandles
(0.9 x 4).
* In no case shall the maximum to minimum uniformity
ratio for parking be in excess of 20:1.
(2) Lighting fixture design.
(a) Fixtures shall be of a type and design appropriate to the
lighting application and aesthetically acceptable to the
Township Supervisors.
(b) For the lighting of predominantly horizontal surfaces, such as
but not limited to roadways, areas of vehicular and pedestrian
passage, loading areas, and parking areas, fixtures, whether
freestanding, wall-mounted, or any other type, shall be aimed
straight down and shall meet IESNA full-cutoff criteria.
(c) Where the use of fixtures meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria is
not practical or possible, fixtures shall be equipped with
aiming and/or light-redirecting devices such as shields, visors,
baffles, skirts or hoods when necessary to direct or redirect
offending light distribution.
(d) The use of floodlighting, spotlighting, noncutoff wall-mounted
fixtures, internally illuminated decorative globes and spheres,
lanterns and other fixtures not meeting IESNA full-cutoff
criteria shall be permitted only with the approval of the
Township, based upon acceptable justification and
achievement of adequate glare control.
(e) National Electrical Manufacturers' Association (NEMA) - head
fixtures, also known as "barn lights" or "dusk-to-dawn lights,"
shall not be permitted where they are visible from other uses,
unless fitted with a reflector or shield to render them full cutoff
(i.e., shielded to prohibit light emission at a ninety-degree
angle or greater).
(3) Control of nuisance and disabling glare
(a) All outdoor lighting, whether or not required by this chapter,
on private, residential, commercial, industrial, municipal,
recreational or institutional property shall be aimed, located,
designed, fitted and maintained so as not to present a hazard
§ 113-57 SEWERS § 113-57
99:355
§ 113-58. Streetlighting.
to drivers or pedestrians by impairing their ability to safely
traverse and so as not to create a nuisance by projecting
or reflecting objectionable light onto a neighboring use or
property.
(b) The use of floodlights and spotlights shall be so installed or
aimed that they do not project their output beyond the
boundaries of the property on which they are located.
(c) Unless otherwise permitted by the Township Supervisors, e.g.,
for safety or security or businesses that operate all night or
past 11:00 p.m., lighting for commercial, industrial, municipal,
recreational and institutional applications shall be controlled
by automatic switching devises, such as time clocks or
combination motion detectors and photocells, to permit
reducing or extinguishing outdoor lighting fixtures between
11:00 p.m. and dawn to mitigate light trespass, nuisance glare
and skylighting consequences.
(d) Lighting proposed for use after 11:00 p.m., or after normal
hours of operation of a business, whichever is earlier, for
commercial, industrial, institutional or municipal applications
shall be reduced by at least 50% from then until dawn, unless
supporting a specific purpose and approved by the Township
Supervisors.
(e) All illumination for advertising signs, buildings and/or
surrounding landscapes for decorative, advertising or esthetic
purposes is prohibited between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise, except
that such lighting situated on the premises of a commercial
establishment may remain illuminated while the establishment
is actually open for business and until one hour after closing.
(f) Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the
primary means for controlling glare. Rather, glare control shall
be achieved primarily through the use of such means as cutoff
fixtures, shields and baffles and appropriate application of
fixture-mounting height, wattage, aiming angle and fixture
placement.
A. Streetlights shall be provided and installed by the developer along
streets within and abutting a proposed subdivision or land development
in the following situations:
(1) Two lights at an intersection of two or more streets; and
(2) At other locations where the Board of Supervisors deems them
necessary to provide safe traffic or pedestrian circulation, to
illuminate curves in streets or to illuminate the more-isolated areas
of a development.
§ 113-57 JACKSON CODE § 113-58
99:356
§ 113-59. Street names.
Street names are subject to the approval of the Township.
§ 113-60. Regulatory signs.
The developer shall install Township-specified, or shall reimburse the
Township for the costs of supplying and installing, needed traffic regulatory
signs and street name identification signs on public streets. The developer
shall be responsible to provide and install signs on private streets. All traffic
regulatory signs shall meet current standards of PennDOT.
§ 113-61. Street trees, landscaping, and preservation of trees.
B. Such lights shall meet Township Construction and Materials
Specifications.97
C. The developer shall coordinate with the electric utility regarding the
responsibilities between the developer and the utility and shall
reimburse the utility for its reasonable costs for such work.
D. Private lighting. On all private streets, parking areas and other areas
requiring lighting, the developer shall provide materials, installation,
energizing and power for all lighting systems necessary for security and
public safety. A system acceptable to the Township shall be established
for the maintenance of such lights.
A. Names shall continue the name of any street with the same or similar
alignment.
B. Names shall not duplicate or be closely similar to the name of another
street within the Township and the same fire company or ambulance
service district and the same five-digit zip code area. The street names
shall be submitted for acceptance and must be approved by the United
States Postal Service and York County 911 Service Center.
A. Street trees. Within and abutting all land developments and major
subdivisions, along any existing or proposed street, or any access drive
serving more than one commercial, industrial or institutional principal
use or any access drive serving five or more dwelling units, street trees
are required to be planted. However, street trees shall not be required
along a single-family detached residential lot or agricultural lot with a
lot area of greater than three acres or where the Township determines
that existing healthy trees proposed to be preserved will serve the same
function.
(1) The Board of Supervisors may approve other species of trees than
those listed below if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
97.Editor's Note: The Construction and Materials Specifications are on file in the Township
offices.
§ 113-58 SEWERS § 113-61
99:357
Supervisors that the trees would be sturdy and resistant to disease
and road salt.
(2) A tree required by this section shall be of the following species.
This list shall not regulate types of trees that are not required to be
planted by this chapter.
Acer rubrum - American red maple
Acer saccharum - Sugar maple
Carpinus - Hornbeam
Celtis occidentalis - Common hackberry
Fagus sylvatica - European beech
Fraxinus pennsylvania - Green ash
Fraxinus americana - White ash
Ginko biloba fastigiata - Maiden hair tree (male only)
Gleditsia triacanthos - Thornless locust or honey locust
Liriodendron tulipifera - Tulip poplar
Prunus sargentii - Sargent cherry
Quercus - all varieties of oak
Tilia americana - American linden
Tilia petiolaris - Silver linden
Tilia euchlora - Crimean linden
Tilia cordata - Little leaf linden
Ulmus - hybrids: homestead or sapporo autumn gold
Ulmus parviflora - Chinese or lacebark elm, not including siberian
elm
Zelkova serrata - Zelkova
(3) In certain cases where evergreen trees would provide a buffer
between a street and dwellings or be more consistent with native
vegetation, then the Township may permit the planting of
evergreen trees instead of deciduous trees. In such case, the trees
are intended to be planted immediately outside of the right-of-way.
Such trees shall be of one of the following species:
Ilex opaca - American holly
Picea - all varieties of spruce
Pinus - all varieties of pine
Pseudotsuga taxifolia - Douglas fir
(a) If more than 10 trees are required to be planted, then no more
than 50% shall be of one species.
(4) Quality of trees.
§ 113-61 JACKSON CODE § 113-61
99:358
(a) Trees shall be of symmetrical growth, free of insect pests and
disease and durable under the maintenance contemplated.
(b) Trees which have died or have become diseased or pest-ridden
within 18 months from the time of planting shall be replaced by
the developer.
(5) Minimum sizes and standards. The trunk diameter (measured at a
height of 3.5 feet above the finished grade level) of deciduous
shade trees required by this chapter shall be a minimum of three
inches. The minimum height above the ground level at the time of
planting of evergreen trees required by this chapter shall be six
feet.
(6) Planting and maintenance.
(a) Trees shall be planted in conformance with good landscaping
practices.
(b) Trees adjacent to or within parking areas shall be properly
protected from damage by vehicles by raised curbs, raised
earth, protective devices and/or sufficient setback.
(c) Required trees shall be properly maintained and shall not be
removed without being replaced by another tree that meets the
requirements of this section.
(7) Required number and spacing of street trees.
(a) Along streets and access drives where street trees are
required, an average of one street tree shall be required for
every 50 feet of distance along the street right-of-way line on
each affected side of the street. Where a right-of-way does not
exist, an average of one street tree shall be required for every
50 feet of length of cartway.
(b) Spacing. The trees required under this section shall be spaced
throughout the development along the street but are not
required to be planted at exact intervals and may be clustered
following an approved plan. Trees shall be located so that they
do not restrict sight distance at driveway and street
intersections.
(8) Location of street trees. The trunks of required street trees shall be
planted outside of the street right-of-way but within the front yard
area unless an alternative location is specifically approved by the
Township or required by PennDOT. Where trees are not allowed in a
location because of a sight distance issue, the trees shall be planted
at other locations on the tract.
(9) Other requirements. The street trees required under this section
shall be in addition to any trees required under other Township
regulations.
§ 113-61 SEWERS § 113-61
99:359
B. Buffer yards. See the requirements in Chapter 133, Zoning. A buffer
yard required under Chapter 133, Zoning, shall include the following:
(1) Vegetative screenings shall include a variety of deciduous and
evergreen species that are indigenous to the area so as to provide a
year-round visual buffer. Trees and shrubs used for screening shall
consist of at least 50% evergreen trees and shrubs and shall be so
arranged as to provide an immediate visual screen of 50%.
Evergreen trees shall be at least six feet in height at the time of
planting.
(2) Vegetative screening shall incorporate earthen mounds or berms to
improve sound as well as visual buffering and shall be broken at
points of vehicular or pedestrian access.
(3) Plant material used in the screen plantings shall be at least six feet
in height when planted and be of a species which will produce a
complete visual screen of at least eight feet in height at maturity.
(4) No plantings shall be placed with their center closer than five feet
from the property line of the tract.
(5) Existing trees within the required screen buffer strip shall be
preserved wherever possible.
(6) Screenings shall be designed so the clear sight triangles at
intersections are not obstructed.
(7) Screen buffers comprised of evergreen plantings shall also be
required for the following conditions:
(a) All service, delivery, loading and outdoor storage and trash
disposal areas shall be screened from all residential uses,
public streets, parking lots and pedestrian walkways.
(b) All ground-level mechanical equipment not enclosed in a
structure shall be fully and completely screened.
C. Preservation of existing trees.
(1) Purposes: to protect wildlife and bird habitats, encourage
groundwater recharge, reduce air pollution, avoid pollution of
creeks by high-temperature runoff, maintain the attractive
character of residential areas and conserve energy.
(2) See the provisions for forestry in Chapter 133, Zoning,.
(3) Tree cutting.
(a) The number of trees with a trunk diameter of six inches or
more, measured at a height of 4.5 feet above the average
surrounding ground height, that are cut down or effectively
killed as part of a subdivision or land development (or in
§ 113-61 JACKSON CODE § 113-61
99:360
preparation to or as a result of such activity) shall be held to
an absolute minimum, except:
[1] As is approved under the Chapter 133, Zoning, as a
forestry operation; and/or
[2] For the routine thinning of woods.
(b) All trees and vegetation shall be removed from all existing and
proposed road rights-of-way.
(4) Protection of trees during construction.
(a) Reasonable efforts shall be taken during any construction to
ensure the protection of trees protected by this section to
ensure that the trees are not accidentally injured or killed.
These efforts shall ensure that equipment does not damage
tree trunks, that roots are not compacted by vehicles and that
the grade level around trees is not changed by more than eight
inches. Temporary barricades shall be placed around the root
systems of trees.
(b) If an approved subdivision or land development plan states
that certain trees are to be preserved, and if those trees are
killed, then the developer shall be required to replace those
trees with new mature trees, in addition to any other penalties
provided in this chapter.
D. Landscape plan. A landscape plan shall be required for each major
subdivision plan or land development plan at the plan submittal stages.
(1) Components of landscape plan. The following shall be required for
each landscape plan submitted:
(a) Any part or portion of the site which is not used for buildings or
other structures, loading and parking spaces and aisles,
sidewalks, paths and patios and designated storage areas shall
be planted and maintained with landscaping.
(b) The location, dimension and spacing of required plantings
should be adequate for their proper growth and maintenance,
taking into account the sizes of such plantings at maturity and
their present and future environmental requirements,
including wind, moisture and sunlight.
(c) The type(s) of plantings shall be limited or carefully selected
for locations where they will not be disturbed and so they do
not contribute to conditions hazardous to the public safety.
Such locations include but shall not be limited to public rightsof-
way, underground and aboveground utility rights-of-way, and
sight triangle areas required for unobstructed views.
§ 113-61 SEWERS § 113-61
99:361
§ 113-62. Curbs.
(d) No bushes or shrubs exceeding 30 inches in height, or at such
lesser height which due to ground elevations would obstruct
the vision of motorists, shall be permitted within 10 feet of the
street right-of-way line adjacent to driveways and access
drives.
(2) Maintenance/replacement guaranty. An eighteen-month
maintenance and replacement guaranty in a form acceptable to the
Township shall be provided by the developer and/or contractor
implementing the landscape plan. It shall commence upon final
inspection and approval by the Township of all landscape elements
shown on the landscape plan.
E. Parking area landscaping.
(1) Landscaping shall be required for any parking area which provides
more than 10 parking spaces, to reduce heat and noise and the
glare of vehicle lights; to reduce the level of carbon dioxide; to
improve stormwater control; and to replenish the groundwater
table.
(2) A minimum of 10% of any parking lot facility over 2,000 square feet
in gross area (as measured to and from the outside edges of paving)
shall be devoted to landscaping. All planting beds within a parking
lot shall be surfaced in natural lawn or ground cover planting.
(3) The interior of each parking lot shall have at least one three-inchcaliper
deciduous shade tree for every five parking spaces, if there
are no existing shade trees to satisfy this requirement. Shrubs and
other plant materials are encouraged to be used to complement the
trees but shall not be the sole contribution to the landscaping.
These trees shall be in addition to those required as a screen/buffer.
(4) Landscaped planting areas shall be reasonably dispersed
throughout the parking lot. Such areas shall be located along
sidewalks or walkways, in traffic separation islands, at the end of
parking aisles or bays, and can be located between parking stalls or
spaces. In addition, where there are more than 20 parking spaces,
landscaped areas at least 10 feet wide shall be provided around the
periphery of parking areas. Such areas shall, at a minimum, extend
the full length and width of the parking areas, except for necessary
accessways.
A. Curbs shall be required, unless the Board of Supervisors deems they
are not necessary based upon review by the Township Engineer. In
deciding whether to require curbs, the Township should consider
whether the curbs are needed to continue existing curbing along an
existing street, whether they are needed for stormwater management
purposes, and/or whether they are needed for road edge stabilization.
§ 113-61 JACKSON CODE § 113-62
99:362
§ 113-63. Blocks.
§ 113-64. Lots.
B. If curbs are not provided, appropriate stabilized drainage channels
designed to meet Chapter 107, Stormwater Management, shall be
required along all streets, within the street right-of-way, or drainage
easements.
C. Required curbs shall meet the following specifications, unless other
specifications are preapproved by the Township:
(1) Only straight or slant concrete curbs shall be provided, unless a
modification is approved under § 113-7. Such curbs shall meet
standards of the Township Construction and Materials
Specifications.98
(2) Gutter design shall be subject to the approval of the Township
Engineer based upon standard engineering practices.
D. Fees in lieu of curbing. See § 113-53J.
A. Maximum length. Residential blocks shall not exceed 2,000 feet in
length in subdivisions using an average lot size of one acre or larger
and shall not exceed 1,500 feet in length in subdivisions having an
average lot size less than one acre.
(1) Pedestrian crossings. The Board of Supervisors may require that a
pedestrian access easement be provided to provide pedestrian
access where street connections are not available to serve the
same purpose. For a crosswalk on a street, the developer shall
provide pavement markers and curb cuts in conformance with
Township Materials and Construction Specifications.99
(2) Future streets. Blocks shall be considered to be separated by the
reservation, as part of an approved subdivision plan, of a fifty-foot
minimum right-of-way reserved for a future cross-street, such as a
street which is intended to serve future interior lots. Such future
street is not required to be constructed until such time as the lots
fronting on it are subdivided. Such right-of-way shall be retained in
the same ownership as the abutting interior lot(s) until a street may
be developed. Potential future street extensions shall be shown on
the plan.
B. Blocks shall be of sufficient width to permit two tiers of lots, except
where access is limited by virtue of an adjoining arterial street or by
virtue of topographic limitations.
98.Editor's Note: The Construction and Materials Specifications are on file in the Township
offices.
99.Editor's Note: The Construction and Materials Specifications are on file at the Township
offices.
§ 113-62 SEWERS § 113-64
99:363
§ 113-65. Recreation areas and fees.
A. Zoning. All lots shall conform to all requirements of Chapter 133,
Zoning, as were in effect at the time such subdivision plan was duly
submitted.
B. Street frontage. Section 113-53A(2) shall apply.
C. Side lot lines shall abut and be approximately at right angles to straight
street rights-of-way and on radial lines to curved street rights-of-way.
Pointed or very irregularly shaped lots shall be avoided.
D. Double-frontage lots shall ordinarily not be created except as needed to
avoid direct vehicular access onto an arterial or collector street.
(1) Rear yard buffers along collector or arterial streets.
(a) Any residential lot of less than two acres with a rear yard
directly abutting a collector or arterial street shall, along such
rear yard, include a ten-foot-wide planting strip along the back
of the lot, in addition to the minimum yard requirement, with
access across this strip clearly prohibited on notes on any
approved plan.
(b) In addition to any street trees required by § 113-61 of this
chapter, this planting strip shall include evergreen plantings
meeting the buffer yard requirements of § 113-61 or
alternative landscaping approved by the Township. American
arborvitae and similar weak-stem plants shall not be used.
A. Purposes:
(1) To provide adequate open spaces, recreational lands and
recreational facilities to serve new inhabitants/occupants of new
developments, for both active and passive recreation.
(2) To recognize and work to carry out the recreation plan portion of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan for Jackson Township, which is the
adopted recreation plan for the Township.
B. Applicability. This section shall apply to any subdivision or land
development for which a final plan or a combined preliminary/final plan
is submitted after the enactment date of this amendment.
(1) This § 113-65 shall not apply to plans that the Township determines
only involve adjustments or corrections to an approved preliminary
plan or a preliminary plan that was actively before the Township for
consideration as of the date of the adoption of this section,
provided that the adjustments do not increase the number of
proposed dwelling units.
C. Limitations on use of fees.
§ 113-64 JACKSON CODE § 113-65
99:364
(1) Any fees collected under this section shall be placed within the
Township Recreation Escrow Fund, or its successor account.
(2) To make sure that the lands and facilities are accessible to the
inhabitants of the developments that paid fees towards their cost,
such fees should only be used within a five-mile radius of the
boundaries of the subdivision or land development that paid the
fees, unless the fees are used within a recreation area open to the
public that the Township intends to serve the entire Township.
(3) Such fees shall only be used for the following: acquisition of public
open space/recreation land and related debt payments,
development of public recreational facilities, landscaping of public
open space, and necessary engineering and design work for those
endeavors.
D. Land to be preserved. Any subdivision or land development regulated
under this § 113-65 shall be required to preserve the specified amount
of recreation land, unless the Board of Supervisors and the applicant
mutually agree that recreation fees shall be required in lieu of land.
(1) As a general nonbinding guideline, it is the intent of this section
that smaller developments (such as 10 or fewer dwelling units) that
do not include land that is adjacent to existing publicly owned land
shall be encouraged to pay a recreation fee in lieu of dedicating
land. However, if the applicant refuses to pay such fees, then
recreation land shall be required to be dedicated.
(2) The land and fee requirements of this section shall be based upon
the number of new dwelling units that would be allowed on the lots
of a subdivision or land development after approval.
(3) Prime recreation land. For the purposes of this section, the term
"prime recreation land" shall mean land proposed to be established
as recreation land that would meet all of the following standards:
(a) Less than 6% slope;
(b) Not a wetland under federal and/or state regulations;
(c) Be adjacent to a contiguous parcel of at least two acres (which
may include existing adjacent recreation land) or be
contiguous to an existing or planned recreational trail system;
and/or
(d) Not be within the one-hundred-year floodplain, as defined by
official floodplain maps of the Township.
(4) Amount of recreation land. If a subdivision or land development is
required to include recreation land, the following amounts for each
permitted new dwelling unit shall apply:
§ 113-65 SEWERS § 113-65
99:365
Percentage of the Total
Required Recreation Land
that Would Meet the
Definition of Prime
Recreation Land
Minimum Required
Recreation Land Per
Permitted Dwelling Unit
(square feet)
0% to 25.0% 5,200
25.1% to 75.0% 2,600
75.1% to 100% 1,300
E. Fees. If the Board of Supervisors determines that a proposed
subdivision or land development is required to pay fees in lieu of
dedicating recreation land, this fee shall be $1,500 for each new
dwelling unit, unless such fee is revised by a future amendment by the
Board of Supervisors.
F. Decision on land vs. fees. The Board of Supervisors shall determine
whether a land dedication would be in the public interest or whether
the payment of fees is required. This initial determination should, but is
not required to, be made at the time of sketch plan review. The
Township should, at a minimum, consider the following in this decision:
(1) Whether the land in that location would serve a valid public
purpose.
(2) Whether there is potential to make a desirable addition to an
existing public or school district recreation area or to create a
greenway along a creek.
(3) Whether the proposed land would meet the objectives and
requirements of this section and any relevant policies of the
Township Comprehensive Plan and any recreation plan.
(4) Whether the area surrounding the proposed development has
sufficient existing recreation and open space land and whether it is
possible for pedestrians and bicyclists to reach those lands.
(5) Any recommendations that may be received from the Planning
Commission, the Township Engineer, the local school board or
school district staff and the Township Parks and Recreation Board.
G. Recreation land to be preserved.
(1) Suitability. Recreation land shall be suitable for its intended
purpose, in the determination of the Board of Supervisors. The
applicant shall state, in writing, what improvements, if any, he/she
will commit to make to the land to make it suitable for its intended
purpose, such as grading, landscaping, or development of trails.
Such land shall be free of construction debris at the time of
dedication. Proposed recreation land shall be suitable to meet the
needs of the residents of the development.
§ 113-65 JACKSON CODE § 113-65
99:366
(2) Ownership. Required recreation land shall be dedicated to the
Township, unless the Board of Supervisors agrees to accept a
dedication to any of the following: the school district, the county,
the Bureau of State Parks, the State Fish and Boat Commission, the
State Game Commission, a similar governmental agency, an
incorporated property owners' association (such as a homeowners'
or condominium association) or an established environmental
organization acceptable to the Board of Supervisors. In the case of
a rental development, the Township may permit the recreation land
to be retained by the owner of the adjacent principal buildings.
(a) If recreation land is to be owned by a property owners'
association, the developer shall be required to establish such
association in a form that requires all property owners within
the development to annually contribute to the maintenance of
the recreation land.
[1] Any property owners' association agreements regarding
required recreation land shall be subject to acceptance by
the Board of Supervisors, based upon review by the
Township Solicitor.
[2] Prior to the sale of any dwelling unit or lot, all deeds shall
require each property owner to pay fees on a regular basis
for the maintenance and other expenses of owning such
land. The property-owners shall be incorporated with
covenants and bylaws providing for the filing of
assessments. After providing notice to affected owners,
the Township shall have the authority to establish
municipal liens upon all properties in the association to
fund maintenance of the land and Township legal costs if
the property owners' association does not fulfill its
responsibilities.
[3] An orderly process shall be established for the transfer of
the land to the association. The dedication of maintenance
responsibilities by a developer to a property owners'
association shall not occur until such association is
incorporated and able to maintain such land.
(b) Transfer to another entity. If the approved plan states that
ownership of and/or responsibility to maintain the recreation
land are given to a particular entity, then any transfer of
ownership or responsibilities to another entity shall require
preapproval by the Board of Supervisors. Where land is to be
owned by a conservation organization, a process shall be
established for the land to transfer to a different organization if
the first organization is not able to fulfill its obligations.
(c) The Board of Supervisors shall have the authority to refuse to
accept an offer of dedication of recreation land to the Township
§ 113-65 SEWERS § 113-65
99:367
and/or to determine that an offer does not meet Township
requirements.
(3) Easements. Any required recreation land dedication shall include a
conservation easement to permanently prevent its development for
buildings, except buildings for approved types of noncommercial
recreation or to support maintenance of the land. Such
conservation easements shall, at a minimum, be enforceable by the
Board of Supervisors. The Supervisors may require that the
easements also authorize their enforcement by a suitable third
party.
(4) Priorities. Priority shall be given to dedication of land that would be
suitable for:
(a) Additions to existing public schools and public parks;
(b) Preservation of woods, steep slopes or other important natural
features or land along a creek; or
(c) For centralized active recreation.
(5) Suitability. Land that is not suitable for active or passive recreation
shall not be permitted to meet the requirements of this section. Any
land area used to meet the requirements of this § 113-65 shall meet
the definition of "recreation land." Portions intended for active
recreation shall be well-drained, of less than 6% average slope and
not require filling in of a wetland for use.
(6) Access and contiguousness. Recreation land within a subdivision or
land development shall be contiguous, except as may be specifically
exempted by the Board of Supervisors, if necessary considering the
unique features of the site, and shall have a minimum of 20 feet of
road frontage at a location that allows access for maintenance and
access by pedestrians.
(7) Other ordinances. Any required land dedication or fees under this
section shall be in addition to any land dedication or improvement
requirements of any other Township ordinance. However, the
Board of Supervisors may allow common open space provided
under a Zoning Ordinance provision to also count towards the
recreation land requirement if the land will be improved for
recreation, capable of meeting all of the requirements of this
section, and be available without charge on a daily basis to the
public.
(8) Residual lands. If only a portion of a larger parcel(s) of land is
currently proposed to be subdivided, or the applicant owns one or
more adjacent parcel(s) that are not currently proposed to be
subdivided, the applicant shall provide a sketch of a possible future
land dedication on these adjacent lands. The intent is to coordinate
current plans with any future development, even in the long-term.
§ 113-65 JACKSON CODE § 113-65
99:368
§ 113-66. Stormwater management and floodplain protection policy.
See the provisions of Chapter 107, Stormwater Management, and Chapter
69, Floodplain Management.
(9) Coordination with future adjacent dedication. The Board of
Supervisors may require that a required land dedication within a
property currently being subdivided be placed along an edge of the
property so that it may, in the future, be combined with a recreation
land/open space dedication on the edge of an adjoining property
when that adjoining property is subdivided or developed.
H. Combination of land and fees. Upon mutual agreement of the Board of
Supervisors and the applicant, the Township may accept a combination
of recreation land and fees in lieu of land to meet the requirements of
this section for a subdivision or land development. This combination
shall be based upon the recreation land requirement applying for a
certain number of dwelling units and the fee in lieu of land requirement
applying for the remaining development. For example, if a development
included 25 dwelling units, recreation land could be required for 15
dwelling units and fees could be required for 10 dwelling units.
I. Timing of residential fees. Fees required by this section for all of the
dwelling units shall be paid prior to approval of the final plan.
J. Facilities in place of land or fees. An applicant may submit a written
request for a modification of the requirements of this section by offering
to construct substantial permanent recreation facilities within the
proposed subdivision or land development or on public parkland. Such
modification shall only be approved if the applicant clearly proves to the
satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that the facilities will serve a
valid public purpose, will be designed following modern standards in a
durable manner and will have a higher market value than the land or
fees that would otherwise be required.
(1) An exemption to these requirements may also be approved by the
Board of Supervisors if the applicant donates or sells at a reduced
price appropriate public recreation land to the Township or the
school district. In such case, the applicant shall provide a written
appraisal from a qualified professional that the market value of the
donation or price reduction is greater than the value of the fee or
land requirement that is exempted. In such case, the land shall be
determined to be suitable for public recreation by the Board of
Supervisors.
A. Detention basins.
(1) Areas of stormwater basins shall be maintained by mowing,
dredging and debris removal.
B. Stormwater easements.
§ 113-65 SEWERS § 113-66
99:369
§ 113-67. Sanitary sewage disposal systems.
(1) Where required. Where a subdivision or land development is
traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream that
the Township Engineer determines is subject to significant
stormwater flows, there shall be provided a drainage easement
established along the following:
(a) The one-hundred-year floodway, where that is defined;
(b) Where a one-hundred-year floodway is not defined, a width
shall be used that includes a minimum of 50 feet on each side
of the top of the primary bank of the waterway.
(2) The drainage easements required by the above Subsection B(1) are
intended to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage and to
provide for future possible widening, deepening, relocating,
improving or protecting of such drainage facilities. The Township
Engineer may require up to a five-tenths-foot freeboard and/or an
additional ten-foot building setback if deemed necessary along
newly constructed watercourses.
(3) The applicant shall prove that he/she notified adjacent downstream
property owners of the discharge onto their property.
(4) Areas where stormwater easements have or will be granted shall
not be obstructed during or after construction.
(5) See also the easement requirements in § 113-69C of this chapter,
including provisions regarding maintenance and obstructions.
C. Floodplain regulations. See the Township floodplain regulations in
Chapter 133, Zoning, and Chapter 69, Floodplain Management, and the
relevant provisions of the State Uniform Construction Codes.
A. In general.
(1) All subdivisions and land developments shall be served with an
approved and adequate sewage disposal system (either on-lot or
public) that will meet state and Township regulations.
(2) Public sewage connections. Any principal building or use within a
subdivision or land development that generates wastewater and
that, in the determination of the Board of Supervisors, based upon
the advice of any applicable municipal authority and the Township
Engineer, could reasonably connect into a public sewage system
shall be required to connect into that system.
(a) In general, a subdivision or land development shall be
expected to connect to a public sewage system if a suitable line
is available for connection within 1,000 feet from the
subdivision or land development. This requirement shall not
apply to land within the AP or RC Zoning District.
§ 113-66 JACKSON CODE § 113-67
99:370
(b) The applicant shall be responsible to pay such reasonable
capital expenses that are necessary for such connection.
B. Central sewage service.
(1) If a municipality or a municipal authority is to provide the central
sewage service, such agency shall have the authority to approve or
reject the proposed sewage collection system.
(2) Nonpublic sewage service. If nonpublic central sewage service is
proposed, the Board of Supervisors shall have the authority to
permit or not permit such service to meet the sewage requirements
of this section based upon:
(a) Whether public sewage service is expected to be available
within five years of the date of preliminary plan approval;
(b) Whether the proposed system would be consistent with the
Township's Official Sewage Facilities Plan; and
(c) Whether the system would include an appropriate permanent
system for professional operation and maintenance.
C. On-lot sewage disposal system.
(1) If connection to a public sewage system is not required at the time
of occupancy, and if a nonpublic central sewage system is not
approved by the Township under the Township Sewage Facilities
Plan, then each lot shall be required to be served by an on-lot
sewage disposal system that will meet all applicable state
regulations. Each such proposed location shall be tested and
approved by Township Sewage Enforcement Officer prior to
approval of the final plan. See the requirements of the DEP for a
planning module.
(2) Portable chemical toilets allowed as per DEP regulation or other
approved privies shall not be used as a primary method of sewage
service for a subdivision or land development that operates more
than 10 days in any calendar year, other than publicly owned
outdoor recreation uses and construction sites.
(3) Each new lot using on-lot septic service shall include a tested
alternate septic system location meeting all DEP regulations, which
shall be kept available for use if needed.
(4) The applicant shall submit results or a summary of the results of
required on-lot septic tests and shall show approved test locations
on the preliminary plans in accordance with DEP planning module
requirements.
D. Laterals. Each lot with central sewage service shall be served by a
separate sewage lateral.
§ 113-67 SEWERS § 113-68
99:371
§ 113-68. Water supply systems, fire hydrants and fire protection.
A. In general.
(1) All subdivisions and land developments shall be served with an
adequate on-lot or central water supply system that will meet DEP
and Township requirements.
(2) Required connections to central water systems.
(a) The Board of Supervisors, after requesting any
recommendations of the Planning Commission, the Township
Engineer and the appropriate water supplier, shall require all
lots and principal uses within a subdivision or land
development to be connected to an existing public or
Township-approved central water system where the Board of
Supervisors determines that such connection would be feasible
and cost-effective, considering the distances that the lines
would need to be extended and the average cost per dwelling
or lot. In general, a subdivision or land development shall be
expected to connect to a public water system if a suitable line
is available for connection within 1,000 feet from the
subdivision or land development. This requirement shall not
apply within the AP or RC Zoning District.
(b) If an applicant does not wish to extend central water service,
then the Township may require the applicant to provide a
comparison of the estimated total costs of extending the
central water service vs. the total costs of developing wells.
Such cost comparison shall be prepared by a professional and
be provided to the water supplier and the Township Engineer
for review. This analysis is intended to assist the Township in
determining whether a water extension would be reasonable.
The Township shall also have the authority to require a
subdivision or land development to include an extension of
central water service if such service is needed to resolve a
significant public health or safety hazard or where such
extension is required by another ordinance or utility
agreement.
(3) Private water system.
(a) The Board of Supervisors, based upon recommendations of the
Township Engineer, may require or permit the development of
a new private central water system if such system can
reasonably be expected to be connected into an extension of an
existing central water supplier within 10 years.
(b) Such system in that case shall be constructed following official
standards of the water supplier to which it is intended to be
connected.
§ 113-68 JACKSON CODE § 113-68
99:372
§ 113-69. Waste dumpsters, utilities and utility easements.
(c) In such case, the approved plan should include a specific
provision offering dedication of such system to the central
water supplier in the future, without any purchase cost by such
central water supplier.
B. Central water supply system.
(1) Water supplier approval. Proposed extensions of central water
systems shall meet all applicable procedures, reviews and
requirements of any appropriate municipal authority or water
company. Such extension shall be approved by such agency prior to
final plan approval, although specific detailed service agreements
are not required to be signed until prior to recording.
(2) Nonpublic supplier. Any new central water system that is not
owned by a public authority or municipality shall be found to be
acceptable in capacity, pressure, design and construction by the
Board of Supervisors, based upon review of the Township Engineer.
The Board of Supervisors may deny permission for a subdivision or
land development to be served by a nonpublic central water system
if such system cannot guarantee sufficient water pressure and
capacity and would not include a suitable process for long-term
operation and maintenance. The applicant may be required by the
Township to establish a test well prior to recording of any lots to
show that adequate water will be available and that there is
provision for a backup well.
C. On-lot water system (wells).
(1) Well locations. When a subdivision or land development is not
required to connect to a central water system, acceptable locations
for wells shall be shown on plans, and each well shall be set back a
minimum of 100 feet from any on-lot septic system.
(2) Setback. Wells should be located no closer than 15 feet from any
future street right-of-way.
D. Fire hydrants. All subdivisions and land developments that will be
served by central water service shall provide fire hydrants as needed
with appropriate water pressure so that hydrants are spaced a
maximum of 750 feet apart, measured along vehicle travel distance.
(1) The fire hydrants shall have connections compatible with those
used by the Township fire companies.
(2) Fire flows shall not be less than 500 gallons per minute in singlefamily
detached residential areas and 1,000 gallons per minute in
other developed areas, at 20 pounds per square inch residual
pressure.
§ 113-68 SEWERS § 113-69
99:373
A. Utilities. All electric power service lines (as opposed to distribution
lines) and all telephone, cable television (where available) and natural
gas service lines within a new subdivision or land development shall be
placed underground.
B. Dumpsters. All apartment developments shall include conveniently
located refuse collection facilities for the residents. All uses within
nonresidential land developments and subdivisions shall include
appropriate refuse collection facilities. All bulk refuse collection
dumpsters shall be screened on three of four sides by walls or
evergreen landscaping from view of public streets and as required by
§ 133-46 of Chapter 133, Zoning. Dumpster areas should not be placed
in areas of the site where garbage trucks can block access drives or
parking spaces.
C. Easements. Easements shall be provided as follows:
(1) Stormwater drainage, sanitary sewage, central water, emergency
access and other types of easements shall be provided as
determined to be needed by the Township and as indicated on the
plans.
(2) Locations. All lots shall include a stormwater drainage and utility
easement around the perimeter of each lot, including adjacent to
the street right-of-way. However, such easements shall not be
required where buildings are to be attached at a lot line.
(3) Width. The standard minimum width of a stormwater drainage or
underground utility easement shall be 15 feet, which may be
reduced to 10 feet for each lot if a ten-foot minimum easement
exists on the abutting side of the abutting lot.
(4) See also drainage easement provisions in § 113-66 of this chapter.
(5) Additional width of easements shall be provided if required by the
utility provider or the Board of Supervisors, based upon advice of
the Township Engineer. The easement widths along side lot lines
may be reduced if Chapter 133, Zoning, allows a principal building
setback that is more narrow than the width of the easement that
would otherwise be required.
(6) Separation. Minimum separation distances between utility lines
shall be as required by the applicable utility or as deemed
necessary by the Township Engineer.
(7) Pipelines. If any activity is proposed within the right-of-way of an
underground fuel or gas pipeline, the applicant shall provide
written evidence from the operator of such pipeline that such
activity is acceptable under its safety standards and the terms of
that right-of-way.
§ 113-69 JACKSON CODE § 113-69
99:374
§ 113-70. Monuments and markers.
§ 113-71. Erosion control and grading.
(8) Maintenance and obstructions. The owner of the lot shall maintain
an easement in such a condition that does not inhibit its intended
purpose(s). Fill or structures shall not be placed in an easement in
a way that inhibits its intended purpose(s). Specifically, structures
or grading that could alter or obstruct stormwater flows in violation
of the approved final plan shall be prohibited within stormwater
easements.
(9) Township entry. The Township, at its option, shall have the right to
enter a stormwater easement or any municipal easement to
maintain it or improve it for its intended purpose(s), although the
Township does not accept the responsibility to complete such work.
A. Monuments.
(1) Location. For a major subdivision, permanent reference
monuments shall be located at each intersection of rights-of-way of
street(s) constructed by the developer, at the beginning and ending
of all street curves, and at exterior corners of the subdivision or
land development. For a minor subdivision, two permanent
monuments shall be required, preferably at the street right-of-way
line. Alternative monument requirements may be approved by the
Board of Supervisors upon recommendation of the Township
Engineer if an alternate arrangement still permits a surveyor to
stake out accurately any building lot shown on the record plan.
(2) Type. Reference monuments shall be constructed of steelreinforced
Portland cement concrete or other materials
preapproved by the Township Engineer and should have a
minimum size of 4 x 4 inches at the ground level and shall have the
top flush with the grade level.
B. Markers. All lot corner markers shall be permanently located and shall
be at least a three-fourths-inch metal pin or pipe with a minimum length
of 20 inches, located in the ground to existing grade. Such markers
shall be located prior to the lot being offered for sale.
A. Ground cover and topsoil. After completion of construction on a lot, all
exposed ground surfaces that are not paved and that are not covered by
approved gravel areas or decorative stones or similar material shall be
covered by a minimum of four inches of topsoil and a vegetative ground
cover that will prevent soil erosion and the raising of dust.
B. Erosion control.
(1) Any earth disturbance shall be controlled by proper measures to
prevent soil erosion and sedimentation, following DEP regulations
and standards of the County Conservation District.
§ 113-69 SEWERS § 113-71
99:375
(a) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan is required to be
submitted to the County Conservation District and found to be
acceptable for most types of earth disturbance under the state
regulations.
(b) Compliance with such plan shall be an automatic condition of
any approval or permit under this chapter.
(c) Township permits may be suspended if earth disturbance does
not comply with such approved plan.
(2) Both the owner of the property at the time of any earth disturbance
and the person(s)/company accomplishing the work shall be
responsible to ensure that adequate erosion control measures are
used.
C. Grading plans. In order to provide more-suitable sites for building and
other uses, to improve surface drainage, and to control erosion, the
following requirements shall be met:
(1) Plan requirement.
(a) A grading plan shall be required for each major subdivision
plan or land development plan at the plan submittal stages.
(b) Grading plans shall be required to show proposed grading for
each individual lot within all major subdivision plans and all
land development plans.
(2) All lots, tracts, or parcels shall be graded in accordance with
Chapter 107, Stormwater Management, to provide proper drainage
away from buildings, prevent any surface runoff from ponding, and
all other stated purposes of such chapter.
(3) Grading shall be done in such a way so as to not divert water onto
the property of another landowner without the express consent of
the Township and the notification of the landowner.
(4) During grading operations, necessary measures for off-premises
dust and mud control shall be exercised at all times in accordance
with approved erosion and sedimentation control plans.
(5) Grading equipment shall not be permitted to cross through
streams. Provisions shall be made for the installation of temporary
culverts and/or bridges as necessary, and such crossings shall be
permitted in accordance with requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
(6) Excavations and fills.
(a) Cut and fill slopes shall be no steeper than 2:1, unless
stabilized by a retaining wall or cribbing, except as approved
by the Township Engineer under special conditions.
§ 113-71 JACKSON CODE § 113-71
99:376
§ 113-72. Natural feature regulations.
(b) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water
from damaging the cut face of excavations or the sloping
surfaces of fills.
(c) Cut and fills shall not endanger or encroach upon adjoining
property.
(d) Fills shall be placed and compacted so as to minimize sliding or
erosion of soil.
(e) Fill shall not encroach on watercourses.
(f) Fill places adjacent to natural watercourses or constructed
channels shall have suitable protection against erosion during
periods of flooding.
D. Topsoil preservation. In addition to any requirements necessary for
erosion and sedimentation control plan approval by the York County
Conservation District, topsoil moved during the course of construction
shall be redistributed on all regraded surfaces and shall be stabilized by
seeding or planting.
E. Removal of debris. All stumps and other tree parts, litter, brush, weeds,
excess or scrap building materials or other debris shall be removed
from the site and disposed of as provided by law. No tree stumps or
portions of tree trunks or limbs shall be buried anywhere on site.
A. Development along streams and wetlands.
(1) Any street, driveway or utility crossing of a perennial stream shall
be approximately perpendicular to the stream, to the maximum
extent feasible. As part of any street, driveway or utility
construction within or adjacent to a stream, the applicant shall
complete remedial measures to mitigate the impact upon the
stream, including planting of trees and thick lower-level vegetation
and use of best management practices.
(2) Areas within 50 feet from the top of the primary bank of a perennial
stream shall not be occupied by any of the following: a new
building, new or expanded vehicle parking, or new or expanded
business outdoor storage.
(3) No new or expanded building, vehicle parking or business outdoor
storage area shall be located less than 20 feet from a wetland. A
wetland shall be an area defined under state or federal regulations
as a wetland, whichever is more inclusive. A setback shall not apply
to wetlands that the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Township Engineer were clearly man-made, such as within
detention basins or man-made drainage ditches.
§ 113-71 SEWERS § 113-72
99:377
(4) Vegetation. Where existing trees and/or shrubs are removed from
lands that are less than 50 feet from the top of the primary bank of
a perennial stream as part of, or in preparation for, a subdivision,
land development or permitted construction of a new building, then
new trees and shrubs shall be planted and maintained. The new
trees and shrubs shall have the same or better impact upon
controlling erosion and filtering pollutants from runoff as the trees
and/or shrubs that were removed. Mature healthy trees shall only
be removed within this fifty-foot-wide area as part of a development
where there is no feasible alternative, such as to allow a utility
crossing.
B. Preservation of existing trees. See § 113-61C.
§ 113-72 JACKSON CODE § 113-72
99:378
ARTICLE XI
Additional Standards for Mobile/Manufactured Home Parks
§ 113-73. Applicability.
§ 113-74. Exemptions.
The following shall not be considered to be a mobile home park but instead
shall be ruled by the applicable sections of this chapter and Chapter 133,
Zoning:
§ 113-75. Other requirements of this chapter.
§ 113-76. General standards and requirements.
A. The requirements in this article as well as those in Chapter 133, Zoning,
shall apply to any mobile home park.
B. The terms "mobile home" and "manufactured home" shall have the
same meaning.
A. Offering of more than one mobile/manufactured home for sale for
relocation to another tract, other than routine sale of previously
occupied homes within a mobile home park.
B. Any development of mobile homes involving only one mobile home per
fee-simple lot, which shall meet all of the requirements for a singlefamily
dwelling residential development.
C. A mobile home that is used only as a field or sales office or work or tool
house during a construction project and is not for residential purposes.
A. All provisions of this chapter shall apply to a mobile home park, except
for provisions that are specifically amended by this article. See also
§ 133-86 of Chapter 133, Zoning, concerning mobile home parks.
B. Every proposed mobile home park shall be submitted, reviewed,
approved and recorded as a land development. The requirements for a
subdivision may also need to be met if one or more new lots are created
or lot lines are changed.
A. All mobile home lots within a mobile home park shall be located on land
with an average natural slope of less than 15%.
B. Any street, not including an approved parking lot, shall meet Township
road construction requirements that would apply to a public street.
C. The mobile home park shall have adequate access by emergency
vehicles and shall include measures to provide adequate water supply
for fire-fighting. If the water supply cannot feasibly be provided on site,
the requirement may be met by the applicant constructing a hydrant to
access an available nearby water supply.
§ 113-73 SEWERS § 113-76
99:379
D. All mobile home parks of more than 25 dwelling units shall include a
mobile home for a qualified resident manager.
E. Access.
(1) Vehicle access to individual mobile home lots shall be from interior
parking lots, access drives or private streets and shall not be from
public streets exterior to the development. Streets within the
development providing access to 20 or more dwellings shall have a
paved cartway width of at least 26 feet, and other streets shall have
a paved cartway width of at least 22 feet, provided that on-street
parking is prohibited. If on-street parking is allowed, the minimum
cartway width shall be 32 feet.
(2) All new streets within the mobile home park shall be private and be
maintained as part of the mobile home park.
F. Parking.
(1) In addition to the off-street parking required by Chapter 133,
Zoning, an average of 0.5 off-street parking space per dwelling unit
shall be provided in convenient locations for visitor parking.
(2) An area shall be set aside for the parking of recreational vehicles
and boats of residents, with a minimum of one space for every 20
dwelling units.
G. Other design standards and improvements.
(1) Every mobile home lot shall be graded to provide a level, stable and
well-drained stand for the mobile home.
(2) Every mobile home lot shall be provided with underground electric,
telephone and television cable (if available) connections.
(3) All fuel storage and supply systems shall be constructed and
maintained in conformity with the regulations of all authorities
having jurisdiction. No aboveground fuel tanks shall be allowed
within a required setback.
(4) An average of one deciduous street tree shall be provided for each
50 feet of frontage along any street. These trees shall meet the
requirements of § 113-61A of this chapter.
§ 113-76 JACKSON CODE § 113-76
99:380
Chapter 117
TAXATION
§ 113-76 SEWERS § 113-76
99:381

ARTICLE I
Fire Plug Tax
[Adopted 8-1-1989 by Ord. No. 49-89]
§ 117-1. Tax imposed. [Amended 2-2-1993 by Ord. No. 57-93;
2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 104-98; 1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 118-00;
2-1-2001 by Ord. No. 127-01]
All customers of the York Water Company owning property, whether or
not exempt from taxation under existing law, abutting upon said highways,
streets, roads and alleys or portions thereof within 780 feet of any fire
hydrant in the district benefited thereby shall annually pay an assessment
of 0.170 mil for the placing, replacing, operating, maintaining and repairing
of said hydrants.
§ 117-2. Filing of assessments; Tax Collector's commission.
All such assessments for fire protection shall be filed with the Township
Tax Collector who shall give 30 days' written or printed notice that the
assessments are due and payable, stating the due date to each party
assessed either by service on the owner of the property or by mailing
such notice to the owner at his or her last known post office address. The
Township Tax Collector shall be entitled to the same commission for the
collection of such assessments as he or she is entitled to by law for the
collection of the Township road tax.
§ 117-3. Late payments; collection by Solicitor; commission.
[Amended 12-5-1995 by Ord. No. 83-95]
If the assessments or any of them remain unpaid at the expiration of not
exceeding 90 days, the exact time to be fixed by the Township Supervisors,
they shall be placed in the hands of the Township Solicitor or his or her
designee for collection. The Township Solicitor shall collect the same,
together with 5% as attorney's commission and interest from the date such
assessments were due, by a municipal claim filed against the property of the
delinquent owner in like manner as municipal claims are by law filed and
collected.
§ 117-4. Claims for more than one lot.
Where an owner has two or more lots against which there is an assessment
for the same year, all such lots may be embraced in one claim.
§ 117-1 SEWERS § 117-4
99:383

ARTICLE II
Streetlighting Tax
[Adopted 4-1-1974 by Ord. No. 2-74]
§ 117-5. Tax levied. [Amended 3-6-1978 by Ord. No. 4-78; 12-4-1979
by Ord. No. 2-79; 12-4-1984 by Ord. No. 33-84; 12-30-1986 by Ord.
No. 38-86; 7-5-1994 by Ord. No. 74-94]
§ 117-6. Collection of tax.
Said tax shall be collected by the Jackson Township Tax Collector in the
manner prescribed by law.
A. Any portion of real estate which is within 250 feet of a streetlight shall
be assessed a streetlight tax based upon the front footage of said
recorded lot.
B. A tax is hereby levied against all owners of real estate with frontage
along lit streets within the Township of Jackson, York County,
Pennsylvania, as follows:
(1) Improved lots.
(a) Menges Mills: $0.53 per front foot.
(b) Thomasville: $0.51 per front foot.
(c) Lincoln Estates: $0.58 per front foot.
(d) Pine Springs: $0.30 per front foot.
(e) Twin Pines I (Melinda Perry, Stitt and Pauline Roads): $0.47
per front foot.
(f) Twin Pines II (all other streets in the Twin Pines development):
$0.30 per front foot.
(2) Vacant lots.
(a) Menges Mills: $0.13 per front foot.
(b) Thomasville: $0.12 per front foot.
(c) Lincoln Estates: $0.14 per front foot.
(d) Pine Springs: $0.08 per front foot.
(e) Twin Pines I (Melinda, Perry, Stitt and Pauline Roads): $0.11
per front foot.
(f) Twin Pines II (all other streets in the Twin Pines development):
$0.08 per front foot.
§ 117-5 SEWERS § 117-7
99:385
§ 117-7. Collection expenses; compensation of Tax Collector.
Expenses of collection and compensation of the Tax Collector shall be paid
in accordance with law.
§ 117-8. Notice of tax due.
The Tax Collector shall give notice to the taxpayers of the amount of such
tax due under this article as provided by law.
§ 117-7 JACKSON CODE § 117-8
99:386
ARTICLE III
(Reserved)100
§ 117-9. through § 117-21. (Reserved)
100. Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Amusement Tax, adopted 1-7-1974 by Ord. No. 1-74, as
amended, was repealed 12-3-1996 by Ord. No. 93-96.
§ 117-9 SEWERS § 117-9
99:387

ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)101
§ 117-22. through § 117-30. (Reserved)
101. Editor's Note: Former Art. IV, Per Capita Tax, adopted 3-7-1966 by Ord. No. 1-66, as
amended, was repealed 12-30-2004 by Ord. No. 152-04.
§ 117-22 SEWERS § 117-22
99:389

ARTICLE V
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-1-2011 by Ord. No. 193-11102]
§ 117-31. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Jackson Township Earned Income and
Net Profits Tax Ordinance," referred to herein as "this article."
§ 117-32. Intent and applicable rules.
§ 117-33. Definitions.
All words and phrases shall have the meanings as set forth in Act 32, as
amended. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit, whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
BUSINESS ENTITY — A sole proprietorship, corporation, joint-stock
association or company, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability
company, association, business trust, syndicate or other commercial or
professional activity organized under the laws of this commonwealth or any
other jurisdiction.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency. This term shall include
an entity which is classified as a corporation for federal income tax
purposes.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
A. It is the intent and purpose of this article to include all of the applicable
language and provisions of 53 P.S. 6924.501 et. seq., the Act of General
Assembly of July 2, 2008 (P.L. 197) and known as Act No. 32, as may be
amended and supplemented from time to time. In all enforcement of the
administration of this article, the language and intent of the Act, as
amended, shall take precedence.
B. The tax imposed by this article shall be collected and administered in
accordance with all applicable laws and regulations; and regulations,
policies and procedures adopted by the TCC or Tax Officer. This
includes any regulations, policies and procedures adopted in the future
to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. 1937.
102. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. V, Earned Income Tax, adopted
5-2-1995 by Ord. No. 81-95, as amended.
§ 117-31 SEWERS § 117-33
99:391
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development or successor agency charged with any duties under
the Act, as may be amended and supplemented.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of abode
which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than transitory.
Domicile is the place in which a man has voluntarily fixed the habitation
of himself and his family, not for a mere special or limited purpose, but
with the present intention of making a permanent home, until some event
occurs to induce him to adopt some other permanent home. In the case
of businesses or associations, the domicile is that place considered as the
center of business affairs and the place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — The compensation as required to be reported to or
as determined by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under section
303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform
Code of 1971,"103 and rules and regulations promulgated under that section.
For purposes of earned income, employee business expenses are allowable
deductions as determined under Article III of the "Tax Reform Code of
1971." The term does not include offsets for business losses. The amount
of any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy shall not be
taxable as earned income.
EARNED INCOME AND NET PROFITS TAX — The tax levied herein by the
municipality on earned income and net profits. Also referred to as "tax"
herein.
EMPLOYER — A person, business entity or other entity employing one
or more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
The term includes the Commonwealth, a political subdivision and an
instrumentality or public authority of either. For purposes of penalties
hereunder, this term includes a corporate officer.
MUNICIPALITY — A city of the second class, city of the second class A, city
of the third class, borough, town, township of the first class or township of
the second class. For purposes of this article, such term shall mean Jackson
Township, York County, Pennsylvania.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business, except
corporations as required to be reported to or as determined by the
Department of Revenue under section 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971
(P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code of 1971,"104 and rules and
regulations promulgated under such section. The term does not include
income which is not paid for services provided; and which is in the nature
of earnings from an investment. Further, the term shall not include:
A. Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
103. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
104. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 117-33 JACKSON CODE § 117-33
99:392
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside of the municipality.
PERSON OR INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the municipality.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAX BUREAU — A public nonprofit entity established by a TCC for the
administration and collection of earned income and net profits tax.
TAX COLLECTION COMMITTEE (HEREIN REFERRED TO AS "TCC") — The
committee established to govern each tax collection district for the purpose
of income tax collection. This term shall include a joint tax collection
committee.
TAX COLLECTION DISTRICT (HEREIN REFERRED TO AS "TCD") — The
York Tax Collection District as established under the Act.
TAX OFFICER — A political subdivision, public employee, tax bureau,
county, excluding a county of the first class, or private agency which
administers and collects earned income and net profits for one or more tax
collection districts. Unless otherwise specifically provided, for purposes of
the obligations of an employer, the term shall mean the Tax Officer or tax
collector for the tax collection district within which the employer is located,
or if an employer maintains workplaces in more than one tax collection
district, the Tax Officer for each such tax collection district with respect to
employees principally employed therein.
TAXPAYER — A person or business required hereunder to file a return of
earned income or net profits or to pay a tax thereon.
§ 117-34. Imposition of tax; rate.
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
B.
C. Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
A. A tax of 1% for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed on earned
income and net profits earned by residents of the municipality.
B. A tax of 1% for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed on earned
income and net profits earned by nonresidents, exclusive of domestic
servants and Maryland residents.
C. The earned income and net profits tax levied under this article shall be
applicable to earned income received and to net profits earned during
the period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year or for taxpayer fiscal years beginning
in the current year. The earned income and net profits tax shall
continue in force on a calendar year or taxpayer fiscal year basis
§ 117-33 SEWERS § 117-34
99:393
§ 117-35. Declaration and payment of tax.
without the need for annual enactment or reenactment, unless the rate
of the tax is subsequently changed. For a taxpayer whose fiscal year is
not a calendar year, the Tax Officer shall establish deadlines for filing,
reporting and payment of taxes which provide time periods equivalent
to those provided for a calendar year taxpayer.
A. Application.
(1) Income taxes shall be applicable to taxable income earned or
received based on the method of accounting used by the taxpayer
in the period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year; except that taxes imposed for the
first time and changes to existing tax rates shall become effective
on January 1 or July 1, as specified in this article, and the tax shall
continue in force on a calendar year or taxpayer fiscal year basis,
without annual reenactment, unless the rate of the tax is
subsequently changed.
(2) For a taxpayer whose fiscal year is not a calendar year, the Tax
Officer shall establish deadlines for filing, reporting and payment of
taxes which provide time periods equivalent to those provided for a
calendar year taxpayer.
B. Partial domicile. The taxable income subject to tax of a taxpayer who is
domiciled in a political subdivision for only a portion of the tax year
shall be an amount equal to the taxpayer's taxable income multiplied by
a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of calendar months
during the tax year that the individual is domiciled in the political
subdivision, and the denominator of which is 12. A taxpayer shall
include in the numerator any calendar month during which the
taxpayer is domiciled for more than half the calendar month. A day that
a taxpayer's domicile changes shall be included as a day the individual
is in the new domicile and not the old domicile. If the number of days in
the calendar month in which the individual lived in the old and new
domiciles are equal, the calendar month shall be included in calculating
the number of months in the new domicile.
C. Declaration and payment. Except as provided in Subsection A(2),
taxpayers shall declare and pay income taxes as follows:
(1) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the resident Tax Officer, a final return showing
the amount of taxable income received during the period beginning
January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the
current year, the total amount of tax due on the taxable income, the
amount of tax paid, the amount of tax that has been withheld under
§ 117-37 below and the balance of tax due. All amounts reported
shall be rounded to the nearest whole dollar. At the time of filing
the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the Tax Officer the balance
§ 117-34 JACKSON CODE § 117-35
99:394
of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case
of overpayment.
(2) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, by April 15 of the current
year, make and file with the Tax Officer a declaration of the
taxpayer's estimated net profits during the period beginning
January 1 and ending December 31 of the current year, and shall
pay to the Tax Officer in four equal quarterly installments the tax
due on the estimated net profits. The first installment shall be paid
at the time of filing the declaration, and the other installments shall
be paid on or before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of
the current year and January 15 of the succeeding year,
respectively.
(3) Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15 of
the current year, shall make and file the declaration required on or
before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of the current
year or December 31 of the current year, whichever date next
follows the date on which the taxpayer first anticipates such net
profit, and shall pay to the Tax Officer in equal installments the tax
due on or before the quarterly payment dates that remain after the
filing of the declaration.
(4) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the Tax Officer a final return showing the
amount of net profits earned or received based on the method of
accounting used by the taxpayer during the period beginning
January 1 of the current year, and ending December 31 of the
current year, the total amount of tax due on the net profits and the
total amount of tax paid. At the time of filing the final return, the
taxpayer shall pay to the Tax Officer the balance of tax due or shall
make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment. Any
taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth quarterly installment of
the estimated tax, elect to make and file with the Tax Officer on or
before January 31 of the succeeding year, the final return.
(5) The Department, in consultation with the Department of Revenue,
shall provide by regulation for the filing of adjusted declarations of
estimated net profits and for the payments of the estimated tax in
cases where a taxpayer who has filed the declaration required
under this subsection anticipates additional net profits not
previously declared or has overestimated anticipated net profits.
(6) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
the current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of
business, file a final return as required under this article and pay
the tax due.
(7) Every taxpayer who receives any other taxable income not subject
to withholding under Section 512(3) of the Act shall make and file
with the resident Tax Officer a quarterly return on or before April
§ 117-35 SEWERS § 117-35
99:395
§ 117-36. Registration.
§ 117-37. Filing and payment of tax by employer; withholding.
15 of the current year, June 15 of the current year, September
15 of the current year, and January 15 of the succeeding year,
setting forth the aggregate amount of taxable income not subject
to withholding by the taxpayer during the three-month periods
ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year, and December 31 of the current
year, respectively, and subject to income tax, together with such
other information as the Department may require. Every taxpayer
filing a return shall, at the time of filing the return, pay to the
Tax Officer the amount of income tax due. The Department shall
establish criteria under which the Tax Officer may waive the
quarterly return and payment of the income tax and permit a
taxpayer to file the receipt of taxable income on the taxpayer's
annual return and pay the income tax due on or before April 15 of
the succeeding year.
(8) The TCC may, by regulation, waive the requirements for a quarterly
return and payment of income tax under specified circumstances,
including those instances where a taxpayer's annual taxable
income is less than a specified amount.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the municipality, having imposed a tax
on earned income or net profits within its municipal boundaries who
employs one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a
salary, wage commission or other compensation who has not previously
registered shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer, register
with the Tax Officer or other designated Tax Officer, his/her or its name
and address and such other information as the Department or Tax
Officer may require.
B. Every employer shall require each new employee to complete a
certificate of residency form, which form shall be an addendum to the
Federal Employee's Withholding Allowance Certificate (Form W-4 or
successor form). An employer shall also require any employee who
changes their address or domicile to complete a certificate of residency
form, which forms are available from the Department or the Tax Officer
upon request. The purpose of said form shall be to help identify the
political subdivision where an employee lives and works.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the municipality imposing a tax on
earned income or net profits within the municipality who employs one
or more persons, exclusive of domestic servants and Maryland
residents, for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation shall
deduct at the time of payment thereof the greater of the employee's
§ 117-35 JACKSON CODE § 117-37
99:396
resident tax or the employee's nonresident tax imposed by this article
on the earned income due to his employee or employees and shall,
on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year,
October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding
year, file a quarterly return and pay to the Tax Officer the amount of
taxes deducted during the preceding quarterly periods ending March
31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year, September 30 of
the current year and December 31 of the current year, respectively.
Such return, unless otherwise agreed upon between the Tax Officer
and employer, shall show the name and social security number of
each such employee, the compensation of such employee during such
preceding three-month period, the tax deducted therefrom, the political
subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, the total
compensation of all such employees during such preceding quarterly
period and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the return as
well as any other information prescribed by the Department or the Tax
Officer.
B. Any employer who, for two of the preceding four quarterly periods, has
failed to deduct the proper tax or any part thereof or who has failed to
pay over the proper amount of tax to the Tax Officer may be required by
the Tax Officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly. In such cases,
payments of tax shall be made to the Tax Officer on or before the last
day of the month succeeding the month for which the tax was withheld.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A above, the provisions of
this Subsection C shall apply if any employer has more than one place of
employment in more than one tax collection district. Within 30 days
following the last day of each month, the employer may file the return
required by Subsection A above and pay the total amount of tax due
from employees in all work locations during the preceding month to the
Tax Officer for either the tax collection district in which the employer's
payroll operations are located or as determined by the Department. The
return and tax deducted shall be filed and paid electronically. The
employer must file a notice of intention to file combined returns and
make combined payments with the Tax Officer for each place of
employment at least one-month prior to filing its first combined return
or making its first combined payment. This paragraph shall not be
construed to change the location of an employee's place of employment
for purposes of nonresident tax liability.
D. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the Tax Officer or other designated Tax Officer to whom tax,
which has been deducted, has been remitted as required herein:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of compensation paid,
the total amount of tax deducted, the total amount of tax paid to the
Tax Officer for the period beginning January 1 of the current year
and ending December 31 of the current year, and any other
information prescribed by the Department.
§ 117-37 SEWERS § 117-37
99:397
§ 117-38. Powers and duties of Tax Officer.
(2) An individual withholding statement which may be integrated with
the Federal Wage and Tax Statement (Form W-2 or successor form),
for each employee employed during all or any part of the period
beginning January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of
the current year, setting forth the employee's name, address and
social security number, the amount of compensation paid to the
employee during said period, the amount of tax deducted, the
numerical code prescribed by the Department representing the tax
collection district where payments required herein were remitted
and any other information required by the Department or the Tax
Officer and the amount of tax paid to the Tax Officer. Every
employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return to the
employee for whom it is filed.
E. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
F. Except as otherwise provided for in Section 511 of the Act, every
employer who willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the
deductions required by this section shall be liable for payment of the
taxes which the employer is required to withhold to the extent that such
taxes have not been recovered from the employee. The failure or
omission of any employer to make the deductions required by this
section shall not relieve any employee from the payment of the tax of
from complying with the requirements of this article relating to the
filing of declarations and returns.
G. No employer shall be required to deduct or withhold taxes, file returns
or pay taxes with regard to residents of Maryland.
A. It shall be the duty of the Tax Officer to collect and receive the taxes,
fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be the Tax
Officer's duty to keep a record showing the amount of tax received from
each taxpayer paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. Each Tax Officer, before entering upon official duties, shall give and
acknowledge a bond to the TCC appointing such Tax Officer. The bond
provided shall be subject to the requirements set forth in the Act.
C. The Tax Officer shall comply with all resolutions, policies and
procedures adopted by the Tax Collection Committee and shall comply
with all regulations adopted by the Department under the Act.
D. The Tax Officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the taxpayer,
earned income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary
business expenses to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the
taxpayer's employer.
§ 117-37 JACKSON CODE § 117-38
99:398
§ 117-39. Suit for collection of tax.
E. The Tax Officer and agents designated by him/her/it are hereby
authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any employer
or of any taxpayer or of any person whom the Tax Officer reasonably
believes to be an employer or taxpayer in order to verify the accuracy of
any declaration or return or, if no declaration or return was filed, to
ascertain the tax due. Every employer and every taxpayer and every
person whom the Tax Officer reasonably believes to be an employer or
taxpayer is hereby directed and required to give to the Tax Officer or to
any agent designated by him any means, facilities and opportunity for
such examination and investigations as are hereby authorized. Such
examination or audits shall be conducted by the Tax Officer and any
agents designated by the Tax Officer and shall be conducted in
accordance with 53 Pa. C.S.A., Chapter 84, Subchapter C (relating to
the local taxpayers bill of rights).
F. Any information gained by the Tax Officer, his/her/its agents or by any
other official or agent of the taxing district as a result of any
declarations, returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required
or authorized by this article shall be and remain confidential, except for
official purposes and except in accordance with a proper judicial order
or as otherwise provided by law.
G. The Tax Officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and
payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year, provided that any filing, reporting or payment dates shall
provide time periods equivalent to those time periods set forth for
taxpayers whose fiscal year coincides with a calendar year.
A. The Tax Officer may sue in the name of the political subdivision within
the TCD for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due; or the declaration or
return has been filed; or a redetermination of compensation or net
profits by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue, whichever date is
later; provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the
institution of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be
due in the following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under
provisions of this article, there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return in
the possession of the Tax Officer reveals a fraudulent evasion of
taxes, there shall be no limitation.
§ 117-38 SEWERS § 117-39
99:399
§ 117-40. Interest and penalties.
(3) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the Tax
Officer or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make
the deductions required by this article, there shall be no limitation.
(4) Where an employer has intentionally failed to make deductions
required by this article, there shall be no limitation.
(5) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
C. The Tax Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund, provided
that such suit is begun two years after making such refund, except that
the suit may be brought within five years if it appears that any part of
the refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
D. This section shall not be construed to limit the municipality from
recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by the Act.
Further, nothing set forth herein shall be construed to limit a Tax
Officer, a tax collection district or political subdivision from recovering
delinquent taxes by any other means provided by the Act.
A. Except as may be provided for in Subsection B below, in the event any
tax imposed in this article is not paid when due, interest shall accrue at
the same rate a taxpayer is required to pay to the commonwealth as
provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176),
known as the "Fiscal Code," or such successor legislation, on the
amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 1% of the unpaid tax for
each month or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid
shall be added and collected, but the amount of penalty shall not exceed
15% in the aggregate. Where an action is brought for the recovery of
tax, the taxpayer liable for the tax shall, in addition, be liable for the
costs of collection, interest and penalties, including, but not limited to
court costs and attorneys' fees.
B. Pursuant to the Act, the Department may establish conditions under
which a Tax Officer, with the concurrence of the TCC, may abate
interest or penalties that would otherwise be imposed for the
nonreporting or underreporting of income tax liabilities or for
nonpayment of taxes previously imposed and due if the taxpayer files
delinquent returns and pays the tax in full.
C. The provisions of Subsection B above shall not affect or terminate any
petitions, investigations, prosecutions or other proceedings pending
under this article, or prevent the commencement of further prosecution
of any proceedings by the appropriate authorities for violations of this
article. However, no proceedings shall be commenced on the basis of
delinquent returns filed pursuant to § 117-40 above if the returns are
§ 117-39 JACKSON CODE § 117-40
99:400
§ 117-41. Violations and penalties.
determined to be substantially true and correct and the tax due is paid
within the prescribed time.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his
employees, any person who refuses to permit the Tax Officer or any
agent designated by him to examine his books, records, papers and any
person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return
or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the
amount of his net profits or earned income in order to avoid the
payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$2,500 for each offense and costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding six months.
B. Any employer who is required under this article to collect, account for
and distribute taxes and who willfully fails to collect or truthfully
account for and distribute such tax, commits a misdemeanor and shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $25,000 or to
imprisonment not exceeding two years, or both.
C. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $2,500 for each offense and
costs or to imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.
D. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
E. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this article shall not
excuse him or her from making such declaration or return.
F. Jackson Township hereby approves and adopts the Cost of Collection
Schedule,105 attached hereto and made a part hereof, to be imposed by
the designated Tax Officer for the collection of taxes on earned income
and net profits, upon any taxpayer whose taxes are or become
delinquent and/or remain due and unpaid; provided, however, that the
TCC may approve amendments to said fee schedule by resolution from
time to time. Amendments to the collection schedule shall become
effective upon adoption by the TCC. The designated Tax Officer is
hereby authorized to retain such costs of collection as set forth in the
attached schedule, as may be amended and supplemented from time to
time, in recovering delinquent taxes and as permitted to be assessed to
delinquent taxpayers pursuant to law.
105. Editor's Note: The cost of collection schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 117-40 SEWERS § 117-42
99:401
§ 117-42. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to any person or property as to whom or which it
is beyond the legal power of the municipality to levy, assess and impose the
tax or duties as herein provided.
§ 117-43. Purpose; effect on prior provisions.
The primary purpose of this article is to conform the local income tax
currently levied on earned income and net profits by the municipality with
the Act and to do so within the time frame set forth in the Act. Any
prior Ordinance levying such tax is hereby amended and restated in its
entirety to read as set forth in this article. To the extent that any previous
Ordinance or portion thereof is inconsistent or conflicts with this article,
such Ordinance(s) or portion thereof shall be repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency and/or conflict. To the extent the same or any prior Ordinance
levying such tax in force immediately prior to enactment of this article, this
article is intended as a continuation of such prior Ordinance and not as the
enactment of an Ordinance imposing a new tax. In the event this article
or any portion thereof is determined to be unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid, the prior Ordinance, or portion thereof, levying a similar tax shall
remain in full force and effect and shall not be affected by the adoption
of this article. Nothing contained herein shall affect, impair or otherwise
abrogate any act done or liability incurred, nor shall any provision of this
article affect, impair or preclude any suit or prosecution pending, whether
or not currently initiated, to enforce any right, penalty or violation under
the authority of any previous Ordinance in force prior to adoption of this
article.
§ 117-43.1. Effective date; initial current year.
The effective date of this article and beginning of the initial current year
shall be January 1, 2012.
§ 117-42 JACKSON CODE § 117-43.1
99:402
ARTICLE VI
Agency for Collection of Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 12-5-1995 by Ord. No. 83-95]
§ 117-44. Tax levied.
Jackson Township has heretofore by appropriate article under the
provisions of Act 511 of December 31, 1965, as amended (53 P.S. § 6901 et
seq.), levied a tax for general revenue purposes on earned income and net
profits within this Township.
§ 117-45. Boundaries.
This Township is a municipality within the geographical boundaries of York
County and the area served by the York Area Earned Income Tax Bureau,
the Bureau established by intermunicipal agreement for the purpose of
collection of taxes levied by each of the various parties to that agreement.
§ 117-46. Agreement for collection of tax.
§ 117-47. Agency appointed.
The York Area Earned Income Tax Bureau is hereby appointed as the agency
for the collection of the tax levied by this Township on earned income and
net profits within this Township of Jackson, York County, Pennsylvania.
A. This Township is desirous of entering into an agreement under the
provision of Section 10 of Act 511 of December 31, 1965, as
amended,106 with other municipalities and school districts within the
geographical boundaries of York and Adams Counties whereunder the
York Area Earned Income Tax Bureau will serve as the agency for the
collection of said tax under the terms and conditions set forth in the
said agreement.
B. Jackson Township hereby approves and adopts the Cost of Collection
Schedule,107 attached hereto and made a part hereof, to be imposed by
the York Area Tax Bureau, or such other tax collection entity hereafter
designated by Jackson Township for the collection of taxes on earned
income and net profits, upon any taxpayer whose taxes are or become
delinquent and/or remain due and unpaid; provided, however, that
Jackson Township may amend said fee schedule by resolution from time
to time. The York Area Tax Bureau, or such other tax collection entity,
designated by Jackson Township, is authorized to retain such costs of
collection as set forth in the attached schedule in recovering delinquent
taxes and as permitted to be assessed to delinquent taxpayers pursuant
to law. [Added 8-2-2005 by Ord. No. 161-05]
106. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6910.
107. Editor's Note: The Cost of Collection Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 117-44 SEWERS § 117-47
99:403

ARTICLE VII
Real Estate Tax
[Adopted 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 85-96]
§ 117-48. Amount of tax.
A tax of 0.5 mil per year ($0.50 per $100) is assessed on all real property
within Jackson Township.
§ 117-49. Computation and use.
The tax shall be computed on the assessed value of the real estate and
utilized for general Township purposes.
§ 117-49.1. Compensation of Tax Collector. [Added 2-1-2005 by Ord.
No. 154-05]
§ 117-50. Effective date.
This article shall become effective February 1, 1996.
A. The Tax Collector of the Township of Jackson, York County,
Pennsylvania, elected for the term of office commencing on the first
Monday of January, 2006, and the Tax Collector elected for any term of
office thereafter, unless changed by later amendment, shall be
compensated for duties as Tax Collector under the Local Tax Collection
Law,108 as amended from time to time, at the following rates:
(1) Three percent on any money collected at rebate amounts;
(2) Three percent on any money collected at face amounts;
(3) Five percent on monies collected at penalty amounts.
B. Said Tax Collector, as collector of Township taxes, shall also be
compensated for such actual printing and postage expenses as he or
she shall incur in performing duties for the Township, as prescribed by
the Local Tax Collection Law, as amended from time to time.
108. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 117-48 SEWERS § 117-50
99:405

ARTICLE VIII
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-4-2007 by Ord. No. 170-07109]
§ 117-51. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Jackson Township Local
Services Tax Ordinance."
§ 117-52. Authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, as
amended by Act No. 7 of 2007.110
§ 117-53. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide revenue for police, fire and
emergency services; road construction and maintenance; the reduction of
property taxes; and for such other purposes as may be specified for such tax
from time to time by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 117-54. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them herein, except where the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The governing body of Jackson Township,
York County, Pennsylvania.
COLLECTOR — The person or firm from time to time designated by motion
of the Board of Supervisors to collect and administer the provisions of this
article and collect the tax levied by this article. Until changed by subsequent
motion, the collector shall be the same person or firm last designated to
collect the emergency and municipal services tax for Jackson Township.
COMBINED RATE — The aggregate annual rate of the local services tax
levied by the Spring Grove Area School District and Jackson Township
located in whole or in part within jurisdictional limits of the Spring Grove
Area School District.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation, as determined under Section 303 of
the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code
of 1971,"111 and regulations in 61 Pa. Code, Part I, Subpart B, Article
V (relating to personal income tax); not including, however, wages or
compensation paid to individuals on active military service. Employee
business expenses are allowable deductions as determined under Article
109. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. VIII, Emergency and Municipal
Services Tax, adopted 11-6-2002 by Ord. No. 133-02, as amended.
110. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
111. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 117-51 SEWERS § 117-54
99:407
III of the Tax Reform Code of 1971. Any housing allowance provided to a
member of the clergy shall not be taxable as earned income.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons
on a salary, wage, commission, fee or other compensation basis, including a
self-employed person.
HE, HIS OR HIM — Shall include singular and plural number and male,
female and neuter gender.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person engaged in any occupation, trade or profession
within the jurisdictional limits of Jackson Township.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity (except from corporations), determined under
Section 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax
Reform Code of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code, Part I, Subpart
B, Article V (relating to personal income tax). The term does not include
income which is not paid for services provided and which is in the nature
of earnings from an investment. For taxpayers engaged in the business,
profession or activity of farming, the term shall not include:
OCCUPATION — any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on
or performed within the jurisdictional limits of Jackson Township for which
compensation is charged and/or received, whether by salary, wages,
commissions, fees or net profits for services rendered.
RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE ARMED FORCES — The United States
Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force
Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air
National Guard.
TAX — The local services tax levied in this article.
TOWNSHIP — Jackson Township, York County, Pennsylvania.
YEAR — A calendar year.
§ 117-55. Levy of tax; use of funds.
Any interest generated from monetary accounts or investment
instruments of the farming business;
A.
B. Any gain on the sale of farming machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
C.
D. Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
A. The Township hereby levies and imposes on every individual engaging
in an occupation within the jurisdictional limits of the Township a tax in
the amount of $52 per annum, beginning the first day of January 2008
§ 117-54 JACKSON CODE § 117-55
99:408
§ 117-56. Duty of employers.
and continuing on a calendar basis annually thereafter until modified
or repealed by subsequent ordinance. This tax is in addition to all other
taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the Township.
B. The Township shall use the revenue derived from this tax for the
following purposes; provided, however, that no less than 25% of the
funds derived from this tax shall be used for emergency services, as
defined herein:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services.
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance.
(3) Reduction of property taxes.
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85,
Subchapter F (relating to homestead property exclusion), and in
accordance with Section 22.6 of Act 7 of 2007, as amended from
time to time.
A. Each employer within the Township and each employer situate outside
the Township who engages in business within the Township is hereby
charged with the duty of collecting the tax from each of the employees
engaged by the employer and performing work for the employer within
the Township. Each person subject to the tax shall be assessed a prorata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is
engaging in an occupation.
B. The pro-rata share of the tax assessed on the person for a payroll period
shall be determined by dividing the combined rate of the local services
tax levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro-rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest onehundredth
of a dollar.
C. Employer collection of the local services tax shall be made on a payrollperiod
basis for each payroll period, beginning with the first payroll
period in which the person is engaging in an occupation.
D. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the local
services tax or for the payment of the withheld tax money to the
Township if the failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect
information submitted by the employee as to the employee's place or
places of employment, the employee's principal office or where the
employee is principally employed.
§ 117-55 SEWERS § 117-57
99:409
§ 117-57. Returns.
Employers are required to make and file a local services tax quarterly
return 30 days after the end of each quarter of a calendar year. The local
services tax quarterly return shall list the name, address, and social security
number of the employee; the physical address of the employee's place of
employment; the number of payroll periods for which the local services tax
was withheld; and the amount of local services tax being remitted for each
employee.
§ 117-58. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
Each employer shall use his employment and payroll records from the first
day of January to March 31 of each year for determining the number of
employees from whom said tax shall be deducted and paid over to the
collector on or before April 30 of the same calendar year. Supplemental
reports shall be made by each employer on July 30, October 30 and January
31 for new employees as reflected on his employment and payroll records
from April 1 to June 30, July 1 to September 30, and October 1 to December
31; and payments on these supplemental reports shall be made on July 30,
October 30 and January 30, respectively.
§ 117-59. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation.
A. In the event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during the payroll
period, the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in
the following order:
(1) The political subdivision in which a person maintains his or her
principal office or is principally employed;
(2) The political subdivision in which the person resides and works, if
the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) The political subdivision in which a person is employed and which
imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the local services tax if the employee provides:
(1) A recent pay statement from a principal employer that includes the
name of the employer, the length of the payroll period and the
amount of local services tax withheld; and
(2) A statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence.
§ 117-57 JACKSON CODE § 117-59
99:410
§ 117-60. Exemptions.
C. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. It is the
intent of this section that no person shall be subject to the payment of
the local services tax by more than one political subdivision during each
payroll period.
A. The local services tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for
each calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions
within which a person may be employed.
B. The Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended, requires municipalities and
school districts who levy the local services tax at a combined rate
exceeding $10 to exempt any person from the local services tax whose
total earned income and net profits from all sources within the
Township is less than $12,000 for the calendar year in which the local
services tax is levied.
C. The Township hereby exempts the following persons from the local
services tax:
(1) Any person whose total earned income and net profits from all
sources within the Township is less than $12,000 for the calendar
year in which the local services tax is levied.
(2) Any person who served in any war or armed conflict in which the
United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total 100% permanent disability.
(3) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
Armed Forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. A "reserve component of the Armed Forces" shall
mean the United States Army Reserve, United States Navy
Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast
Guard Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania
Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
D. A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax must
annually file an exemption certificate with the collector of the tax for
the Township levying the tax and file a copy of the certificate with the
person's employer, affirming that the person reasonably expects to
receive earned income and net profits from all sources within the
Township of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for which the
exemption certificate is filed. The exemption certificate shall have
attached to it a copy of all of the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms
from employment within the Township for the year prior to the fiscal
§ 117-59 SEWERS § 117-60
99:411
year for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the
local services tax.
E. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise instructed
by the collector of the tax for the Township, the employer shall not
withhold the tax from the person during the calendar year or remainder
of the calendar year for which the exemption certificate applies. With
respect to a person who claimed an exemption from the local services
tax, upon notification to an employer by the person or by the collector of
the tax for the Township that the person has received earned income
and net profits from all sources within the Township equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or that the person is otherwise
ineligible for the tax exemption for that calendar year, or upon an
employer's payment to the person of earned income within the
Township in an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar
year, an employer shall withhold the local services tax from the person
as follows:
(1) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the local services tax becomes subject to the tax for the
calendar year, the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year.
(2) The employer shall withhold from the person, for the first payroll
period after receipt of the notification under Subsection E above, a
lump sum equal to the amount of the tax that was not withheld from
the person due to the exemption certificate filed by the person, plus
the per-payroll amount due for that first payroll period.
(3) The amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining
payroll periods in that calendar year shall be the same amount
withheld for other employees.
F. In the event the employment of a person subject to withholding of the
local services tax under this exception is severed in that calendar year,
the person shall be liable for any outstanding balance of tax due, and
the Township may pursue collection under this article.
G. Except as provided for in Subsection E above, employers shall not be
responsible for investigating exemption certificates, monitoring tax
exemption eligibility or exempting any employee from a local services
tax.
H. Employers shall be responsible for retaining a copy of all exemption
certificates filed by employees within a given calendar year for a
minimum of three years. Employers who have failed to withhold the
local services tax from an employee or employees and do not have
copies of the employee exemption certificate or certificates will be held
responsible for the payment of the local services tax as if the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 117-60 JACKSON CODE § 117-61
99:412
§ 117-61. Self-employed individuals.
All self-employed individuals and individuals whose employer is not
required to withhold local taxes (certain state and federal agencies) will be
billed quarterly for the local services tax. The full amount of tax must be
paid by the date indicated on such billing. If such taxpayer qualifies for a
low-income exemption, the taxpayer may complete the required exemption
certificate or make application for a refund of the tax paid.
§ 117-62. Employees and self-employed individuals residing beyond
the limits of the Township.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their place
of business outside the Township but who engage in any occupation within
the Township do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the Township. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation within the
Township and an employee of a nonresident employer may, for the purpose
of this article, be considered a self-employed person; and in the event this
tax is not paid, the collector shall have the option of proceeding against
either the employer or employee for collection of this tax as hereinafter
provided.
§ 117-63. Administration of tax.
A. It shall be the duty of the collector to accept and receive payments of
this tax and keep a record thereof showing the amount received by him
from each employer or self-employed person, together with the date the
tax was received. It shall be the duty of the collector to accept and keep
a record of the information submitted by employers relating to the
number of employees subject to the tax, the number of employees
exempt from the tax, the employee exemption certificates and refunds
of the tax paid to individuals and employers. It further shall be the duty
of the collector, on behalf of the Township, to provide a taxpayer a
receipt of payment upon written request of the taxpayer.
B. The collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby empowered to prescribe,
adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any
matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the examination of the payroll records of any
employer subject to this article; the examination and correction of any
return made in compliance with this article; and any payment alleged or
found to be incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to
have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector
shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of York
County as in other cases provided.
C. The collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
§ 117-61 SEWERS § 117-63
99:413
§ 117-64. Suits for collection.
§ 117-65. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or who refuses inspection of his books, records or accounts
in his custody and control in order to determine the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his employment, or who fails or refuses to
file any return required by this article or fails or refuses to pay the tax
herein levied shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, be
sentenced to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. It is further
provided that the action to enforce the fine and penalty herein provided may
be instituted against any person in charge of the business of any employer
who has failed or refused to file a return required by this article.
§ 117-66. Refunds.
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the
tax due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event any of the tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due date set forth above, the collector may sue for the
recovery of such tax due or unpaid, together with interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 10%,
shall be added to the flat rate of said tax for nonpayment thereof. Where
suit is brought for the recovery of this tax, the individual liable therefor
shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of collection,
including but not limited to attorneys' fees.
A. Refunds are to be paid within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days
after the last day the employer is required to remit the local services tax
for the last quarter of the calendar year, under Section 9 of Act 7,
whichever is later, and shall not be subject to interest if paid within the
allowed time.
B. Refunds shall only be provided for amounts overpaid in a calendar year
that exceed $1.
C. Refunds due to duplication of payment. If, at any time during the
calendar year, a taxpayer pays more than $52 in combined local
services tax, the taxpayer may apply for a refund of the amount over
$52. The proper refund request form must be completed and signed by
the taxpayer, and necessary documentation must be included. These
refunds may be processed at the time they are received, unless there is
reason to believe we will not receive the tax from the employer.
§ 117-63 JACKSON CODE § 117-66
99:414
D. When an individual's earned income and net profits only for the
calendar year is less than the twelve-thousand-dollar exemption, at the
end of the calendar year, any taxpayer who qualifies may complete a
refund application and include a copy of the necessary documentation.
§ 117-66 SEWERS § 117-66
99:415

ARTICLE IX
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance
[Adopted 4-5-2005 by Ord. No. 158-05]
§ 117-67. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
following meanings:
DETERIORATED PROPERTY — Any industrial, commercial or other
business property owned by an individual, association, or corporation, and
located in a deteriorating area, as hereinafter provided, or any such
property which has been the subject of an order by a government agency
requiring the unit to be vacated, condemned or demolished by reason of
noncompliance with laws, ordinances, or regulations.
IMPROVEMENT — Repair, construction or reconstruction including
alterations and additions having the effect of rehabilitating a deteriorated
property so that it becomes habitable or attains higher standards of safety,
health, economic use or amenity, or is brought into compliance with laws,
ordinances, or regulations governing such standards. Ordinary upkeep and
maintenance shall not be deemed an "improvement."
§ 117-68. Eligible areas.
The Board of Supervisors determines that the areas shown on the map
attached as Exhibit A112 shall be the areas which contain and consist of
deteriorated properties which are eligible for tax exemption under this
article. Additional eligible areas may be included from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 117-69. Exemptions.
§ 117-70. Exemption schedule. [Amended 5-6-2008 by Ord. No.
174-08]
A. The amount to be exempted from real estate taxes shall be limited to
that portion of the additional assessment attributable to the actual cost
of new construction or improvements to deteriorated property in
accordance with the exemption schedule established by this article.
B. The exemption from real estate taxes shall be limited to that
improvement for which an exemption has been requested in the manner
set forth in this article and for which a separate assessment has been
made by the Board of Assessment Appeals.
A. The schedule of real estate taxes to be exempted shall be in accordance
with the below portion of improvements to be exempted each year:
112. Editor's Note: Exhibit A, Location Map (LERTA) is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 117-67 SEWERS § 117-70
99:417
§ 117-71. Procedure for obtaining exemption.
Length
(Year)
Portion
(Percent)
First 100%
Second 100%
Third 100%
Fourth 100%
Fifth 100%
Sixth 80%
Seventh 60%
Eighth 40%
Ninth 20%
Tenth 0%
B. If an eligible property is granted a tax exemption pursuant to this
article, the improvement shall not, during the exemption period, be
considered as a factor in assessing other properties.
C. The exemption from taxes granted under this article shall be upon the
property and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of the
property.
A. Any person desiring tax exemption under this article shall notify the
Manager and Tax Collector of Jackson Township, as well as the Business
Manager of Spring Grove Area School District in writing on a form
provided to the applicant at the time he secures a building permit for
new construction or an improvement. A copy of the exemption request
shall be forwarded to the York County Assessment Office. The York
County Assessor shall, upon notice by applicant and after completion of
the new construction or improvement, assess separately the new
construction or improvement and calculate the amount of the
assessment eligible for tax exemption in accordance with the limits
established by this article and shall notify the taxpayer, the Township
and the School District of the reassessment and the amount of the
assessment eligible for the exemption. Appeals from the reassessment
and the amount eligible for the exemption may be taken by the taxpayer
or the local taxing authority as provided by law.
B. The cost of the new construction or improvements to be exempted and
the schedule of taxes exempted existing at the time of the initial request
for tax exemption shall be applicable to that exemption request, and
subsequent amendment to this article, if any, shall not apply to the
adoption of any such amendment.
§ 117-70 JACKSON CODE § 117-72
99:418
§ 117-72. Termination date.
An application for exemption may be made at any time within three years
from the effective date of this article. All qualified applications under this
article are eligible for the entire nine-year exemption schedule.113
§ 117-73. Extension.
The Township may, by resolution adopted from time to time, extend the time
for filing an application for exemption. However, in no event shall any one
extension period exceed three years.
§ 117-74. Revocation of LERTA exemption.
The exemption from real estate taxes provided for herein shall be forfeited
by the applicant and/or any subsequent owner of the real estate for the
failure to pay any nonexempt real estate taxes by the last day of the time
period to pay such taxes in the penalty period. Upon receipt of the notice
of nonpayment of nonexempt real estate taxes, the Township Tax Collector
shall discontinue the LERTA exemption.
113. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 174-08, adopted 5-6-2008, provided that the time for
applications for exemptions under § 117-72 shall be extended for a period of three years
from and after the effective date of Ord. No. 174-08.
§ 117-72 SEWERS § 117-74
99:419

ARTICLE X
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 11-8-2006 by Ord. No. 169-06]
§ 117-75. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Jackson Township Realty Transfer Tax
Ordinance."
§ 117-76. Statutory authority.
This realty transfer tax is levied under authority of Article XI-D, entitled the
"Local Real Estate Transfer Tax," of the Pennsylvania Real Estate Transfer
Tax Act, added by Act 77 of 1986 (Act of July 2, 1986, P.L. 318, No. 77) to the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Act, Act 14 of 1981 (Act of May 5, 1981,
P.L. 36, No. 14), as amended. The Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Act is
codified at 72 P.S. § 8101-C, et seq., and Article XI-D is codified at 72 P.S.
§ 8101-D et seq.
§ 117-77. Word usage; definitions.
A. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and neuter.
B. The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form
of unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more
persons.
COLLECTOR — The Recorder of Deeds of York County, Pennsylvania, is
hereby appointed collector of the tax levied by this article.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the United States or any other state,
territory, foreign country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys,
transfers, demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise
of title to real estate within the municipality, but does not include wills;
mortgages; deeds of trust or other instruments of like character given
as security for a debt and deeds of release thereof to the debtor; land
contracts whereby the legal title does not pass to the grantee until
the total consideration specified in the contract has been paid or any
cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable over a period
of time exceeding 30 years; or instruments which solely grant, vest
or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include a
declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 117-83 of this article.
§ 117-75 SEWERS § 117-77
99:421
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75%
of its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least
75% of each class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by
members of the same family. The business of agriculture shall not be
deemed to include:
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's
parents and grandparents, the ancestors of lineal descendants of any
of the foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any
of the foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption
shall be treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
MUNICIPALITY — Jackson Township, York County, Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, corporation or entity of
any kind. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine
or imprisonment, or both, the term "person," as applied to associations,
shall include the responsible members or general partners thereof and,
as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is
primarily engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real
estate, 90% or more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or
fewer persons and which:
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
(1)
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds,
fish, cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
(2)
(3) Fur farming.
(4) Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
(5) Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
Any lands, tenements or hereditaments within Jackson Township,
including without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures, mines,
minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower
boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or
interests which, by custom, usage or law, pass with a conveyance
of land, but excluding permanently attached machinery and
equipment in an industrial plant.
(1)
(2) A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing
corporation, trust or association under a proprietary lease or
occupancy agreement.
(3)
§ 117-77 JACKSON CODE § 117-77
99:422
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering,
accepting or presenting for recording of a document.
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
VALUE —
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the
ownership or disposition of real estate; or
(1)
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of
the value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible
assets which are freely transferable and actively traded on an
established market.
(2)
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time,
the termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific
number of years, including without limitation an estate in fee
simple, life estate or perpetual leasehold; or
(1)
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of
a right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of
a group of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple,
life estate or perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a
leasehold interest or possessory interest under a lease or
occupancy agreement for a term of 30 years or more or a leasehold
interest or possessory interest in real estate in which the lessee has
equity. In determining the term of the lease, it shall be presumed
that a right or option to renew or extend the lease will be exercised
if the rental charge to the lessee is fixed or if a method for
calculating the rental charge is established.
(2)
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length
for actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration
therefor paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances
thereon existing before the transfer and not removed thereby,
whether or not the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and
ground rents or a commensurate part thereof where such liens
or other encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are
charged against other real estate, provided that where the
document shall set forth a nominal consideration, the "value"
thereof shall be determined from the price set forth in or actual
consideration for the contract of sale.
(1)
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary
worth of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement,
a leasehold or possessory interest, any exchange of properties
or the real estate of an acquired company, "value" shall be the
actual monetary worth of the real estate within the municipality,
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for
(2)
§ 117-77 SEWERS § 117-77
99:423
§ 117-78. Tax imposed; payment.
A tax is hereby levied and imposed, for general municipal purposes, on
every real estate transaction at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate
represented by the document involved in the real estate transaction.
§ 117-79. Evidence of payment.
The payment of the tax imposed hereunder shall be evidenced by the
Collector affixing on the document an official stamp or writing setting forth
the date of payment of the tax and amount of tax paid.
local real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio of
assessed values to market values of the taxing district in which the
municipality is located as established by the State Tax Equalization
Board, or a commensurate part of the assessment where the
assessment includes other real estate.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value
of which is not determinable under Subsection (1) or (2), the actual
monetary worth of such interest.
(3)
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any
executory agreement for the construction of buildings, structures
or other permanent improvements to real estate between the
grantor and other persons existing before the transfer and not
removed thereby or between the grantor, the agent or principal of
the grantor or a related corporation, association or partnership and
the grantee existing before or effective with the transfer.
(4)
A. The tax shall be payable at the earliest of the time the document is
presented for recording, within 30 days of acceptance of the document
or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. If the real estate is located partially within and partially outside the
municipality, the tax shall be calculated on the value of the portion
within the municipality.
C. The tax imposed hereunder shall be due and payable to the Collector, as
a joint and several liability, by every person who makes, executes,
delivers, accepts or presents for recording any document or in whose
behalf any document is made, executed, delivered, accepted or
presented for recording. In the case of an acquired company, the
company shall also have liability for payment of the tax. All such
persons shall also be liable for any penalties imposed under this article.
D. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
on a real estate transaction by the municipality and other political
subdivisions shall not exceed the limitations prescribed in § 8 of the
Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6908, so that if any other political
subdivision imposes a tax on real estate transactions taxed under this
article, the provisions of said § 8 shall apply.
§ 117-77 JACKSON CODE § 117-80
99:424
§ 117-80. Exempt parties.
The United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any of their
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from
payment of the tax imposed by this article. The exemption of such
governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a real
estate transaction from liability for the tax.
§ 117-81. Excluded transactions.
A. The tax imposed by this article shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or to any of its
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions by gift,
dedication or deed in lieu of condemnation or deed of confirmation
in connection with condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance
by the condemning body of the property condemned to the owner
of record at the time of condemnation, which reconveyance may
include property line adjustments, provided that said reconveyance
is made within one year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the municipality is prohibited from taxing under
the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at a Sheriff sale or
tax claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
covenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife; between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce; between parent
and child or the spouse of such child, between brother and sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister; and between grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
§ 117-80 SEWERS § 117-81
99:425
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a descendent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Collector is presented with a copy of the trust
instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all possible
beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from or for the benefit of
his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is
the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee
claims an exemption from taxation under this subsection.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the municipality reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
§ 117-81 JACKSON CODE § 117-81
99:426
§ 117-82. Documents relating to associations or corporations.
Except as otherwise provided in § 117-81, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conservation, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure of a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is a bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
and which has as its primary purpose preservation of land for
historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or open space
opportunities or a transfer from such conservancy to the United
States, the commonwealth or to any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement of
value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such document is
not subject to tax under this article.
§ 117-81 SEWERS § 117-82
99:427
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 117-83. Acquired companies.
§ 117-84. Credits against tax.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change:
(1) Does not affect the continuity of the company; and
(2) Of itself or together with prior changes has the effect of
transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or more of the total
ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a
family farm corporation under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition to the Collector for recording and
for the affixation of the official stamp or writing evidencing payment of
the tax. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate holdings
of the acquired company in the municipality.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
§ 117-82 JACKSON CODE § 117-84
99:428
§ 117-85. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Collector for recording
shall set forth therein and as part of such document the true, full and
complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement of value
executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing
such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof
or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under this
article. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any excludable
real estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based on family
relationship, provided that the relationship is specified in the deed,
instrument or writing. Documents which are not to be recorded shall be
presented to the Collector and shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and a statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article. Evidence of payment shall
be affixed to the original document and the certified copy. The certified copy
and statement of value shall be filed with the Collector.
§ 117-86. Unlawful acts; violations and penalties.
E. If the tax upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under this
section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater than
the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover shall be allowed.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Make, execute, deliver, accept or present for recording or cause to
be made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording
any document, without the full amount of tax thereon being duly
paid.
(2) Fail to record a declaration of acquisition, as required by this
article.
(3) Fraudulently affix to any document any forged evidence of
payment.
(4) Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or violate other provisions of
this article or any rules and regulations promulgated by the
municipality under this article or any rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Revenue to the extent applicable to
the tax levied hereunder.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty
of a summary offense.
C. Any person who makes a false statement of value or declaration of
acquisition, when he does not believe the statement or declaration to be
true, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
§ 117-84 SEWERS § 117-87
99:429
§ 117-87. Civil penalties.
§ 117-88. Unpaid tax to become lien.
The tax imposed by this article, together with all penalties, shall be a lien
against the real estate to which the document relates and, in the case of an
acquired company, the real estate owned by the acquired company. The lien
shall date from the time when the tax is due and payable and shall continue
until discharged by payment in full of the tax, together with all penalties and
interest. In order to enforce the lien, the municipality may proceed under
the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., or in any
other appropriate manner.
A. If any tax owing under the terms of this article shall not be paid when
due, 10% of the amount of the tax shall be added and collected as initial
penalty for nonpayment or underpayment of the tax.
B. In addition, if any tax owing under the terms of this article shall not be
paid when due, a penalty shall accrue on the amount of the unpaid tax
at the rate of 1% per month or fractional part of a month, on the amount
of the unpaid tax, from the due date until the amount of the tax is paid
in full.
C. In addition, in the case of failure of any acquired company to record a
declaration of acquisition, as required by this article, unless it is shown
to the satisfaction of the municipality that such failure is due to
reasonable cause, a penalty shall accrue on the amount of the unpaid
tax at the rate of 5% per month or fractional part of a month on the
amount of the unpaid tax, from the due date until the amount of the tax
is paid in full. This penalty shall be in addition to all other penalties but
shall not in the aggregate exceed 50% of the amount of the unpaid tax.
D. In addition, if any part of any underpayment of the tax is due to fraud,
there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
E. Further, if the municipality must file suit in order to collect the amount
of any tax not paid when due under this article, at the discretion of the
court, any person liable for payment of the tax shall also be liable for
reasonable costs, expenses, and attorneys' fees incurred by the
municipality in prosecution of the suit.
F. No document upon which tax is imposed by this article shall at any time
be made the basis of any action or other legal proceeding, nor shall
proof thereof be offered or received in evidence in any court of this
commonwealth or recorded in the office of any Recorder of Deeds of
any county of this commonwealth, unless the tax imposed hereunder
shall have been paid in full and evidence of payment shall have been
affixed thereto by the Collector.
§ 117-87 JACKSON CODE § 117-89
99:430
§ 117-89. Proceeds of judicial sales.
The tax imposed under this article shall be fully paid and have priority out of
the proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, and the Sheriff or other officer conducting sale shall pay
the tax herein imposed out of the first moneys paid to him in connection
therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax
herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for the remaining tax.
§ 117-90. Enforcement.
§ 117-91. Collection.
A. In order to determine whether the proper amount of tax has been paid,
without limiting any other rights of the municipality, the municipality
shall have the right to review all documents or records relating to any
real estate transaction or any related transactions and to take such
other steps as the municipality shall deem necessary or appropriate,
including a review or audit of any documents or records of any party to
a real estate transaction to determine the fair market value of the real
estate or any other relevant matter as determined by the municipality.
Upon request of the municipality, and at such place and time as
specified by the municipality, any party shall make available to the
municipality any such documents or records requested by the
municipality.
B. In the event that any tax is not paid when due, the municipality may
enforce payment of the tax, together with all penalties and interest, by
civil suit or any other appropriate means.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, the Recorder of Deeds shall be the
collection agent for this tax, without compensation from the
municipality.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Collector shall not
accept for recording any document unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each political
subdivision.
C. On or before the 10th day of each month, the Collector shall pay over to
the municipality all taxes collected under this article, less 2% for use of
the county, and shall also provide a report containing the information
required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections
of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent commission
shall be paid to the county.
D. In accordance with Act 77 of 1986, any Recorder of Deeds who shall
record any document upon which is imposed under this article without
payment of tax as required under this article, as is indicated in the
§ 117-89 SEWERS § 117-91
99:431
§ 117-92. Promulgation of additional rules and regulations.
The municipality may promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and
regulations for the interpretation, collection and enforcement of the tax.
§ 117-93. Construal of provisions.
§ 117-94. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this article is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
document or accompanying statement of value, shall, upon summary
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 and costs of prosecution.
A. To the extent this article imposes a tax on a real estate transaction
which is subject to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania realty transfer
tax imposed by Act 77 of 1986, and to the extent not inconsistent
herewith or with rules or regulations adopted by the municipality, this
article shall be interpreted in the same manner as Act 77 of 1986 and in
accordance with regulations promulgated thereunder.
B. The provisions of this article, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances in force immediately prior to adoption of this article, are
intended as a continuation of such ordinances, and not as new
enactments.
C. This article is intended to supplement the realty transfer tax in effect
prior to adoption of this article by imposing a tax on real estate
transactions not covered by prior ordinances and now taxable under
Act 77 of 1986. This article shall impose a tax on all transactions
taxable under ordinances levying a realty transfer tax in force
immediately prior to adoption of this article and also on all transactions
which the municipality is permitted to tax under Act 77 of 1986 to the
fullest extent permissible.
D. To the extent that the provisions of this article tax real estate
transactions taxable under ordinances levying a realty transfer tax in
force immediately prior to adoption of this article, this article shall
supersede said prior ordinances.
E. In the event that this article is declared invalid, the prior ordinance or
ordinances of the municipality levying a realty transfer tax shall remain
in full force and effect and shall not be affected in any way by adoption
of this article.
F. The provisions of this article shall not affect any act done or liability
incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense,
under the authority of any ordinance in force prior to adoption of this
article.
§ 117-91 JACKSON CODE § 117-94
99:432
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this article. It is hereby declared
as the intent of the Township that this article would have been adopted
had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part
thereof not been included herein.
§ 117-95. When effective.
This article shall be effective immediately upon enactment and shall
continue in effect on a calendar basis without the need for annual
reenactment.
§ 117-94 SEWERS § 117-95
99:433
Chapter 123
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 76. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 127.
§ 123-1. Permit required.
The placing, leaving and abandoning of personal property, including
unlicensed or uninspected motor vehicles, upon private property in excess
of 30 days without securing a permit for storage shall be illegal. The storage
of such articles in excess of 30 days promotes the infestation of rodents and
insects which jeopardizes the health, aesthetics, safety and well-being of the
citizens of Jackson Township.
§ 123-2. Issuance of permit; posting.
Upon application for each thirty-day period, a permit fee of $250 shall
be paid. Before issuing the permit, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
inspect the site and, if the storage does not promote the infestation of
rodents, insects, obnoxious odors or interfere with the aesthetics of the
surrounding properties, he shall issue said permit subject to such control
restrictions as he shall deem necessary in the interest of the safety and wellbeing
of the citizens of Jackson Township. The permit shall be conspicuously
posted upon the property.
§ 123-3. Appeals.
The Zoning Officer's failure to issue a permit or the restrictions imposed
may be appealed within 30 days to the Board of Supervisors by notification
in writing.
§ 123-4. Violation. [Amended 12-5-1995 by Ord. No. 83-95;
8-13-1996 by Ord. No. 91-96]
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail to secure a permit within
15 days of written notification to do so or who fails to adhere to the
control restrictions on the permit shall, upon being found liable therefor
in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a
judgment of not more than $600 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof. If
the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation.
§ 117-95 JACKSON CODE § 123-4
123:434
Chapter 127
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 109. Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 123.
B. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Township.
§ 123-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 123-4
123:435

ARTICLE I
Speed Limits
§ 127-1. Speed limits established.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts of
streets described below is established at the rate of speed indicated. It shall
be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a higher rate of speed than
the maximum prescribed for that street or part of a street.
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Bowman Road (T 482)
[Added 6-2-2009 by Ord.
No. 181-09]
30 Lincoln Highway West (S.R.
0030) to East Berlin Road (S.R.
0234)
Bowman Road (T 482)
[Amended 6-2-2009 by
Ord. No. 181-09]
35 Entire length, except as
provided above
Church Road (T 457) 35 Entire length
Commerce Drive (T 481)
[Added 6-2-2009 by Ord.
No. 181-09]
30 Bowman Road (T 482) to its
terminus
Commerce Drive (T 481)
[Added 11-1-2000 by
Ord. No. 125-00;
amended 6-2-2009 by
Ord. No. 181-09]]
35 Entire length, except as
provided above
Gnatstown Road (T 389) 35 From Pigeon Hill Road (S.R.
3096) to Jackson/Paradise
Township line
Grandview Road (T 491) 35 From Martin Road (T 400) to a
point 1/2 mile east thereof
Grant Drive (T 473) 25 Entire length
Grant Road (T 395)
[Amended 11-1-2000 by
Ord. No. 125-00]
30 Entire length
Hershey Road (T 452) 35 Entire length
Hillcrest Road (T 460) 25 Entire length
Jackson Square Road (T
461)
35 Entire length
KBS Road (T 483)
[Amended 9-5-2006 by
Ord. No. 167-06]
35 Entire length, except from
Roth's Church Road to
Nashville Boulevard
§ 127-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 127-1
123:437
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
KBS Road [Added
9-5-2006 by Ord. No.
167-06]
30 From Roth's Church Road to
Nashville Boulevard
Kevin Drive (T 499) 25 Entire length
Lefever Road (T 397) 35 East Berlin Road (S.R. 0234) to
Jackson/Dover Township line
Lester Avenue (T 500) 25 Entire length
Lincolnwood Drive (T 474)
[Added 2-1-2001 by Ord.
No. 126-01]
25 Entire length
Lincolnwood Drive (T 475) 25 Entire length
Little Creek Road (T 451) 35 Entire length
Main Street (T 399) 35 Entire length
Martin Road (T 400) 35 Entire length
Maywood Road (T 488) 35 Entire length
Melinda Drive (T 501) 25 Entire length
Moul Road (T 392) 35 From Big Mount Road (S.R.
4051) to Jackson/Paradise
Township line
Myers Road (T 502) 25 Entire length
Orchard Road (T 462) 35 From Pigeon Hill Road (S.R.
3094) north to Pigeon Hill
Road (S.R. 3096)
Orchard Road (T 462) 35 From Pigeon Hill Road (S.R.
3096) to Jackson/Paradise
Township line
Packinghouse Road (T 393) 35 From Pigeon Hill Road (S.R.
3096) to Jackson/Heidelberg
Township line
Pahagaco Road (T 401)
[Added 8-7-2001 by Ord.
No. 129-01]
35 Entire length
Pine Road (T 477) 35 Entire length
Pine Springs Boulevard (T
506)
25 Entire length
Rambler Road (T 391) 35 Entire length
Ridge Road (T 449) 35 Entire length
§ 127-1 JACKSON CODE § 127-1
123:438
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Roth's Church Road (S.R.
3059) [Added 2-4-2003
by Ord. No. 136-03]
35 Southern drive of Spring Grove
Middle School (Segment 0020)
to the bridge over Paradise
Creek (Segment 0050)
Shady Dell Road (T 448) 35 From Pine Road (T 477) to
Jackson/Dover/Paradise
Township line
Slate Ridge Drive (T 507) 25 Entire length
Sprenkle Road (T 455) 35 Entire length
Spring Road (T 394) 35 Entire length
Sunset Road (T 564) 35 Entire length
Woodland Road (T 388) 35 From Kopp Road (S.R. 3092) to
Jackson/Paradise Township line
§ 127-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with this article shall,
upon conviction thereof before any District Magistrate, be sentenced to
pay fines and costs of prosecution as mandated by those sections of the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code relating to speed limits.
§ 127-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 127-2
123:439

ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 127-3. Parking, stopping and standing prohibited at all times.
No person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Location
Bowman Road [Added
7-2-2013 by Ord. No.
198-13]
Both From Commerce Drive to Lincoln
Highway (U.S. Route 30)
Cape Climb [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
Both From Ledge Drive to Knob Run
Commerce Drive [Added
7-2-2013 by Ord. No.
198-13]
Both From Bowman Road to its
terminus at the cul-de-sac
Crest Street [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
South From Quartz Ridge Drive to End
Dolomite Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
East/North From South Alpine Drive (north
end) to Mineral Drive/South
Alpine Drive
Juniper Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
North From Farm House Lane to South
Alpine Drive
Knob Run [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
Both From Mesa Lane to Cape Climb
Knoll Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
West From North Alpine Drive to
Quartz Ridge Drive
Ledge Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
Both From Cape Climb to End
Main Street (T 399) West From S.R. 0116 to York Rail
Tracks
Mesa Lane [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
West From Mineral Drive to Ledge
Drive
Mineral Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
Both From Grandview Road to
Dolomite Drive/South Alpine Drive
§ 127-3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 127-3
123:441
Name of Street Side Location
Mineral Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
South From South Alpine Drive/Dolomite
Drive to Dolomite Drive
North Alpine Drive
[Added 12-7-2010 by
Ord. No. 188-10]
South/East From Hanover Road to Crest
Street
Pinnacle Court [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
East From End to North Alpine Drive
Quartz Ridge Drive
[Added 12-7-2010 by
Ord. No. 188-10]
East From North Alpine Drive to
Summit Run Court
Roth's Church Road (S.R.
3059) [Added 9-7-1999
by Ord. No. 116-99]
Both From Little Creek Road (T 451) to
the Jackson Township/Spring
Grove Borough boundary line
Route 30 (S.R. 0030) Both From Biesecker Road (S.R. 3061)
to a point 1,350 feet east thereof
Route 30 (S.R. 0030)
[Added 9-7-1999 by
Ord. No. 116-99]
Both From Biesecker Road (S.R. 3061)
to a point 100 feet west of the
Little Conewago Creek bridge
Route 30 (S.R. 0030) Both From Labott Road (T 458) to the
Jackson Township/Paradise
Township boundary line
Route 30 (S.R. 0030) Both Vicinity of York-Thomasville
Airport
South Alpine Drive
[Added 12-7-2010 by
Ord. No. 188-10]
South From Hanover Road to Mineral
Drive
Summit Run Court
[Added 12-7-2010 by
Ord. No. 188-10]
West From North Alpine Drive to End
§ 127-3.1. Establishing parking for handicapped persons and
disabled veterans. [Added 3-1-2005 by Ord. No. 155-05]
Parking for physically challenged persons and severely disabled veterans
may be approved by resolution of the Township Board of Supervisors. Such
resolution shall only be considered upon written requests by or on behalf of
such persons or veterans to the Township Manager. The request shall fully
set forth the reasons or circumstances that prompted the request and shall
be accompanied by a letter from a physician supporting such application.
The Township Manager shall review all such requests and forward those
meriting resolution consideration to the Board of Supervisors. If the Board
of Supervisors approves a resolution to establish a restricted parking space,
§ 127-3 JACKSON CODE § 127-3.1
123:442
the Township will erect an appropriate "reserved parking" sign with the
standard wheelchair symbol along the public street as close as possible to
the affected person's residence. The Township will also paint the concrete
curbing (if it exists) along the space for a length of 20 feet to help identify
the reserved space. The cost of the sign, post, installation and replacement,
and curb painting, if necessary, shall be the responsibility of the person
requesting the reserved parking space. It is also the responsibility of the
person requesting the space, or their heir or designee, to notify the
Township office when the reserved space is no longer justified or needed
so that the sign and restriction can be removed, which removal shall also
be ordered by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. It should be noted
that the posting of such a restricted space reserves it for use by any vehicle
displaying a valid severely disabled registration, veteran registration plate,
handicapped registration plate or handicapped placard. All other vehicles
parked in the reserved space will be subject to penalties as provided for
herein.
§ 127-4. Enforcement. [Amended 5-7-1996 by Ord. No. 87-96;
3-1-2005 by Ord. No. 155-05]
Violations of signs placed in conformity with this article, as well as signs
placed in conformity with 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 3353 and 3354, shall be
prosecuted in accordance with the laws relating to traffic violations of a
similar nature as enacted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 127-3.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 127-4
123:443

ARTICLE III
Stop Intersections
§ 127-5. Stop intersections designated.
The intersections described below are established as stop intersections and
official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if previously erected) in
such a position on the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street in the direction or directions indicated. Every driver
of a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street
in the direction or directions indicated in each case shall come to a full stop
before entering any such intersection.
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Acorn Road South Woodland Drive (T 388)
Bowman Road (T 482) North York Rail Tracks
Bowman Road (T 482) South York Rail Tracks
Cape Climb [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
North Ledge Drive
Cape Climb [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
South Knob Run
Chami Drive [Added
4-1-2008 by Ord. No.
173-08]
North and
south
Village Drive
Chami Drive [Added
4-1-2008 by Ord. No.
173-08]
South Roth's Church Road
Chami Drive (north end)
[Added 4-1-2008 by Ord.
No. 173-08]
West Village Drive
Commerce Drive (T 481) East Bowman Road (T 482)
Courtney Court [Added
4-1-2008 by Ord. No.
173-08]
South Lauren Lane
Crest Street [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
East Quartz Ridge Drive
Darlington Road (T 398) West KBS Road (T 483)
Dolomite Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
North Mineral Drive
§ 127-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 127-5
123:445
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Dolomite Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
North South Alpine Drive
Emig School Road (T 809) South Lefever Road (T 397)
Glenmar Drive (T 447) West Martin Road (T 400)
Glenview Road [Added
4-1-2008 by Ord. No.
173-08]
West Village Drive
Grandview Road (T 491) West Martin Road (T 400)
Grant Drive (T 473) [Added
9-5-2000 by Ord. No.
123-00]
South Lincolnway Drive (T 474)
Grant Road (T 395) North Pine Road (T 477)
Greenwood Road (T 453) North Little Creek Road (T 451)
Hershey Road (T 452) North Sprenkle Road (T 455)
Holtzschwamm Road (T 396) East Shady Dell Road (T 448)
Jackson Square Road (T 461) West Orchard Road (T 462)
Juniper Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
North and
south
Farm House Lane
Juniper Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
South South Alpine Drive
Knob Run [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
North Mineral Drive
Knoll Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
North North Alpine Drive
Knoll Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
South Quartz Ridge Drive
Lakeview Drive [Added
4-1-2008 by Ord. No.
173-08]
North Pahagaco Road
Lakeview Drive [Added
4-1-2008 by Ord. No.
173-08]
West Lake Road
Lakewood Drive (T 386) West Oakwood Drive (T 387)
§ 127-5 JACKSON CODE § 127-5
123:446
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Lauren Lane [Added
4-1-2008 by Ord. No.
173-08]
East Lakeview Drive
Lauren Lane [Added
4-1-2008 by Ord. No.
173-08]
South Lakeview Drive
Leah Lane [Added 4-1-2008
by Ord. No. 173-08]
North Lauren Lane
Leah Lane [Added 4-1-2008
by Ord. No. 173-08]
South Lakeview Drive
Ledge Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
North Mesa Lane
Leedy Road (T 464) West Orchard Road (T 462)
Lincolnway Drive (T 474)
[Added 9-5-2000 by Ord.
No. 123-00]
West KBS Road (T 483)
Locust Lane (T 479) East Jackson Square Road (T
461)
Locust Lane (T 479) West Jackson Square Road (T
461)
Main Street (T 399) North Ridge Road (T 449)
Martin Road (T 400) East Grandview Road (T 491)
Maywood Road (T 488) North Pine Road (T 477)
Mesa Lane [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
South Mineral Drive
Mineral Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
East and west Ledge Drive
Mineral Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
South Grandview Road
Mineral Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
West Dolomite Drive
North Alpine Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
East Hanover Road
§ 127-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 127-5
123:447
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
North Alpine Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
South Crest Street
Oakwood Drive (T 387) North Woodland Drive (T 388)
Pine Hollow Road [Added
4-1-2008 by Ord. No.
173-08; 12-7-2010 by Ord.
No. 188-10]
North Cedarlyn Drive
Pine Hollow Road [Added
4-1-2008 by Ord. No.
173-08; 12-7-2010 by Ord.
No. 188-10]
South Farmhouse Lane
Pine Road (T 477) East Grant Road (T 395)
Pine Road (T 477) West Grant Road (T 395)
Pinnacle Court [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
North North Alpine Drive
Quartz Ridge Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
East Summit Run Court
Quartz Ridge Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
North North Alpine Drive
Rambler Road (T 391) North Moul Road (T 392)
Shady Dell Road (T 448) South Pine Road (T 477)
Short Road (T 478) South Pine Road (T 477)
South Alpine Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
South Mineral Drive
South Alpine Drive [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
West Hanover Road
South Courtney Court
[Added 4-1-2008 by Ord.
No. 173-08]
North Lauren Lane
Sprenkle Road (T 455) East Martin Road (T 400)
Spring Road (T 394) South Gnatstown Road (T 389)
Summit Run Court [Added
12-7-2010 by Ord. No.
188-10]
North North Alpine Drive
§ 127-5 JACKSON CODE § 127-5
123:448
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Sunnyside Road (T 493) North Grandview Road (T 491)
Sunset Road (T 564) South Pine Road (T 477)
Three Hills Road (T 390) West Orchard Road (T 462)
Woodland Drive (T 388) East Orchard Road (T 462)
Woodland Drive (T 388) West Orchard Road (T 462)
Wren Road (T 807) West Shady Dell Road (T 448)
Lincoln Estates
Grant Drive (T 473) North Lincolnwood Drive (T 475)
Lincolnwood Drive (T 475) South Lincolnway Drive (T 474)
Lincolnwood Drive (T 475) West KBS Road (T 483)
Springfield Drive (T 476) North Lincolnway Drive (T 474)
Springfield Drive (T 476) West Lincolnway Drive (T 474)
Twin Pines
Kevin Drive (T 499) North Melinda Drive (T 501)
Lena Drive (T 510) South Melinda Drive (T 501)
Melinda Drive (T 501) East Pauline Avenue (T 503)
Perry Drive (T 504) East Pauline Avenue (T 503)
Perry Drive (T 504) South Kevin Drive (T 499)
Stitt Drive (T 509) South Kevin Drive (T 499)
Pine Springs
Farmview Drive (T 498) East Pine Springs Boulevard (T
506)
Lester Avenue (T 500) East Pine Springs Boulevard (T
506)
Lester Avenue (T 500) West Pine Springs Boulevard (T
506)
Slate Ridge Drive (T 507) East Pine Springs Boulevard (T
506)
Slate Ridge Drive (T 507) West Myers Road (T 502)
Spring Ridge Drive (T 508) South Pine Springs Boulevard (T
506)
§ 127-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 127-5
123:449

ARTICLE IV
Snow Emergencies
[Amended 6-6-2000 by Ord. No. 121-00]
§ 127-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SNOW EMERGENCY — Any time snow removal is conducted by the
Township either by plowing or by the spreading of cinders, salt or antiskid
materials.
§ 127-7. Parking or obstructing roadway prohibited.
During a snow emergency as defined in this article, it shall be unlawful
to park motor vehicles, boats, campers, trailers or otherwise obstruct the
roadway so as to prevent snow removal to the edge of the roadway. Parking
along the roadway is only permitted after a snow emergency is no longer in
effect.
§ 127-8. Violations and penalties.
Obstructions to snow removal during a snow emergency may be towed,
in which case the owner of the obstruction shall be liable to pay all costs
associated with towing and storage. In addition, the owner of the offending
obstruction may be ticketed for violating the provisions of this article and,
upon the issuance of a citation and conviction by a District Justice, shall
be guilty of a summary offense and shall pay a fine of not less than $25
nor more than $600. Each day a violation exists shall be considered a
separate violation, subject to the same fines as set forth above. It shall
not be necessary to issue a separate citation for each day of violation, but
one citation shall be sufficient to cover multiple days of obstructions. The
Board of Supervisors hereby authorizes the Township Manager, Township
Roadmaster, Assistant Township Roadmaster and Township police officers
to issue citations for violations of this article.
§ 127-6 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 127-8
123:451

ARTICLE V
Restrictions on Size, Weight and Type of Vehicle and Load
[Added 4-1-2008 by Ord. No. 172-08]
§ 127-9. Vehicle weight limits on certain roads and bridges.
A. On the following bridges and roads or parts of roads, by the authority
granted by Section 4902(a) of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, it
shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drive any vehicle or
combination having a gross weight in excess of the maximum
prescribed below for that bridge or road or parts of a road, as the case
may be:
Road or Bridge Location
Maximum Gross
Weight
Hidden Lane Between Lincoln
Highway and
Commerce Drive
5 tons (10,000 pounds)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Sections 4902(a) and 4902(g-1) of the Pennsylvania
Motor Vehicle Code and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of $150, plus $150 for each 500 pounds or part thereof in excess of
3,000 pounds over the maximum allowable weight, as well as costs of
court.
§ 127-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 127-9
123:453
Chapter 131
WELLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 99. Stormwater management — See Ch. 107.
§ 131-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Jackson Township Well Ordinance."
§ 131-2. Purpose.
The intention of this chapter is to insure and protect the quality and
suitability of potable water supply, and to secure and maintain the minimum
required isolation distances between water supplies and sewage disposal
systems or other sources of contamination.
§ 131-3. Application.
This chapter shall apply to all potable wells which have not been completed
or which are not in operation at the time of passage of this chapter. This
chapter shall further apply to the reconstruction, major repair, and other
changes to existing potable wells, when, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer,
such reconstruction, major repair, and other changes may affect the quality
and suitability of the water supply of the property upon which the well is
constructed or surrounding properties.
§ 131-4. Definitions.
All words and phrases not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings
provided in Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
§ 131-5. Permits and inspection.
A. All applications and permits shall be issued on forms provided by the
Township, which shall be executed by the Zoning Officer.
B. No potable well permit shall be issued for a particular property until a
sewage permit has been issued for said property, if applicable.
C. The Township, through its Zoning Officer, shall act upon each such
application for permit within 30 days after said application has been
filed, and in the event of failure on the part of the said officer to render
and communicate a decision to the applicant within said time period,
the applicant shall have the right to request a hearing before the Board
of Supervisors.
§ 127-9 JACKSON CODE § 131-5
131:454
§ 131-6. Fees.
All applications for a potable well permit shall be accompanied by a fee
payable to Jackson Township in accordance with a schedule of fees
established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of Jackson Township.
§ 131-7. Effective date of permits.
All permits shall be in effect as of the date of issuance and shall remain in
effect for a period of two years thereafter. In the event that construction
under the permit has not been completed at the expiration of two years from
the date of issuance, the permit shall expire and the validity of the permit
shall cease and terminate.
§ 131-8. Well location and setbacks.
D. Upon receipt of any application for a potable well permit, the Township,
through its duly authorized Zoning Officer, shall within 30 days perform
an inspection of the premises on which the well is to be constructed.
The inspection shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. Upon completion of the inspection, the Zoning Officer shall
either:
(1) Issue a permit to the applicant indicating the approved location for
the well and the special instructions for construction, if any; or
(2) Refuse to issue the said permit, and, in such event, shall provide
the applicant with written reasons for such refusal.
E. Upon the completion of construction, and after certification by the well
driller that construction has complied with the standards in this
chapter, or at such other time as the Zoning Officer may deem
appropriate, the Township, through its Zoning Officer, shall perform a
final inspection of the well to determine whether there has been
compliance with the permit issued. Upon completion of the said
inspection, the Zoning Officer shall:
(1) Issue certificate of well permit compliance upon the original
permit; or
(2) Deny such approval due to noncompliance with the permit issued,
in which latter event written reasons for such denial shall be noted.
A. All potable wells constructed after the date of this chapter shall be
located at least 100 feet from any portion of an area tested and
approved for an on-lot sewage disposal system; or, an existing septic
system, drain field or absorption area. Wells shall be at least 50 feet
from any existing septic tank, distribution box or pump tank. The well
shall be located so as to enable adjacent lots to place a septic system
drain field or absorption area so that the same would be at least 100
feet from such well with the septic tank, distribution box, and/or pump
tank on such lot being at least 50 feet from such well.
§ 131-5 WELLS § 131-8
131:455
§ 131-9. Drilling, water sampling and testing requirements.
B. All wells shall, if reasonably possible, be located at least 50 feet from an
agricultural field. If the fifty-foot isolation distance cannot reasonably
be achieved, the well shall be kept as far as reasonably possible from
the agricultural field.
C. The applicant shall present an accurate scale plan showing the location
of all existing or proposed wells, applicable setback distances for wells,
and existing or proposed sewage disposal drain fields and septic tanks
on the lands of the applicant, and on any immediately adjoining lands,
that may be affected by said regulations. The plan shall be the same
scale plan as submitted for the sewage permit for the subject property.
In all cases, a sewage permit must be issued for said property prior to
securing a well permit.
D. Well permits may be denied if drilling a well at a proposed location is
not possible due to the setback requirements.
E. All other setbacks shall be as follows with minimum isolation distances
from the proposed well to the features listed in Table 1:
Table 1
Features
Minimum
Distance
Lakes, ponds, streams or other surface waters 25 feet (4.6m)
Storm drains, stormwater detention ponds and
conveyance channels
25 feet (7.6m)
Preparation area or storage area of hazardous
spray materials, fertilizers of chemicals, salt piles
300 feet (91.5m)
Sewer lines and drains carrying domestic sewage
or industrial waste (except when the sewer line is
encased in concrete or is ductile iron pipe with
neoprene gasket joints
50 feet (15.2m)
Sewage seepage pits, cesspools 100 feet (30.4m)
Farm silos, barnyards 100 feet (30.4m)
Rainwater pits 25 feet (7.6m)
Spray irrigation site; sewage sludge and septic
disposal sites
300 feet (41.2m)
Property lines or rights-of-way 10 feet (3.04m)
Dedicated road right-of-way 15 feet (4.56m)
Building foundations (except for buildings
enclosing just water wells and/or water well
pumps)
30 feet (9.12m)
Any other potential source of pollution As approved
§ 131-8 JACKSON CODE § 131-9
131:456
§ 131-10. Construction standards.
All construction of new potable wells and repairs to potable wells shall be
subject to the following construction standards:
A. A potable water supply must be drilled by a well driller licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All well drillers shall, upon completion
of the well, provide the Township with a copy of the information
required to be submitted to the PA DEP and certification that the well
construction has complied with the requirements/standards of this
chapter.
B. All wells shall be purged prior to sampling.
C. Analysis shall be made of the bacterial and chemical quality as specified
below. The sample shall be taken from the pumping or staging
equipment. The analysis shall be performed by laboratories approved
by the PA DEP. Water from an individual water supply well shall be
certified as potable by the approved laboratory. A copy of the analysis
and certification shall be provided to the Township. At a minimum,
testing shall be conducted for the presence of the following
contaminants:
(1) Total coliforms - total plate counts total coliform/100 milliliters.
(2) pH.
(3) Nitrates.
(4) Sulfates.
(5) Iron.
(6) Manganese.
(7) Lead.
(8) Chlorides.
(9) Where the Township believes there may be contamination from
other pollutants, additional testing may be required, including, but
not limited to:
(a) TCE, PCE, and 1-1-1 trichlorethane.
(b) Benzene, toluene, xylene.
(c) Detergents (MBAS).
D. If the samples do not meet PA DEP and USEPA standards for safe
drinking water, the water supply must be treated so that the water
meets the standards.
A. Casing.
§ 131-9 WELLS § 131-10
131:457
(1) The well shall have a watertight and durable wrought iron, steel,
plastic, or other type of approved casing with a nominal thickness
of 3/16 (0.1875) inches and 6 5/8 inches outside diameter. The
sections shall be joined together by threaded couplings, welded
joints or other watertight approved joint or coupling.
(2) The casing shall be carried to a minimum depth of 20 feet from the
finished grade and in all cases shall be extended 10 feet into
bedrock or other competent strata. Driven wells shall be provided
with a drive shoe or other effective casing seal.
(3) An annular space shall be provided between the well casing and the
earth formation of a radius at least 1 1/2 inches greater than the
casing radius, excluding couplings. The annular space shall be
completely filled with impervious cement grout or equivalent
sealing material from bottom of the casing to within five feet of the
ground surface. External grouting shall be accomplished utilizing a
tremic pipe grout pump to force out any standing water on the
outside of the well casing.
(4) The casing shall be sealed effectively against entrances of water
from water bearing formations, which are subject to pollution,
through which the casing may pass. If casings of small diameter are
used in the lower portions of the well, effective watertight seals
shall be provided between the casings where they telescope. In
such instances, a section of casing shall telescope for a minimum
distance of four feet.
(5) The top of the well casing shall extend a minimum of 24 inches
above the finished grade of the lot so that contaminated water or
other substances cannot enter the well through the annular
opening at the top of the well casing, wall or pipe sleeve.
B. Well covers. Every potable water well shall be equipped with an
overlapping cover at the top of the well casing or pipe sleeve. Covers
shall extend downward at least two inches over the outside of the well
casing or wall. All well caps shall indicate well driller's name, depth of
well and depth of casing.
C. Pitless adapter. Where pump sections or discharge pipes enter or leave
a well through the side of the casing, the circle of contact shall be
watertight. The use of plastic/nylon adapters for this purpose is not
acceptable. A brass pitless adapter with brass connectors or equivalent
shall be required.
D. Electrical wiring. Electrical wiring for well purposes shall be encased in
conduit from the bottom of the water supply line trench to the well cap.
E. Drainage. All potable water wells shall be constructed so that surface
drainage will be diverted away from the well.
§ 131-10 JACKSON CODE § 131-10
131:458
§ 131-11. Sealing of abandoned wells.
The owner of any well shall, upon abandonment of any existing well or
test hole, effectively seal and fill such abandoned wells or test holes. All
abandoned wells and test holes must be filled with portland/sand grout,
and the placement of the grout must be observed by the Zoning Officer. A
well not in operation for three or more years or improperly maintained to
prevent contamination shall be considered abandoned.
§ 131-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the terms or provisions in this chapter shall
upon conviction thereof before a District Justice be subject to a penalty
in the amount of $500 for each offense. Each day that a violation of any
provision of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense and distinct penalties hereunder. Any such fines collected will be
used for general Township purposes.
§ 131-13. Liability.
No responsibility or liability for the construction of any well and amount and
potability of the resultant water supply shall be deemed to be placed upon
Jackson Township or its officers, agents, or employees by virtue of the terms
of this chapter or otherwise.
Chapter 133
F. Pumping equipment. All pumps installed in wells drilled to a depth
greater than 300 feet, but not to exceed 450 feet, shall be installed with
two-hundred-pound-per-square-inch plastic pipe. Well depths
exceeding 450 feet shall have pumps installed with Schedule 80 PVC
threaded pipe or galvanized steel pipe to support the increased
pumping pressure. The pressure rating on plastic pipe shall be at least
160 pounds per square inch, regardless of water supply depth.
G. Pump enclosures. Any pump room or any enclosure around a well pump
shall be drained and protected from freezing by heating or other
approved means. Where pumps are installed in basements, they shall
be mounted on a block or shelf not less than 18 inches above the
basement floor.
H. Service. The size of water service pipe shall be a minimum diameter of
3/4 inch.
I. Source. The source of the supply shall be from a water bearing
formation drawn not less than 100 feet from the ground surface, unless
it can be demonstrated that there is a flow of at least six gallons per
minute at a lesser depth. There shall be at least 20 feet of properly
grouted well casing, and the supply source must not be subject to
pollution.
§ 131-10 WELLS § 131-13
131:459
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult uses — See Ch. 36.
Building construction — See Ch. 47.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 69.
Junkyards — See Ch. 76.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 107.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
113.
§ 131-13 JACKSON CODE § 131-13
131:460
ARTICLE I
Short Title, Purpose and Community Development Objectives
§ 133-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Jackson Township
Zoning Ordinance, 2008."
§ 133-2. Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to promote and protect the harmonious
development of the Township by facilitating:
§ 133-3. Community development objectives.
This chapter is enacted as part of the overall plan for the orderly growth
and development of Jackson Township. As such, this chapter is based upon
the expressed or implied community development objectives as contained
in the Jackson/Paradise Joint Comprehensive Plan of 2006.
A. The orderly and efficient integration of land development within the
Township.
B. Proper density of population.
C. Adequate water and sewerage.
D. Adequate police protection, fire protection, schools, parks and other
public grounds and buildings.
E. The protection of water resources and drainageways.
F. Adequate light and air.
G. Adequate transportation, parking, and loading space.
H. The public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the Township.
I. Adequate sites for recreation, agriculture, conservation, and open
space.
J. The prevention of blight and overcrowding of land.
§ 133-1 WELLS § 133-3
131:461

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 133-4. Intent.
Words and phrases shall be presumed to be used in their ordinary context
unless such word or phrase is defined or interpreted differently within this
article.
§ 133-5. General interpretation.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the succeeding shall, for the purposes of
this chapter, be interpreted in the following manner:
§ 133-6. Specific words and phrases.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the
meanings given herein:
ACCESS DRIVE — A private minor vehicular right-of-way, other than a
street, providing access from a street to a property or parking area within
a lot. Access drives shall be required for all commercial, institutional
(including but not limited to schools, hospitals, and religious institutions),
and industrial uses and all multifamily dwellings. (See § 133-35.)
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT — A second dwelling unit incorporated as
an accessory use into a single-family detached dwelling.[Added 6-7-2016
by Ord. No. 210-16]
ADULT-ORIENTED FACILITY — An establishment open to the general public
or a private club open to members, except persons under the age of 18
years, which is used and occupied for one or more of the following activities:
A. Words used in the present tense imply the future tense.
B. Words used in the singular imply the plural.
C. The word "person" includes a partnership, corporation, or other legal
entity, as well as an individual.
D. The words "shall," "required," or "must" are to be interpreted as
mandatory; the word "may" as directory and to be complied with unless
waived.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment in which 5% or more of the
occupied sales or display area offers for sale, for rent or lease, for loan,
or for viewing upon the premises pictures, photographs, drawings,
prints, images, sculpture, still film, motion-picture film, videotape,
digital media, or similar visual representations distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on sexual conduct or sexually explicit
nudity, or books, pamphlets, magazines, printed matter, or sound
recordings containing explicit and detailed descriptions or narrative
A.
§ 133-4 WELLS § 133-6
131:463
AEU (ANIMAL EQUIVALENT UNIT) — One thousand pounds' live weight of
livestock or poultry animals, regardless of the actual number of individual
animals comprising the unit, as defined in the Nutrient Management Act, 3
Pa.C.S.A § 501 et seq.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Housing designed to be affordable for
households with no more than 80% of the median household income in York
County, as determined by the most recent data issued by the United States
Census Bureau. The Census median-income data shall be increased by a
standard United States government measurement of inflation to update the
median income to the present.
AGRICULTURAL COMMODITY — Agricultural, aquacultural, horticultural,
viticultural, and dairy products, livestock and the products thereof, ranchraised
fur-bearing animals and the products thereof, the products of poultry
and bee raising, forestry products and any and all products raised or
produced on farms intended for human consumption and the processed
or manufactured products thereof intended for human consumption,
transported or intended to be transported in commerce.
AGRICULTURE — The use of land for farming, dairying, pasturage,
silviculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, or animal or poultry
husbandry, including the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating or
storing the produce and equipment or housing and feeding the animals;
includes land devoted to and meeting the requirements and qualifications
for payments or other compensation pursuant to a soil conservation
program.
ALLEY — A minor right-of-way, privately or publicly owned, primarily for
vehicular access to the rear of properties.
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, any change in
the total area or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by
increasing in height.
accounts distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on sexual
conduct or offers sexual devices for sale.
ADULT CABARET — An establishment, club, tavern, restaurant,
theater, or hall that features live entertainment distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on sexual conduct or sexually explicit
nudity.
B.
ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR — An establishment whose business is the
administration of massage to the anatomy of patrons, regardless of
whether or not the same includes sexual conduct (does not apply to
heath and fitness centers and/or licensed therapeutic massage).
C.
ADULT THEATER — A building, or a room within a building, used
for presenting motion-picture film, videotape, digital media, or similar
visual representations of materials distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity.
D.
§ 133-6 JACKSON CODE § 133-6
131:464
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL — Any change in the supporting members of
a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.
AMENDMENT — A change that includes revisions to the zoning text and/or
the Official Zoning Map.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A building used primarily for the treatment of small
animals, such as dogs, cats, rabbits, and birds.
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign with action or motion, flashing, starbursts,
simulated explosions, or similar displays, or color changes requiring
electrical energy, but not including wind-actuated elements, such as flags,
banners or specialty items.
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit for rent and/or lease that is intended to be
a separate use other than the principal use of the building.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors, and
assigns.
AUTOMOBILE — A self-propelled motor vehicle designed for the
conveyance of persons or property, requiring a registration plate by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for operation upon public highways,
including trucks, motor homes, and motorcycles. (See "recreational
vehicle.")
AUTOMOBILE BODY SHOP — A building on a lot that is used for the repair
or painting of bodies, chassis, wheels, fenders, bumpers, and/or accessories
of automobiles and other vehicles for conveyance.
AUTOMOBILE GARAGE — A building on a lot designed and/or used
primarily for mechanical and/or body repairs, storage, rental, servicing,
or supplying of gasoline or oil to automobiles, trucks, and similar motor
vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE, AND/OR TRAILER SALES LOT
— An open lot for the outdoor display of new or used automobiles,
recreational vehicles, or trailers accessory to an automobile, recreational
vehicle or trailer sales, or a display building.
AUTOMOBILE, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE, OR TRAILER SALES DISPLAY
BUILDING — A building for the display or sale of new or used automobiles,
recreational vehicles, or trailers.
AUTOMOBILE WASHING FACILITY — A building designed and used
primarily for the washing and polishing of automobiles and that may provide
accessory services related to washing and polishing.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING — The dismantling or wrecking of used
automobiles or trailers or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled,
partially dismantled, obsolete, or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building partly underground, but having
1/2 or more of its height above the average level of the adjoining ground.
§ 133-6 WELLS § 133-6
131:465
A basement shall be considered as a story in determining compliance with
building height restrictions.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST INN — A single-family residence or portion thereof
containing not more than five guest rooms where rent is paid in money,
goods, labor, or otherwise.
BUILDING — Any structure on a lot, having a roof supported by columns
or walls, and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons,
animals, mechanical devices, or property, and including covered porches
and bay windows. (See "structure.")
BUILDING AREA — The total area within the outside dimensions on a
horizontal plane at ground level of the principal building and all accessory
buildings.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The total overall height in feet of a building,
measured from the average grade level to the highest point of the roof.
BUILDING SCALE — The relationship between the mass of a building and
its surroundings, including the width of streets, open space, and mass of
surrounding buildings. Mass is determined by the three-dimensional bulk of
a structure: height, width, and depth.
CAFO (CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION) — A CAO with
greater than 300 AEUs, any agricultural operation with greater than 1,000
AEUs, or any agricultural operation defined as a large CAFO under 40 CFR
122.23 (relating to concentrated animal feeding operations).
CAMPGROUND — A lot, tract, or parcel of land upon which two or more
campsites are located, intended for occupation by transients in tents or
recreational vehicles with sleeping quarters.
CAMPSITE — A plot of ground within a campground intended for temporary
occupation by a tent or recreational vehicle with sleeping quarters.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to and detached
from the main building on the same lot and used for purposes
customarily incidental to the principal building. However, for the
purpose of establishing setbacks, any accessory building larger than
150 square feet shall comply with principal structure setback
requirements.
A.
ATTACHED BUILDING — A building that has two or more party walls
in common.
B.
C. DETACHED BUILDING — A building that has no party wall.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which the principal use for that
lot is conducted.
D.
SEMIDETACHED BUILDING — A building that has only one party wall
in common.
E.
§ 133-6 JACKSON CODE § 133-6
131:466
CAO (CONCENTRATED ANIMAL OPERATIONS) — Agricultural operations
where the animal density exceeds two AEUs per acre on an annualized
basis.
CARE FACILITIES — Establishments that provide food, shelter, personal
assistance, supervision, and/or medical or other health-related services for
individuals not in need of hospitalization but who, because of age, illness,
disease, injury, convalescence, or physical or mental infirmity, need such
care.
ADULT DAY-CARE CENTER — Any premises where care is provided to
four or more elderly or disabled adults for part of a twenty-four-hour
day, excluding care provided by relatives. Such care includes personal
assistance, the development of skills for daily living, and the provision
of social contact.
A.
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility licensed by the state that
provides a wide range of formal day-care services for remuneration to
seven or more children who are supervised by a qualified staff. The
child-care areas in a day-care center shall not be used as a family
residence.
B.
CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME — A licensed establishment
that provides full-time residential, intermediate, or skilled nursing care
for three or more individuals who, by reason of chronic illness or
infirmity, cannot care for themselves. No care for the acutely ill or
surgical or obstetrical services shall be provided in such a home.
C.
DOMICILIARY CARE HOME — An existing building or structure
designed as a dwelling unit for one family that provides twenty-fourhour
supervised protective living arrangements by the family residing
therein for not more than three unrelated persons 18 years of age and
older who are disabled physically, mentally, or emotionally or who are
aged persons.
D.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — A facility, located in a single-family
residence, which provides supervised care for remuneration to not
more than six children who are not relatives of the caregiver.
E.
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME — A facility, located in a single-family
residence, which provides supervised care for remuneration to more
than six but fewer than 12 children who are not relatives of the
caregiver.
F.
GROUP HOME — A type of group quarters, specifically a dwelling
designed for a group of mentally and/or physically disabled persons
living and cooking together in a single dwelling unit. A group home
shall be directly affiliated with a parent institution that provides for
the administration of the residents, who are required to reside on
the premises to benefit from the service, through the direction of a
professional staff, and for supervision of residents by full-time resident
staff.
G.
§ 133-6 WELLS § 133-6
131:467
CARTWAY — The paved portion of a highway improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the sidewalk or shoulder;
also referred to as a "travelway" or "roadway."
CELLAR — That portion of a building wholly or partly underground and
having more than 1/2 of its height below the average level of the adjoining
ground. A cellar shall not be considered in determining the required
number of stories or building height.
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND/OR OCCUPANCY — The certificate issued by
the Zoning Officer that permits the use of a building in accordance with
the approved plans and specifications and that certifies compliance with the
provisions of law for the use and occupancy of the land and structure in
its several parts, together with any special stipulations or conditions of the
building permit.
CLUB OR MEETING HALL — A building used by an association of persons
for some common nonprofit activity (not including groups organized
primarily to render a service that is customarily carried on as a business).
COMMERCIAL LIVESTOCK OPERATIONS — An agricultural use involving
the commercial housing, feeding, watering, or running of livestock or
poultry in the form of CAFOs and CAOs, as defined herein.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION ESTABLISHMENT — An activity operated as
a business, open to the public, for the purpose of public recreation or
entertainment. This use shall not include adult-oriented uses.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land, or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development,
including squares, greens, neighborhood parks, public parks, playgrounds,
tot lots, linear environmental corridors, and similar areas, not including
streets, off-street parking areas, stormwater facilities, and areas set aside
for public facilities.
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any device used for the transmission
or reception of radio, television, wireless telephone, pager, or commercial
mobile radio service, or any other wireless communications signals, existing
or hereinafter developed, including, without limitation, omnidirectional or
whip antennas and directional or panel antennas, that is owned, leased,
licensed or operated by any person or entity. This definition shall not
include satellite dishes or television antennas or amateur radio equipment,
including, without limitation, ham or citizens' band radio antennas,
mounted on private residences.
PERSONAL CARE BOARDING HOME — A type of group quarters,
specifically, a premises in which food, shelter, and personal assistance
or supervision are provided, on the basis of a state or federal license,
for a period exceeding 24 consecutive hours, for at least four persons
who are over the age of 18, are not relatives of the operator, and
who are aged, blind, disabled, infirm, or dependent but do not require
skilled or intermediate nursing care.
H.
§ 133-6 JACKSON CODE § 133-6
131:468
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING — An unmanned building
or cabinet, whether existing or proposed, containing communications
equipment required for operating communications antennas and covering
an area on or under the ground not greater than 250 square feet.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A structure other than a building,
including, without limitation, monopole, self-supporting, or guyed towers,
designed and used to support one or more communications antennas.
COMMUNITY SEWER SYSTEM — A central sewage disposal system that
serves a given area and is not publicly owned. Minimum lot area and lot
width requirements for uses served by a public sewer system shall also
apply to uses served by a community sewer system.
COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM — A central water supply system that serves
a given area and is not publicly owned. The minimum lot area and lot width
requirements for uses served by a public water system shall also apply to
uses served by a community water system.
CONDOMINIUM — A type of ownership arrangement, not a land use,
wherein parts of a building typically are owned separately by persons and
other parts, such as halls, stairs, and recreation areas, are owned jointly by
such persons. A condominium may be residential, commercial, or industrial
in nature.
CONTRACTOR'S OFFICE OR SHOP — An office or shop for tradesmen, such
as building, cement, electrical, masonry, painting, and roofing contractors.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A use that primarily sells routine household
goods, groceries and prepared ready-to-eat foods to the general public, but
that is not primarily a restaurant, and that includes a building with a floor
area of less than 8,000 square feet. A convenience store shall not have
drive-through service.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DRIVE-IN BUSINESS — A commercial establishment, including a drive-in
eating establishment, primarily offering stand-up counter, vending machine,
window, or in-car service.
DRIVEWAY — An improved surface for vehicular travel that provides access
between a street and a lot. For the purposes of this chapter, drives for
all residential uses (except multifamily) and all agricultural uses shall be
considered driveways. (See § 133-34.)
DUMPSTERS — See "solid waste storage containers."
DWELLING — A building or structure designed for living quarters for one
or more families, including mobile homes, not including hotels, rooming
houses, convalescent homes, or other accommodations used for transient
occupancy.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building containing three or more
dwelling units (such as apartment houses and garden apartments). All
A.
§ 133-6 WELLS § 133-6
131:469
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms used for living and sleeping
purposes and having a kitchen with fixed cooking facilities, arranged for
occupancy by one family.
EASEMENT — A limited right of use granted on private land for public
or private use by another party or parties, or a protective condition, as
in the case of drainage easements, for protection and/or preservation of a
specified area.
ENCLOSED PORCH — A covered area where one wall of the structure is
formed by the house and at least one wall is a window or screen that allows
views of the outside but keeps out insects and possibly the weather. An
enclosed porch can be at the rear or front or wrapped around the sides of
the house.
FAMILY — One or more persons who live in one dwelling unit and maintain a
common household; may consist of a single person or two or more persons,
whether or not related by blood, marriage, or adoption; may also include
domestic servants and gratuitous guests, but not occupants of a club,
fraternal lodging, or boardinghouse.
FARM — A parcel of land used for agriculture, including necessary farm
structures within the prescribed limits, which may include a single-family
dwelling, and the storage of equipment customarily incidental to the
principal use. For the purposes of this chapter, a farm shall not include a
kennel.
FARM PRODUCE STAND — An accessory use to agriculture where the
display and sale of agricultural commodities is conducted.
FELLING — The act of cutting a standing tree so that it falls to the ground.
dwelling units are located on a single lot and share with other units a
common yard area.
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING — A portion of a building
containing one dwelling unit and having two party walls in common
with other dwelling units (such as row houses or townhouses). Each
dwelling unit is located on a single lot. End units that have one party
wall in common are included and are subject to the lot area
requirements for other single-family attached units but must meet
setback requirements on the open side.
B.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A building containing only
one dwelling unit and having two side yards.
C.
SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED DWELLING — A portion of a
building containing one dwelling unit, having one side yard, and one
party wall in common with another dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit is
located on a single lot.
D.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing two dwelling units,
having two side yards, and one partition in common between the two
units. Both dwelling units are located on the same lot.
E.
§ 133-6 JACKSON CODE § 133-6
131:470
FENCE — Any combination of materials creating an enclosure or barrier
to prevent intrusion from outside or straying from within. The height of all
fences and walls or portions thereof shall be measured from grade level.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — A commercial savings and loan, credit union,
or banking establishment that provides office space for financial assistance
and/or protective savings and investment services.
FLOOD-PRONE AREA — A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a
stream, river, or watercourse that is subject to partial or complete
inundation; or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or
runoff of surface waters from any source. (See § 133-17.)
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures that
reduces or eliminates flood damage to lands, water and sanitary facilities,
structures, and contents of buildings. (See § 133-17.)
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas required to carry and discharge a flood of a given magnitude.
(See § 133-17.)
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — The sum of the horizontal areas of all rooms
used for habitation, such as living room, dining room, kitchen, bathroom,
or bedroom, but not including hallways, stairways, cellars, attics, service
rooms or utility rooms, closets, or unheated areas such as enclosed porches.
Earth-sheltered dwellings, designed as such, shall include the aggregate of
area used for habitation as defined above, whether or not all or a portion of
such a dwelling is below ground level.
FLOOR AREA OF A BUILDING — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of
the several floors of a building, excluding cellar, basement, and attic floor
areas not devoted to the principal use, but including the area of roofed
porches and roofed terraces. All dimensions shall be measured between
exterior faces of walls.
FOOTCANDLE — A unit of incident light quantity stated in lumens per
square foot and measurable with an illumination meter, such as a footcandle
meter or light meter.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands, when practiced
in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes, that does not involve any land development.
FUNERAL HOME — A use that prepares the remains of deceased humans
for burial and cremation. This use may also conduct funeral services.
GREENHOUSE OR HORTICULTURAL NURSERY — A use primarily
involving horticulture, which includes the sale of plants grown on the
premises and related goods and materials, as well as the storage of
equipment customarily incidental and accessory to the principal use.
GROUP HOME — See "care facilities."
§ 133-6 WELLS § 133-6
131:471
GROUP QUARTERS — Any dwelling or portion thereof designed or used for
at least three persons unrelated to each other or for any family occupying
the dwelling unit and having common eating facilities. Group quarters
include but are not limited to lodging houses or boardinghouses, fraternity
and sorority houses and dormitories, and other quarters of an institutional
nature. Such quarters must be associated with a religious, educational,
charitable or philanthropic institution.
GUEST ROOM — A room intended, arranged, or designed to be occupied
or which is occupied by one or more guests but in which no provision is
made for cooking. Residential noncommercial guest rooms shall be within
or attached to the principal residence and shall be a part of the residential
utility (sewer and electric) service line.
HALFWAY HOUSE — A dwelling for the transitional, institutional
supervision of individuals who have violated the law and are sent to a
halfway house upon release from, or instead of being sent to, a penal
institution or juvenile detention center.
HEALTH/FITNESS CENTER — An establishment that contains various
equipment for the purpose of physical exercise, offers participatory classes
in aerobics or similar activities, may offer therapeutic massage by licensed
therapists, and may contain a sauna or tanning facilities. For a fee, a visitor
can use the equipment or services and participate in the courses at the
health and fitness center.
HEAVY STORAGE — The storage of goods, material, equipment, and/or
large vehicles (including but not limited to trucks and buses). Such storage
includes warehousing and wholesale establishments and the exterior
storage of the types of vehicles described above.
HEIGHT OF A COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — The vertical distance
measured from the ground level to the highest point on a communications
tower, including antennas mounted on the tower. In the case of a tower
mounted on a slope, height shall be measured from the lowest point where
the tower contacts the slope to the highest point on the tower.
HOME OCCUPATION — A special type of accessory use, specifically an
occupation or profession that:
HOSPITAL — A place for the diagnosis, treatment, or other care of humans
and having facilities for inpatient care.
HOTEL — A building in which guest rooms are provided for occupancy, with
or without meals, for compensation, by transient or semipermanent guests,
A. Is carried on only in a dwelling unit, except in the AP or RC Zone;
B. Is carried on by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit;
Is clearly incidental and secondary to the principal use of a property;
and
C.
Sells items in conjunction with the home occupation that are those only
produced on site or items incidental to the home occupation.
D.
§ 133-6 JACKSON CODE § 133-6
131:472
or both, and in which no provision is made for cooking in any individual
room or suite.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES — Paved surfaces that do not absorb
precipitation. Areas including but not limited to parking areas, driveways,
roads, sidewalks, patios and any similar areas of concrete, brick or asphalt
shall be considered impervious surfaces. In addition, all buildings and
structures shall be considered as impervious surfaces for computations of
lot coverage.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES — The manufacturing, processing and/or
assembly of materials, including but not limited to the following: printing
and publishing, electronic components industries, tool and die making,
molding plastics, bottling operations, food processing, furniture making,
metal fabrication, and textiles.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — A parcel or parcels of land:
JUNKYARD — Any lot, land, or structure, or part thereof, used primarily
for the collection, storage, and/or sale of scrap metal or discarded material,
or for the collecting, dismantling, storage, and salvaging of machinery,
equipment, junked or inoperable motor vehicles, and/or for the sale of parts
thereof. For all such uses, issuance of an annual license shall be required
according to the provisions of Chapter 76, Junkyards.
KENNEL — Any commercial building or buildings and/or land used for the
sheltering, boarding, breeding, or training of dogs, cats, fowl, or other small
domestic animals at least six months of age that are kept or bred for profit,
but not to include the keeping of livestock for agricultural purposes. A
kennel operation may include accessory uses such as animal grooming.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
Organized and laid out in accordance with an overall plan for a
community of industries, heavy storage facilities and/or office
complexes, on separate building sites and/or separate lots arranged on
streets with utility services; and
A.
Designed to ensure compatibility between the industrial operations
in the park and the surrounding area through such devices as
landscaping, setbacks, and use requirements.
B.
Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts,
or parcels of land for any purpose involving the following:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
(b)
(1)
A.
§ 133-6 WELLS § 133-6
131:473
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LARGE CAFO — A CAFO that stables or confines as many as or more than
the numbers of animals specified in any of the following categories:
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups, or other features.
(2) A subdivision of land.
The following activities are excluded from the definition of land
development only when such land development involves the following:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
(1)
The addition of an accessory residential or farm building on a lot or
lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise that would be considered an amusement park.
For purposes of this subsection, an "amusement park" is defined
as a tract or area used principally as a location for permanent
amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to
newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans
for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
(3)
B.
A. Seven hundred mature dairy cows, whether milked or dry.
B. One thousand veal calves.
One thousand cattle other than mature dairy cows or veal calves. Cattle
includes but is not limited to heifers, steers, bulls and cow/calf pairs.
C.
D. Two thousand five hundred swine, each weighing 55 pounds or more.
E. Ten thousand swine, each weighing less than 55 pounds.
F. Five hundred horses.
G. Ten thousand sheep or lambs.
H. Fifty-five thousand turkeys.
Thirty thousand laying hens or broilers, if the AFO uses a liquid manure
handling system.
I.
§ 133-6 JACKSON CODE § 133-6
131:474
LIVESTOCK — Any domestic animals, such as cattle, donkeys, horses,
mules, burros, sheep, hogs, goats, or poultry, maintained for agricultural
use, commercial purposes, or as pets. Livestock shall include the raising of
fur-bearing animals and fish farming.
LIVE/WORK BUILDING — A combination of a dwelling unit and business
space, such as an artisan shop or office, that is open to the public for retail
trade or personal or professional services. Work activities are conducted by
one or more occupants of the dwelling unit, and the dwelling unit is their
principal residence.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract, or area of land, established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed, or built upon as a
unit.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of an individual
parcel of land, excluding any area within a street right-of-way, but including
the area of any easement. If a lot is traversed by a street right-of-way,
whether existing or proposed, any principal building on said lot shall be
located on a portion of that lot, which area, in and of itself, contains the
minimum lot area required by this chapter.
One hundred twenty-five thousand chickens (other than laying hens), if
the AFO uses other than a liquid manure handling system.
J.
Eighty-two thousand laying hens, if the AFO uses other than a liquid
manure handling system.
K.
Thirty thousand ducks (if the AFO uses other than a liquid manure
handling system).
L.
M. Five thousand ducks (if the AFO uses a liquid manure handling system).
CORNER LOT — A lot located at the intersection of, and fronting on,
two streets. The front setback regulations of the zone in which the lot
is located shall apply to both street frontages.
A.
DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOT — A lot extending between and having
frontage on two streets. The front setback requirements of the zone in
which the lot is located shall apply to both street frontages.
B.
INTERIOR LOT — A lot having frontage on one street, adjoined on the
sides and rear by other lots.
C.
REVERSE-FRONTAGE LOT — A lot extending between and having
frontage on a minor street and either an arterial or collector street,
with vehicular access solely from the minor street. The front setback
regulations of the zone in which the lot is located shall apply to both
street frontages.
D.
TRIPLE-FRONTAGE LOT — A lot fronting on three streets. The front
setback regulations of the zone in which the lot is located shall apply to
each street frontage.
E.
§ 133-6 WELLS § 133-6
131:475
LOT COVERAGE — That area of a lot represented by a percentage that,
when its decimal equivalent is multiplied by the total lot area, will
determine the maximum area permitted to be covered by impervious
surfaces. (See "impervious surfaces.")
LOT LINES — The lines bounding a lot as described in the recorded title;
also referred to as "property lines."
LOT WIDTH — The required continuous distance between the side property
lines (or in the case of corner lots, between a front and side property line),
measured along a single street right-of-way line. If a lot is traversed by a
street right-of-way, whether existing or proposed, any principal building on
said lot shall be located on a portion of that lot that contains the minimum
lot width required by this chapter.
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE — A street or highway designated in the
Comprehensive Plan as an existing or planned rural principal arterial, rural
minor arterial, or minor collector street.
MEDICAL CLINIC — Any building or group of buildings occupied by medical
practitioners and related services for providing health services to persons
on an outpatient basis.
MINI-STORAGE FACILITY — A commercial rental facility of two or more
units, providing for the enclosed storage of household items, recreational
vehicles, and/or equipment, and/or classic or antique automobiles, where
said items are retained for direct use by their owner, who shall have
direct access thereto without intermediate handling by the proprietor of the
facility. Mini-storage units shall not be used as offices or shops and shall not
house any items or operations other than dead storage as specified above.
No volatile or hazardous materials shall be stored in such facilities.
MIXED-USE BUILDING — A two- or three-story building that houses
nonresidential uses, including retail shops and offices, on the ground floor.
Uses within the upper floors include multifamily units and/or professional
offices.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land that has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME SALES LOT — An open lot for the outdoor display of new
or used mobile homes.
§ 133-6 JACKSON CODE § 133-6
131:476
MOTEL — A group of attached or detached buildings, containing sleeping
rooms or living units with accessory facilities, designed for temporary use
by automobile tourists or transients, including auto courts, motor lodges,
and similar establishments.
MULTIFAMILY OR TWO-FAMILY CONVERSION — A multifamily or twofamily
dwelling constructed by converting an existing building into dwelling
units for more than one family, without substantially altering the exterior
of the building. Such conversions shall be subject to review and permitting
procedure by the Township Planning Commission, Board of Supervisors,
Sewage Enforcement Officer, and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, where applicable.
NATURAL EXTRACTION INDUSTRIES — Surface excavation for the
purposes of removal and sale of topsoil, sand, gravel, clay, shale, limestone,
or other natural substances. The term "natural extraction industries" shall
not include underground mining.
NEIGHBORHOOD RETAIL — Retail establishments that supply area
residents with their day-to-day consumer purchases. Such businesses
typically occupy buildings of 8,000 square feet or less.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use that is clearly secondary to
the use as a residential dwelling and that involves no customer, client or
patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises in excess of those normally associated
with residential use.
NONCONFORMITY — A use, structure, lot, or dimension in conflict with
the regulations of this chapter, (1) existing on the effective date of this
chapter, or (2) existing at any subsequent amendment of this chapter, or (3)
created by variance. Specifically, the following types of nonconformities are
distinguished:
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area or dimension of which was
lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter but which
fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located by reason of such adoption or amendment.
A.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
not designed to comply with the applicable use or dimensional
provisions in this chapter or any amendment heretofore or hereafter
enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment
of this chapter or amendment or prior to the application of this chapter
or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such
nonconforming structures include but are not limited to nonconforming
signs.
B.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of a structure,
that does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter
or any amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use
was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or
C.
§ 133-6 WELLS § 133-6
131:477
NONPROFIT — An educational, religious, or charitable use that qualifies as
nonprofit under Section 501-C of the Internal Revenue Service Code.
NURSERY SCHOOL — A school that provides instruction and child-care
services at a pre-kindergarten level.
OPEN-AIR RETAIL — A business that provides stalls, booths, or selling
spaces for short-term rental to individuals involved in the retail sales of
used or new merchandise, antiques, art and craft items, and collectibles.
Resale of merchandise is allowable but not as a branch or outlet of a
business with another location elsewhere outside the flea market. Junk
sales, weapons sales, used automobile sales, thrift shops, and consignment
shops are specifically excluded from this definition
OPEN-AREA REQUIREMENT — That area of a lot represented by a
percentage which, when its decimal equivalent is multiplied by the total lot
area, will determine the required area of a lot that must not contain any
impervious surface area. Such area shall be naturally landscaped and shall
be devoid of buildings, structures, and paving. (See "impervious surfaces.")
OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATION ESTABLISHMENT — A use of
open land, operated as a business for profit, including facilities for leisuretime
activities, such as a swimming pool, tennis court, ski resort (including
snowboard and snowtube), skateboard park, ATV track, or golf course.
PARCEL — Any tract or contiguous tracts of land in the same ownership
and contained in the same deed. Land shall be considered contiguous even
though separated by public or private roads.
PARKING GARAGE — A building where automobiles may be stored for
short-term, daily, or overnight off-street parking.
PARKING LOT — An open lot where automobiles may be stored for shortterm,
daily, or overnight off-street parking.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for the parking of one
automobile and having direct usable access to a street, access drive, or
driveway.
PARK OR OTHER RECREATION AREA OF A NONPROFIT NATURE — Any
land, including buildings and structures, that is used for active or passive
recreation that is of a noncommercial and nonprofit nature. Such uses
would include but not be limited to athletic fields and courts, biking and
hiking trails, children's playgrounds, and picnic areas. Examples of uses not
included would be outdoor sports clubs, golf courses, and similar facilities
which are not public and involve a commercial rate for use or membership
fees in lieu of such rates.
PERSONAL SERVICE BUSINESS — Shall include barber- and beauty shops;
self-service laundry and dry-cleaning establishments; laundromats; radio
and television repair; repair shops for home appliances, tools, bicycles,
guns, locks, shoes, and watches; tailor and dressmaking shops; or any
amendment or prior to the application of this chapter or amendment to
its location by reason of annexation.
§ 133-6 JACKSON CODE § 133-6
131:478
other establishment of a similar nature providing personalized service to
customers.
PLAT — A map, plan, or layout showing the subdivision of land or land
development and indicating the location and boundaries of individual
properties.
PRIVATE — Not publicly owned, operated, or controlled.
PROFESSIONAL OR BUSINESS OFFICE — An office that generally
operates on an appointment basis. Business offices shall include advertising
agencies, opticians' offices, personnel agencies, and travel and ticket
agencies. Professional offices shall include offices of accountants, actuaries,
architects, attorneys, clergy, computer consultants and technicians,
dentists, designers, engineers, insurance and bonding agents,
manufacturing representatives, physicians, real estate agents, teachers,
various testing services (including water sampling and testing), and
miscellaneous consulting services. Also included are offices of a
governmental agency, social service organization, District Justice or Justice
of the Peace, notary, public or private utility, or political organization, or
an office of a bank, savings and loan association, credit or loan company,
collection agency, or stock and bond broker.
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency (federal,
state or local, including a corporation created pursuant to law for the
performance of certain specialized governmental functions).[Amended
6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 210-16]
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewage disposal system that is owned and operated by
a local government authority or by a local public utility company controlled
by a government authority.
PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDING/SERVICE STRUCTURE — Any building or
service structure owned or otherwise controlled by a utility, which utility is
governed by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.
PUBLIC WATER — A water supply system that is owned and operated by a
local government authority or by a local public utility company controlled
by a government authority.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any portable or mobile vehicle used or
designed to be used for travel, recreation, and/or temporary living purposes
and with its wheels, rollers or skids in place. A recreational vehicle shall
include a trailer, house trailer, camper, snowmobile, golf cart, all-terrain
vehicle, trail bike, boat, boat trailer, airplane, or similar vehicle.
REGULATED SHOOTING GROUNDS — A privately owned and operated
pay-to-hunt area regulated and permitted under the requirements of Title
34 of the Pennsylvania Game and Wildlife Code. Such establishments may
be operated as a private (by membership only) club or as a commercial
enterprise open to the general public.
RESEARCH LABORATORY — An establishment in which the principal use
involves testing and/or research. Such use may involve but is not
§ 133-6 WELLS § 133-6
131:479
necessarily limited to metallurgical, chemical, electronic, or biological
research, testing, and development activities.
RESTAURANT — A public eating place primarily offering sit-down counter
or table service and custom-prepared foods for on-premises consumption.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH — An accessory use to a commercial
restaurant where the customer receives food or beverage through a driveup
window without the need for the customer to leave his or her vehicle.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A commercial establishment where a limited
selection of food or beverage is sold either for consumption on the premises
or as a take-out service. Food preparation is designed for immediate service
to customers, and food is normally prepared in advance to facilitate this
type of fast service.
RETAIL STORE OR SHOP — Any shop or store whose primary activities
involve the sale or lease of amusements and games, antiques, art, books,
beverages, carpets and rugs, ceramics and glass, confections, drugs, dry
goods, flowers, food, furniture, gifts, garden supplies, hobbies, hardware,
household appliances, household pets and supplies, leather goods, musical
supplies and equipment, notions, paint, periodicals, photographs and
photographic equipment, radio, television and sound equipment, sporting
and camping goods, stationery, tobacco, toys, and wearing apparel. The
wholesale distribution or manufacture of the foregoing products is not
included herein and is permitted only as provided in other appropriate
sections of this chapter. Among the uses not to be interpreted as retail
stores or businesses are uses specifically provided for elsewhere in this
chapter, including but not limited to service stations, vehicular sales and
rental, restaurants, taverns, hotels and motels, funeral homes, contractors
offices, building material sales, and adult-oriented facilities.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A legal right of passage across land occupied or intended
to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission
line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade
trees, or for another special use. If the right-of-way involves maintenance by
a public agency, it shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat
on which such right-of-way is established.
ROOMING HOUSE — A building or a portion thereof, other than a hotel,
containing not more than one dwelling unit, where lodging is provided with
or without meals for compensation.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — Any accessory structure capable of
receiving radio or television signals from a transmitter or transmitter relay
located in planetary orbit.
SCHOOL — Any place offering instruction in any branch of knowledge
under the supervision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or a lawfully
constituted ecclesiastical governing body, person, partnership, or
corporation meeting the requirements of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 133-6 JACKSON CODE § 133-6
131:480
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL — A school conducted for profit for such special
instruction as business, art, music, trades, handicraft, or dancing.
SCREEN PLANTING — A vegetative material, the purpose of which is to
conceal from the view of property owners in adjoining zones, or on adjoining
lots, the structures and uses on the premises on which the screen planting
is located.
SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including structures thereon, that
is used for the sale of gasoline or any other motor vehicle fuel and oil
and other lubricating substances, including any sales of motor vehicle
accessories at retail only, but not including major repairing, body and fender
work, painting, vehicular sales or rental, or automatic car washes.
SETBACK — The required horizontal distance between a structure and a
property or street line.
SETBACK LINE — A line within a property and parallel to a property
or street line that delimits the required minimum distance that must be
provided between a structure or building and an adjacent street line and/or
property line.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, involving a person or persons, or a person or persons and an
animal, including acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, fellatio,
cunnilingus, analingus, or physical contact with a person's nude or partially
denuded genitals, pubic area, perineum, anal region, or, if such person be
female, a breast.
SEXUALLY EXPLICIT NUDITY — A sexually oriented and explicit showing
or exhibition, by any means or manner, which presents or exposes to the
viewer the following anatomical areas: the human genitals, pubic area,
perineum, buttocks or anal region, with less than a fully opaque covering;
the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state; or the
postpubertal, full or partially developed human female breast with less than
opaque covering of a portion thereof below the top of the areola or nipple.
SHOPPING MALL, SHOPPING CENTER OR SHOPPING PLAZA — A group
of two or more retail stores or shops planned and designed to function
FRONT SETBACK — The required distance between the street right-ofway
line (regardless whether the same is also a front, side, or rear lot
line) and the front setback line, projected the full width of the lot.
A.
REAR SETBACK — The required distance between the rear lot line,
unless such line is also a street line, and the rear setback line, projected
the full width of the lot.
B.
SIDE SETBACK — The required distance between the side lot line,
unless such line is also a street line, and the side setback line, projected
from the front setback line to the opposite setback line. However, in
the case of corner lots, the second side setback shall be the required
distance between the rear lot line and the side setback line projected
from the side lot line to the opposite front setback line.
C.
§ 133-6 WELLS § 133-6
131:481
as a unit for the site on which it is located, with off-street parking and
landscaping provided as an integral part of the unit.
SIGN —
Any surface, fabric, device, or structure (including billboards or poster
panels) bearing lettered, pictorial, or sculptured matter designed for
visual communication and used for the purpose of bringing the subject
thereof to the attention of public, but not including lettering or symbols
that are an integral part of another structure or any flag, badge, or
other insignia of any government or government agency or of any civic,
charitable, religious, fraternal, or similar organization.
ADVERTISING SIGN — A sign whose major purpose is for directing
attention to a business commodity, service, or entertainment that is
conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than upon the same lot, such
as billboards.
(1)
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign with action or motion, flashing,
starbursts, simulated explosions, or similar displays or color
changes requiring electrical energy, but not including windactuated
elements such as flags, banners, or specialty items.
(2)
BANNER — A temporary sign consisting of lightweight, flexible
material, which is supported by a frame, rope, wires or other
anchoring devices, and may or may not include copy, a logo, or
graphic symbols.
(3)
BEACON — Any source of electric light, whether portable or fixed,
the primary purpose of which is to cast a concentrated beam of
light generally skyward as a means of attracting attention to its
location rather than to illuminate any particular sign, structure, or
other object.
(4)
BUSINESS SIGN — A sign directing attention to a business or
profession conducted on the same lot or, as incidental to a business,
to products sold upon the same lot.
(5)
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign that directs people to a community,
an event of public interest, public uses and buildings, uses and
buildings of service and charitable organizations, and uses and
buildings of a commercial nature, and containing no advertising
matter other than an identifying name or symbol.
(6)
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign supported by uprights or braces
placed upon or in the ground and not attached to a building.
(7)
PARALLEL SIGN — A sign attached, painted, or otherwise mounted
parallel to the surface of that portion of the building or structure to
which it is affixed.
(8)
PERMANENT SIGN — A sign permanently attached or applied to
a building or structure or permanently anchored into the ground
(9)
A.
§ 133-6 JACKSON CODE § 133-6
131:482
SKIDDING — Dragging trees on the ground from the stump to the landing
by any means.
SLASH — Woody debris left in the woods after logging, including logs,
chunks, bark, branches, uprooted stumps, and broken or uprooted trees or
shrubs.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse, and other discarded materials, including
but not limited to solid and liquid waste materials resulting from municipal,
industrial, commercial, agricultural and residential activities. Such wastes
shall not include biological excrements or hazardous waste materials, as
defined in the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling, and Waste Reduction
Act, Act 101 of 1988, and 25 Pa. Code Chapter 273, as amended,
supplemented, or revised.
SOLID WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS — Large receptacles, such as
dumpsters, that are used as the central collection point for the temporary
storage of solid waste.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — Approval granted an applicant to use land and/
or structures in a zone for a purpose other than that generally permitted
outright in that zone. A special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing
and that cannot easily be moved. Permanent signs may have either
permanent or replaceable lettering.
PORTABLE SIGN — A temporary sign, with or without changeable
lettering, illuminated or unilluminated, mounted or transported
on a vehicle, trailer or similar structure, with or without wheels,
and not permanently attached to the ground. Such signs are often
referred to as "mobile signs."
(10)
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign that is attached to a building or other
structure and extends beyond the line of a building or structure or
beyond the surface of that portion of the building or structure to
which it is attached.
(11)
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and
over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and/or
extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof.
(12)
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign that is anchored to the ground or
attached to a building or structure with weights, cables, pins,
braces, or stakes and that can easily be moved. Temporary signs
are displayed for a limited period of time.
(13)
VEHICULAR SIGN — Any vehicle used as a sign or vehicle to
which a sign is affixed in such a manner that the carrying of the
sign is used primarily as stationary advertisement for the business
or another business on which the vehicle sits or is otherwise not
incidental to the vehicle's primary purpose.
(14)
In instances where a sign may serve two or more purposes, for example,
directional and advertising, the most-restrictive regulations shall apply.
B.
§ 133-6 WELLS § 133-6
131:483
Board in accordance with the terms, procedures and conditions as set forth
in Articles V and VI.
STABLE OR RIDING ACADEMY — An establishment where horses are
kept for riding or driving or where they are stabled for compensation
or incidental to the operation of any club, association, ranch, or similar
establishment.
STORY — That portion of a building, excluding cellars, included between
the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there
is no floor above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next
above it.
STREET — A public or private way, excluding driveways, alleys, and access
drives, that affords the principal means of access to abutting properties,
intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians; includes street,
avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, viaduct, and any other
dedicated and accepted public right-of-way or private right-of-way.
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon which
a lot fronts or, in its absence, the established grade of other streets upon
which the lot abuts at the midway of the frontage of the lot thereon. If there
is no officially established grade, the existing grade of the street at such
midpoint shall be the street grade.
STREET LINE — A line defining the edge of a street right-of-way and
separating the street from abutting property or lots; commonly known as
the "street right-of-way line."
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land. Unless
noted otherwise, the following structures are excluded from the definition
of "structure" for the regulatory purposes of this chapter: patios, alleys,
access drives, driveways, walkways, parking areas, and other similar atgrade
structures.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or building or lot
development; provided, however, that the division of land for agricultural
purposes of more than 10 acres not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling shall be exempted.
HALF STORY — A story under a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than
two feet above the floor.
A.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A subordinate structure on a lot, the use
of which is customarily incidental to that of the principal structure.
A.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — A structure that is directly involved in the
principal use of the lot on which said structure is located.
B.
§ 133-6 JACKSON CODE § 133-6
131:484
SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR — Any outdoor pool or open tank containing,
or normally capable of containing, water to a depth at any point greater
than 1 1/2 feet. Ponds, lakes, livestock watering tanks, decorative fountains
and fishponds, and detention basins are not included, provided that
swimming was not the primary purpose for their construction.
TAVERN — An establishment that serves primarily alcoholic beverages for
mostly on-premises consumption and that is licensed by the Pennsylvania
Liquor Control Board. Taverns may also serve food.
TEMPORARY STORAGE RECEPTACLES — Containment of personal
belongings for a period of not more than seven days prior to the moving of
the materials.
TRACT — An area of land that may comprise the entire area or a subpart of
a parcel. Individual "tracts" within a parcel of land that are not separately
deeded shall not constitute separate lots for the purpose of construction,
permitting, or for the purposes of this chapter. Such tracts contained within
a parcel shall be considered descriptive only.
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD — A compact, mixed-use neighborhood
where residential, commercial and civic buildings are within close proximity
to each other.
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT — An area of land
developed for a compatible mixture of residential units for various income
levels and nonresidential commercial and workplace uses, including some
structures that provide for a mix of uses within the same building.
Residences, shops, offices, workplaces, public buildings, and parks are
interwoven within the neighborhood so that all are within relatively close
proximity to each other. Traditional neighborhood development is relatively
compact, limited in size, and oriented toward pedestrian activity. It has an
identifiable center and a discernible edge. The center of the neighborhood
is in the form of a public park, commons, plaza, square, or prominent
intersection of two or more major streets. Generally, there is a hierarchy of
streets laid out in a rectilinear or grid pattern of interconnecting streets and
blocks that provides multiple routes from origins to destinations and which
are appropriately designed to serve the needs of pedestrians and vehicles
equally.
TRASH OR JUNK — Any garbage, debris, material, equipment, and/or
apparatus that has been discarded or is no longer functional.
TRUCK OR MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL — A building or facility utilized
for transferring cargo and materials, including auxiliary uses such as
storage of trailers, maintenance of trucks, and dispensing of fuel.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision involving six or more lots or a
land subdivision involving five lots or less and requiring new streets or
other public improvements.
A.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision involving five lots or less and
involving no new streets or other public improvements, except curbs
and street-widening required along an existing street.
B.
§ 133-6 WELLS § 133-6
131:485
UNDERGROUND MINING — An operation whereby minerals are extracted
from beneath the surface by means of shafts, tunnels, adits, or other mine
openings, including underground construction, operation and reclamation
of mine openings; underground mining, hauling, pumping, and blasting; in
situ processing; and other subsurface activities in connection with the mine.
UNENCLOSED PORCH/PATIO — An uncovered area or walkway formed
adjacent to a house with one of its edges being formed by the house.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a structure is designed,
arranged, intended, occupied, or maintained.
UTILITY SHED — A small nonrental building designed primarily for storage
of yard and garden equipment and miscellaneous household items,
incidental to a dwelling and customarily made of prefabricated materials,
purchased, assembled, or erected, and used exclusively by the property
owner. However, for the purpose of establishing setbacks, any utility shed
larger than 150 square feet shall comply with principal structure setback
requirements.
VARIANCE — The permission, granted by the Zoning Hearing Board,
following a public hearing that has been properly advertised, for a
particular modification to some regulation or provision of the zoning
provisions of this chapter that, if strictly adhered to, would result in an
unnecessary hardship, and where the permission granted would not be
contrary to the public interest and would maintain the spirit and intent of
the chapter.
WAREHOUSE — A structure used for storage and eventual distribution only
of equipment and/or merchandise.
WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT — A business devoted to the sale of
commodities in quantity, chiefly to retailers, other merchants or industrial,
institutional, and commercial users mainly for resale or business use.
WILDLIFE PRESERVE — A publicly or privately owned natural area
established and/or maintained as a protective habitat for plants and
animals.
YARD — A prescribed open area on a lot, unobstructed from the ground
upward, except as modified in Article IV of this chapter.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to
the principal use or building and located on the same lot with the
principal use or building.
A.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main or primary use of property, buildings or
structures. Unless specifically noted otherwise, only one use permitted
by right, or by special exception, shall be permitted as a principal
use on an individual lot. For example, one single- family dwelling, one
commercial establishment, or one industrial firm shall be permitted
on an individual lot. Complexes listed as permitted uses, such as a
shopping center, shall be limited to one such complex per lot.
B.
§ 133-6 JACKSON CODE § 133-6
131:486
FRONT YARD — An area bounded by the street right-of-way line(s),
front wall of the principal building, and side lot line(s).
A.
REAR YARD — An area bounded by the rear lot line (and street rightof-
way line in the case of double-frontage, reverse-frontage, or triplefrontage
lots), rear wall of the principal building, and side lot lines.
B.
SIDE YARD — An area bounded by a side lot line and the front, rear,
and/or side walls of the principal building.
C.
§ 133-6 WELLS § 133-6
131:487

ARTICLE III
Zone Regulations
§ 133-7. Zones and boundaries.
A. Establishment of zones. The Township of Jackson is divided into zones
enumerated below and shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map of
Jackson Township," which is part of this chapter:114
AP Agricultural Protection
RC Rural Conservation
R-1 Low-Density Residential
R-2 Medium-Density Residential
R-3 High-Density Residential
V Village
C Commercial
I Industrial
FW Floodway Overlay
FF Flood Fringe Overlay
FA General Floodplain Area Overlay
UM Underground Mining Overlay
AIR-1 Airport Safety - 1
AIR-2 Airport Safety - 2
AIR-3 Airport Safety - 3
B. Boundaries of zones. Where uncertainty exists concerning the
boundaries of the zones as shown on the Zoning Map, the following
rules shall apply:
(1) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center
lines.
(2) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines.
(3) Boundaries indicated as approximately following municipal limits
shall be construed as following municipal limits.
(4) Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed
to be midway between the main tracks.
(5) Boundaries indicated as following utility lines or rights-of-way shall
be construed to be centered upon such lines or rights-of-way.
114. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 133-7 WELLS § 133-7
131:489
§ 133-8. Use regulations.
(6) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streams, rivers, or other bodies of water shall be construed to
follow such center lines.
(7) Boundaries indicated as parallel to, or extensions of, features
indicated in Subsection B(1) through (5) shall be so construed.
Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall
be determined by the scale of the map.
(8) Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in
circumstances not covered by Subsection B(1) through (7), the
Zoning Hearing Board shall interpret the district boundaries.
C. Lots split by boundaries of zones. If a lot is split by a zoning boundary,
the minimum lot area and lot width for the zone in which the principal
building, structure, or use is to be located shall be applicable to the
entire lot.
D. Federal- and state-owned property. Whenever federally or state-owned
property is included in one or more zoning districts, it shall be subject
to the provisions of this chapter only insofar as permitted by the
Constitutions and laws of the United States of America and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. Uses permitted. The uses permitted in the zones established by this
chapter and the permitted extent of these uses are as shown in §§ 133-9
through 133-19. The uses shown as permitted in each zone are the only
uses permitted in that zone. Unless otherwise noted, the use or
dimensional standards are the requirements for each use. However,
(1) Additional general provisions are set forth in Article IV.
(2) Modifications to the use or dimensional requirements are set forth
in Article IV.
(3) Supplemental regulations for selected uses permitted by right are
set forth in Article VII.
(4) Standards for special exception uses are set forth in Article VI and
§ 133-54F.
B. All other uses. Any use not specifically allowed elsewhere in this
chapter shall be allowed by special exception in the zone or zones
where, and to the extent that, similar uses are permitted or allowed by
special exception, provided that said use meets the requirements for a
special exception and does not constitute a public or private nuisance.
C. Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be
permitted in conjunction with the principal uses permitted by this
§ 133-7 JACKSON CODE § 133-8
131:490
§ 133-9. Agricultural Protection Zone (AP).
chapter and shall be further subject to the requirements for accessory
uses and structures as set forth in Article IV.
D. Uses with nuisance effect. In no case is a use permitted that, by reason
of noise, dust, odor, appearance, or other objectionable factor, creates a
nuisance, hazard, or other substantial adverse effect upon the
reasonable enjoyment of the surrounding property, unless otherwise
allowed by law, as in the case of agricultural security areas.
E. Existing and proposed uses. Where a proposed use is to be located
adjacent to or near an existing use, the existing use, as long as such
existing use is determined to be legal, shall not be considered a
nuisance.
A. Purpose. The primary purpose of the Agricultural Protection Zone is to
maintain and promote the rural character of the land within this zone.
This zone is composed of those areas in the Township whose
predominant land use is rural residential and agricultural. The
regulations of this zone are designed to protect and stabilize the
essential characteristics of these areas, to minimize conflicting land
uses detrimental to agricultural enterprises and to limit development
which requires highways and other public facilities in excess of those
required by rural land uses.
B. Uses by right. The following uses, limited to one principal use per lot,
are permitted by right in the AP Zone, subject to applicable regulations
of Articles IV and VII of this chapter:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings or group homes, subject to the
following regulations:
(a) There may be permitted on each parcel, defined by a deed or
plat of record as it existed on February 5, 2008 (regardless of
the number of individual "tracts" contained therein), the
following number of dwellings or group homes, excluding the
prime farmstead:
Size of Parcel of Land
(acres)
Number of Dwellings or
Group Homes Permitted
0 - 4.99 1
5 - 14.99 2
15 - 29.99 3
30 - 44.99 4
45 - 59.99 5
60 - 74.99 6
75 -- 124.99 7
§ 133-8 WELLS § 133-9
131:491
Size of Parcel of Land
(acres)
Number of Dwellings or
Group Homes Permitted
125 -- 174.99 8
175 -- 224.99 9
225 or more 1 additional for each 50 acres
over 225 acres
(b) Where two or more contiguous parcels that existed as of
February 5, 2008, have been combined to form a single parcel
contained in the same deed, this combination shall be
considered to be a new parcel and shall be entitled to the total
number of building rights allowable under the scale set forth
above or the total number of building rights attributable to the
two smaller parcels that were defined by a deed or plat of
record as they existed on February 5, 2008, whichever number
of dwelling rights is less.
(c) New dwellings or group homes shall be located on lots on lands
which cannot feasibly be farmed due to existing features of the
site, such as rock outcroppings, swamps, the fact that the area
is heavily wooded, or the fact that the slope of the area exceeds
15%, or due to the fact that the size or shape of the area
suitable for farming is insufficient to permit efficient use of
farm machinery. In all cases, however, such residential lots
should be located on the least-agriculturally-productive land
feasible to minimize interference with agricultural production
as identified in the current applicable Jackson Township
Comprehensive Plan.
(d) A lot on which a new dwelling or group home is to be located
shall not contain more than 1 1/2 acres (65,340 square feet)
unless the physical characteristics of the land itself require a
lot size in excess of 1 1/2 acres. In the event that additional
land is required, the amount of land in excess of 1 1/2 acres
shall be the minimum amount necessary to make the lot
suitable for the location of the proposed dwelling or group
home and any on-site sewage disposal and water supply
systems serving that dwelling or group home. The Board of
Supervisors shall determine the propriety of any such
oversized lot, provided that the maximum lot size approved by
the Board of Supervisors shall not exceed two acres in the case
of a single-family detached dwelling or group home. The Board
of Supervisors may approve lots larger than this size in cases of
unsubdividable residual land with no dwelling rights, where
unique circumstances exist, such as topography, location,
roads, and the like, which otherwise cause the acreage to be
unusable, and allow it to be included with the last subdivided
lot of a subdivision. In all other cases, any application
§ 133-9 JACKSON CODE § 133-9
131:492
requesting a lot size in excess of this amount shall be
submitted as a variance to the Jackson Township Zoning
Hearing Board rather than to the Board of Supervisors.
Furthermore, a decision adverse to an applicant by the Jackson
Township Board of Supervisors with respect to lot size changes
within the jurisdiction of the Board of Supervisors shall not
extinguish the applicant's right to make an application to the
Jackson Township Zoning Hearing Board for the same relief.
(e) A property owner submitting a subdivision plan will be
required to specify on his plan which lot or lots shall carry with
them the right to erect or place any unused quota of dwellings
or group homes his parcel may have.
(f) All lots contained on one subdivision plan, including all new
lots and the residual lot, shall carry with such lot a building
right or dwelling right granted by § 133-9B. The residual lot
shall contain a building envelope not to exceed two acres, in
which shall be placed all residential construction and
accessory buildings and structures.
(2) Agriculture.
(3) Animal hospital.
(4) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure, including existing
communications towers and communications equipment buildings,
provided that the proposed addition does not exceed the existing
public utility transmission tower, building or other structure by
more than 20 feet, or unless the additional height would create the
need for lighting of the structure.
(5) Farm buildings.
(6) Farm produce stand.
(7) Forestry.
(8) No-impact home-based business.
(9) Slaughtering, processing, rendering and packaging of food
products.
(10) Stable, riding academy.
(11)Wildlife preserve.
C. Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
special exceptions, limited to one principal use per lot, when authorized
by the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and
decide requests for such uses according to criteria established in
Articles V and VI of this chapter.
§ 133-9 WELLS § 133-9
131:493
(1) Bed-and-breakfast inn.
(2) Cemetery.
(3) Club room, club grounds, meeting hall. (Any accessory outdoor
trap, skeet, rifle, pistol or archery range must comply with the
requirements of § 133-112 of this chapter.)
(4) Domiciliary care home.
(5) Farm implement sales and service.
(6) Greenhouse, horticultural nursery.
(7) Home occupation.
(8) House of worship.
(9) Kennel.
(10) Medical clinic, research laboratory.
(11) Nonconformity, expansion of.
(12) Park or other recreation area of a nonprofit nature.
(13) Public buildings and/or facilities. [Amended 6-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 210-16]
(14) Public utility building or service structure.
(15) Regulated shooting grounds.
(16) Sawmill operation.
D. Lot area and width. Lot area and lot width not less than the following
dimensions shall be provided for each principal use hereafter
established in this zone:
(1) Minimum lot area: one acre (43,560 square feet).
(2) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
E. Setbacks. Each lot shall provide front, side and rear setbacks not less
than the following:
(1) Front setback: 50 feet.
(2) Each side setback: 25 feet.
(3) Rear setback: 40 feet.
F. Building height. The building height limit shall be 35 feet, except in the
case of farm buildings, in which case there shall be no height limitation,
except as set forth in § 133-27 of this chapter.
§ 133-9 JACKSON CODE § 133-9
131:494
§ 133-10. Rural Conservation Zone (RC).
G. Lot coverage. The total surface area of all buildings, structures, paving
and any other impervious surfaces shall not exceed 20% of the lot area.
H. Open area. Not less than 80% of the lot area shall be devoted to open
area, as defined in this chapter.
I. Subdivision. When land is transferred from a first parcel to a second
parcel, the second parcel after transfer will contain as many acres as
were contained in the first parcel. Land transferred to a second parcel
shall not subsequently be separated from the second parcel unless
subdivision approval is procured from the Township. Land added on to
another parcel for agricultural purposes does not need to carry a
dwelling right, and such additional land does not serve to increase the
road frontage or dwelling rights of the receiving property for any
further subdivision.
J. A property owner submitting a subdivision plan shall be required to
specify on the plan which lot or lots shall carry with them the right to
erect or place any unused quota of dwelling units the parcel may have.
K. Subsequent owners of any parcel of land legally existing on February 5,
2008, shall be bound by the actions of the previous owners that the
current owner may subdivide lots for purposes of additional singlefamily
detached dwellings or group homes only by number of lots, if
any, that remain from the original number permitted by § 133-9 of this
chapter.
L. Prime farmstead regulations.
(1) The prime farmstead shall be considered as an additional dwelling
right.
(2) In the event that the prime farmstead is not assigned to the
residual parcel, the lot may exceed the maximum lot size as set out
in § 133-9B(1)(c), but in no event shall it exceed five acres.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Rural Conservation Zone is to allow
undeveloped land to be used for very low-density residential,
agricultural, recreational, and conservation purposes, to encourage the
preservation of natural amenities, to protect watershed areas, and to
otherwise create conditions conducive to carrying out the purposes of
this chapter.
B. Uses by right. The following uses, limited to one principal use per lot,
are permitted by right in the RC Zone, subject to applicable regulations
of Articles IV and VII:
(1) Agriculture.
(2) Animal hospital.
§ 133-9 WELLS § 133-10
131:495
(3) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure, including existing
communications towers and communications equipment buildings,
provided that the proposed addition does not exceed the existing
public utility transmission tower, building or other structure by
more than 20 feet, or unless the additional height would create the
need for lighting of the structure.
(4) Farm, farm buildings.
(5) Farm produce stand.
(6) Forestry.
(7) Group home.
(8) House of worship.
(9) No-impact home-based business.
(10) Single-family detached dwelling.
(11)Wildlife preserves.
C. Uses by special exception. The following uses, limited to one principal
use per lot, shall be permitted as special exceptions when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and
decide requests for such uses according to criteria established in
Articles V and VI of this chapter.
(1) Bed-and-breakfast inn.
(2) Campground.
(3) Cemetery.
(4) Club room, club grounds, meeting hall. (Any accessory outdoor
trap, skeet, rifle, pistol, or archery range must comply with the
requirements of § 133-112 of this chapter.)
(5) Communications tower and communications equipment buildings.
(6) Day-care home (family or group).
(7) Domiciliary care home.
(8) Farm implement sales and service.
(9) Greenhouse, horticultural nursery.
(10) Home occupation.
(11)Kennel.
(12) Nonconformity, expansion of.
§ 133-10 JACKSON CODE § 133-10
131:496
§ 133-11. Low-Density Residential Zone (R-1).
(13) Outdoor commercial recreation establishment.
(14) Park or other recreation area of a nonprofit nature.
(15) Personal care boarding home.
(16) Public buildings and/or facilities. [Amended 6-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 210-16]
(17) Public utility building or service structure.
(18) Regulated shooting grounds.
(19) Sawmill operation.
(20) School.
(21) Trap, skeet, rifle, pistol, or archery range (outdoor commercial).
D. Minimum lot area and width. Lot area and width not less than the
following dimensions shall be provided for each principal use hereafter
established in this zone:*
(1) Minimum lot area: three acres (130,680 square feet).
(2) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
*NOTE: Additional lot area may be required if well testing, soil
limitations for on-site sewage disposal, or other factors evidence
the need for a larger lot.
E. Setback. Each lot shall have front, side, and rear setbacks not less than
the following:
(1) Front setback: 50 feet.
(2) Side setback: 25 feet.
(3) Rear setback: 40 feet.
F. Building height. The height limit for a principal building or structure
shall be three stories but in no case more than 35 feet. The height limit
for an accessory building or structure shall be two stories but not over
25 feet. There shall be no height limitation for farm buildings or
structures except as provided in § 133-27.
G. Lot coverage. The total surface area of all buildings, structures, paving
and any other impervious surfaces shall not exceed 25% of the lot area.
H. Open area. Not less than 75% of the lot area shall be devoted to open
area, as defined in this chapter.
§ 133-10 WELLS § 133-11
131:497
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Low-Density Residential Zone is to provide
for the orderly expansion of residential development; to provide for the
public health; and to prevent the overcrowding of land through the
application of maximum housing densities; to provide standards that
will not necessarily require the installation of public facilities and will
encourage the preservation of open space; to provide for uses that
support and do not adversely impact neighboring residences; to exclude
any activities not compatible with residential development; to provide
for the public convenience and avoid undue congestion on the roads;
and to otherwise create conditions conducive to carrying out the
purposes of this chapter.
B. Uses by right. The following uses, limited to one principal use per lot,
are permitted by right in the R-1 Zone, subject to applicable regulations
of Articles IV and VII:
(1) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure, including existing
communications towers and communications equipment buildings,
provided that the proposed addition does not exceed the existing
public utility transmission tower, building or other structure by
more than 20 feet, or unless the additional height would create the
need for lighting of the structure.
(2) Forestry.
(3) Group home.
(4) No-impact home-based business.
(5) Single-family detached dwelling.
C. Uses by special exception. The following uses, limited to one principal
use per lot, shall be permitted as special exceptions when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and
decide requests for such uses according to criteria established in
Articles V and VI of this chapter.
(1) Bed-and-breakfast inn.
(2) Day-care center (child or adult) or nursery school.
(3) Day-care home (family or group).
(4) Home occupation.
(5) Nonconformity, expansion of.
(6) Park or other recreation area of a nonprofit nature.
(7) Public buildings and/or facilities. [Amended 6-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 210-16]
(8) Public utility building or service structure.
§ 133-11 JACKSON CODE § 133-11
131:498
(9) School.
D. Minimum lot area and width. Lot area and lot width not less than the
following dimensions shall be provided for each principal use hereafter
established in this zone:*
Public Water and/or
Public Sewer
No Public Water and No
Public Sewer
Use
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Lot Width
(feet)
Lot Area
(acres)
Lot Width
(feet)
Single-family
detached
dwellings
30,000 per
dwelling unit
125 per
dwelling unit
1 (43,560
square feet)
per dwelling
unit
150 per
dwelling unit
All other
uses
30,000 125 1 (43,560
square feet)
150
*NOTE: Additional lot area may be required if well testing, soil
limitations for on-site sewage disposal, or other factors require the
need for a larger lot.
E. Setbacks. Each lot shall have front, side, and rear setbacks not less than
the following:
(1) Front setback: 35 feet.
(2) Side setback: 15 feet.
(3) Rear setback: 30 feet.
F. Building height. The height limit for a principal building or structure
shall be three stories, but in no case more than 35 feet. The height limit
for an accessory building or structure shall be one story, but not over 20
feet. [Amended 9-6-2011 by Ord. No. 190-11]
G. Lot coverage. The total surface area of all buildings, structures, paving
and any other impervious surfaces shall not exceed 35% of the lot area.
H. Open area. Not less than 65% of the lot area shall be devoted to open
area, as defined in this chapter.
I. Cluster development. Within the R-1 Zone, clustering of dwelling units
is permitted, provided that the following requirements are met:
(1) The parcel shall have a minimum size of 10 acres.
(2) The gross density requirements for uses within a cluster
development shall be the same as for conventional development in
the R-1 Zone; however, the following uses and corresponding lot
widths and lot sizes shall be permitted for cluster development:
§ 133-11 WELLS § 133-11
131:499
Dwelling Type
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet)
Single-family
detached dwellings
100 per dwelling
unit
20,000 per dwelling
unit
(3) Whenever cluster development is proposed, a sketch plan of the
development as it would appear if designed conventionally must be
presented with the cluster development plan.
(4) All cluster developments shall be served by public or community
sewer and public water facilities.
(5) All streets, driveways, and access drives serving cluster
developments shall comply with the standards this chapter,
Chapter 113, Subdivision and Land Development, and other
applicable regulations.
(6) Open space, individual lot coverage, and open area requirements.
(a) A minimum of 30% of the parcel shall remain as common open
space apart from the lots on which dwellings are to be located.
(b) Open space shall, wherever possible, preserve steep slopes,
wetlands, streams, woodlands and similar areas.
(c) Unless prohibited by topography or physical attributes of the
land, open space areas shall be laid out as large contiguous
areas. If two or more open space areas are proposed, said
areas shall be directly connected. All open space areas shall be
accessible from a public street or public pedestrian walkway or
sidewalk.
(d) The developer must submit a signed, notarized statement
concerning use and maintenance of the open space area(s) that
shall include any and all covenants, restrictions, and
agreements pertaining to such rights and responsibilities.
Such covenants and/or agreements shall be perpetual and
must be recorded with the approved plan.
(e) No development shall occur within the required open space
area. However, open space areas may include recreation
equipment, gazebos, benches, paths, walkways, athletic fields,
picnic shelters and similar structures and activities.
(f) Required open space shall not include streets, parking areas,
private yards, minimum required spacing between buildings,
or required recreational areas, and similar areas typically used
for other specific purposes.
§ 133-11 JACKSON CODE § 133-11
131:500
§ 133-12. Medium-Density Residential Zone (R-2).
(7) Setback requirements. Minimum setback requirements for singlefamily
detached dwellings shall be as follows:
(a) Front setback: 20 feet.
(b) Side setback: 10 feet.
(c) Rear setback: 20 feet.
(8) Other requirements. In all other respects, dwelling units, accessory
structures, and all other improvements located in cluster
developments shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and
all other applicable regulations.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Medium-Density Residential Zone is to
provide for the orderly expansion of residential development; to provide
for the public health; and to prevent the overcrowding of land through
the application of maximum housing densities; to provide standards
that will encourage the installation of public facilities and the
preservation of open space; to provide for uses that support and do not
adversely impact neighboring residences; to exclude any activities not
compatible with residential development; to provide for the public
convenience and avoid undue congestion on the roads; and to otherwise
create conditions conducive to carrying out the purposes of this
chapter.
B. Uses by right. The following uses, limited to one principal use per lot,
are permitted by right in the R-2 Zone, subject to applicable regulations
of Articles IV and VII:
(1) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure, including existing
communications towers and communications equipment buildings,
provided that the proposed addition does not exceed the existing
public utility transmission tower, building or other structure by
more than 20 feet, or unless the additional height would create the
need for lighting of the structure.
(2) Forestry.
(3) Group home.
(4) House of worship.
(5) No-impact home-based business.
(6) Single-family detached dwelling.
(7) Single-family semidetached dwelling.
C. Uses by special exception. The following uses, limited to one principal
use per lot, shall be permitted as special exceptions when authorized by
§ 133-11 WELLS § 133-12
131:501
the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and
decide requests for such uses according to criteria established in
Articles V and VI of this chapter.
(1) Bed-and-breakfast inn.
(2) Cemetery.
(3) Day-care center (child or adult) or nursery school.
(4) Day-care home (family or group).
(5) Home occupation.
(6) Nonconformity, expansion of.
(7) Park or other recreation area of a nonprofit nature.
(8) Public buildings and/or facilities. [Amended 6-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 210-16]
(9) Public utility building or service structure.
(10) School.
D. Minimum lot area and width. Lot area and lot width not less than the
following dimensions shall be provided for each principal use hereafter
established in this zone:*
With Public
Water and
Public Sewer
With Either
Public Water or
Public Sewer
No Public
Water and No
Public Sewer
Use
Lot
Area
(square
feet)
Lot
Width
(feet)
Lot
Area
(square
feet)
Lot
Width
(feet)
Lot
Area
(acres)
Lot
Width
(feet)
Single-family
detached
dwellings;
single-family
semidetached
dwellings
15,000
per
dwelling
unit
100 per
dwelling
unit
25,000
per
dwelling
unit
125 per
dwelling
unit
1
(43,560
square
feet)
per
dwelling
unit
150 per
dwelling
unit
All other uses 20,000 100 25,000 125 1
(43,560
square
feet)
150
*NOTE: Additional lot area may be required if well testing, soil
limitations for on-site sewage disposal, or other factors evidence the
need for a larger lot.
§ 133-12 JACKSON CODE § 133-12
131:502
E. Setbacks. Each lot shall have front, side, and rear setbacks not less than
the following:
(1) Front setback: 35 feet.
(2) Side setback: 15 feet.
(3) Rear setback: 30 feet.
F. Building height. The height limit for a principal building or structure
shall be three stories but in no case more than 35 feet. The height limit
for an accessory building or structure shall be one story but not over 20
feet.
G. Lot coverage. The total surface area of all buildings, structures, paving
and any other impervious surfaces shall not exceed 35% of the lot area.
H. Open area. Not less than 65% of the lot area shall be devoted to open
area, as defined in this chapter.
I. Cluster development. Within the R-2 Zone, clustering of dwelling units
is permitted, provided that the following requirements are met:
(1) The parcel shall have a minimum size of 10 acres.
(2) The gross density requirements for uses within a cluster
development shall be the same as for conventional development in
the R-2 Zone; however, the following uses and corresponding lot
widths and lot sizes shall be permitted for cluster development.:
Dwelling Type
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
Minimum Lot
Area
(square feet)
Single-family detached
dwellings; single-family
semidetached dwellings
60 per dwelling
unit
7,000 per
dwelling unit
(3) Whenever cluster development is proposed, a sketch plan of the
development as it would appear if designed conventionally must be
presented with the cluster development plan.
(4) All cluster developments shall be served by public or community
sewer and public water facilities.
(5) All streets, driveways, and access drives serving cluster
developments shall comply with the standards of this chapter,
Chapter 113, Subdivision and Land Development, and other
applicable regulations.
(6) Open space, individual lot coverage, and open area requirements.
(a) When cluster development consists entirely of single-family
semidetached dwellings and/or single-family detached
§ 133-12 WELLS § 133-12
131:503
§ 133-13. High-Density Residential Zone (R-3).
dwellings, a minimum of 25% of the parcel shall remain as
common open space apart from the lots on which dwellings
are to be located. The maximum lot coverage on individual lots
in instances where the aforementioned residential use mix is
proposed shall be 65%. The minimum open area requirement
for such lots shall be 35%.
(b) Open space shall, wherever possible, preserve steep slopes,
wetlands, streams, woodlands, and similar areas.
(c) Wherever possible, open space areas shall be laid out as large
contiguous areas. If two or more open space areas are
proposed, said areas shall be directly connected. All open
space areas shall be accessible from a public street or public
pedestrian walkway or sidewalk.
(d) The developer must submit a signed, notarized statement
concerning use and maintenance of the open space area(s) that
shall include any and all covenants, restrictions, and
agreements pertaining to such rights and responsibilities.
Such covenants or agreements shall be perpetual and must be
recorded with the approved plan.
(e) No development shall occur within the required open space
area. However, open space areas may include recreation
equipment, gazebos, benches, paths, walkways, athletic fields,
picnic shelters and similar structures and activities.
(f) Required open space shall not include streets, parking areas,
private yards, minimum required spacing between buildings,
or required recreational areas, and similar areas typically used
for other specific purposes.
(7) Setback requirements. Minimum setback requirements for singlefamily
detached dwellings and single-family semidetached
dwellings shall be as follows:
(a) Front setback: 20 feet.
(b) Side setback: 10 feet.
(c) Rear setback: 20 feet.
(8) Other requirements. In all other respects, dwelling units, accessory
structures, and all other improvements located in cluster
developments shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and
all other applicable regulations.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the High-Density Residential Zone is to
provide for the orderly expansion of residential development, including
all types of dwelling units; to provide for the public health; and to
§ 133-12 JACKSON CODE § 133-13
131:504
prevent the overcrowding of land through the application of maximum
housing densities; to provide standards that will encourage the
installation of public facilities and the preservation of open space; to
provide for uses that support or do not adversely impact neighboring
residences; to exclude any activities not compatible with residential
development; to provide for the public convenience and avoid undue
congestion on the roads; and to otherwise create conditions conducive
to carrying out the purposes of this chapter.
B. Uses by right. The following uses, limited to one principal use per lot,
except in the case of single-family attached dwellings and apartments,
are permitted by right in the R-3 Zone, subject to applicable regulations
of Articles IV and VII:
(1) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure, including existing
communications towers and communications equipment buildings,
provided that the proposed addition does not exceed the existing
public utility transmission tower, building or other structure by
more than 20 feet, or unless the additional height would create the
need for lighting of the structure.
(2) Forestry.
(3) Group home.
(4) Multifamily dwellings and apartments.
(5) No-impact home-based business.
(6) Single-family detached dwelling.
(7) Single-family semidetached dwelling.
(8) Single-family attached dwellings.
(9) Two-family detached dwelling.
C. Uses by special exception. The following uses, limited to one principal
use per lot, shall be permitted as special exceptions when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and
decide requests for such uses according to criteria established in
Articles V and VI of this chapter.
(1) Bed-and-breakfast inn.
(2) Club room, club grounds, meeting hall.
(3) Convalescent home, hospital.
(4) Day-care center (child or adult) or nursery school.
(5) Day-care home (family or group).
(6) Domiciliary care home.
§ 133-13 WELLS § 133-13
131:505
(7) Group quarters.
(8) Home occupation.
(9) Medical clinic, research laboratory.
(10) Mobile home park.
(11) Multifamily or two-family conversion.
(12) Nonconformity, expansion of.
(13) Park or other recreation area of a nonprofit nature.
(14) Public buildings and/or facilities. [Amended 6-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 210-16]
(15) Public utility building or service structure.
D. Minimum lot area and width. Lot area and lot width not less than the
following dimensions shall be provided for each principal use hereafter
established in this zone:
Public Water and Public Sewer
Use
Lot Area
(square feet)
Lot Width
(feet)
Single-family detached dwellings;
single-family semidetached
dwellings; two-family dwellings
8,000 per
dwelling unit
70 per dwelling
unit
Single-family attached dwellings 4,000 per
dwelling unit
20 per dwelling
unit
Multifamily dwellings 4,000 per
dwelling unit
All other uses 10,000 100
E. Setbacks. Each lot shall have front, side, and rear setbacks not less than
the following:
(1) Front setback: 30 feet.
(2) Side setback: 10 feet.
(3) Rear setback: 30 feet.
F. Building height. The height limit for a principal building or structure
shall be three stories but in no case more than 35 feet; however, the
maximum height limit may be increased to four stories or 45 feet,
provided that each minimum building setback is increased in size one
foot for each additional one foot of building height over 35 feet. The
height limit for an accessory building or structure shall be one story but
not over 20 feet.
§ 133-13 JACKSON CODE § 133-13
131:506
G. Lot coverage. The total surface area of all buildings, structures, paving
and any other impervious surfaces shall not exceed 35% of the lot area.
H. Open area. Not less than 65% of the lot area shall be devoted to open
area, as defined in this chapter.
I. Cluster development. Within the R-3 Zone, clustering of dwelling units
is permitted, provided that the following requirements are met:
(1) The parcel shall have a minimum size of 10 acres.
(2) The gross density requirements for uses within a cluster
development shall be the same as for conventional development in
the R-3 Zone; however, the following uses and corresponding lot
widths and lot sizes shall be permitted for cluster development:
Dwelling Type
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
Minimum Lot
Area
(square feet)
Single-family detached
dwellings, single-family
semidetached dwellings and
two-family dwellings
60 per dwelling
unit
6,000 per
dwelling unit
Single-family attached
dwellings
20 per dwelling
unit
2,000 per
dwelling unit
Multifamily dwellings 100 20,000
(3) Whenever cluster development is proposed, a sketch plan of the
development as it would appear if designed conventionally must be
presented with the cluster development plan.
(4) All cluster developments shall be served by public or community
sewer and public water facilities.
(5) All streets, driveways, and access drives serving cluster
developments shall comply with the standards of this chapter,
Chapter 113, Subdivision and Land Development, and other
applicable regulations.
(6) Cluster developments shall be permitted to develop a maximum of
50% of the total dwelling units as multifamily dwellings, singlefamily
attached dwellings, or a combination of the two.
(7) Open space, individual lot coverage, and open area requirements.
(a) When cluster development consists entirely of single-family
semidetached dwellings and/or two-family dwellings and/or
single-family detached dwellings, a minimum of 25% of the
parcel shall remain as common open space apart from the lots
on which dwellings are to be located. The maximum lot
coverage on individual lots in instances where the
§ 133-13 WELLS § 133-13
131:507
aforementioned residential use mix is proposed shall be 65%.
The minimum open area requirement for such lots shall be
35%.
(b) When cluster development consists of a mixture of any of the
dwelling types noted in Subsection I(7)(a) above with
multifamily dwellings and/or single-family attached dwellings,
a minimum of 40% of the parcel shall remain as common open
space apart from the lots on which dwellings are to be located.
The maximum lot coverage on individual lots in instances
where the aforementioned residential use mix is proposed shall
be 75%. The minimum open area requirement for such lots
shall be 25%.
(c) Open space shall, wherever possible, preserve steep slopes,
wetlands, streams, woodlands, and similar areas.
(d) Whenever possible, open space areas shall be laid out as large
contiguous areas. If two or more open space areas are
proposed, said areas shall be directly connected. All open
space areas shall be accessible from a public street or public
pedestrian walkway or sidewalk.
(e) The developer must submit a signed, notarized statement
concerning use and maintenance of the open space area(s) that
shall include any and all covenants, restrictions, and
agreements pertaining to such rights and responsibilities.
Such covenants or agreements shall be perpetual and must be
recorded with the approved plan.
(f) No development shall occur within the required open space
area. However, open space areas may include recreation
equipment, gazebos, benches, paths, walkways, athletic fields,
picnic shelters and similar structures and activities.
(g) Required open space shall not include streets, parking areas,
private yards, minimum required spacing between buildings,
or required recreational areas, and similar areas typically used
for other specific purposes.
(8) Setback requirements. Minimum setback requirements for singlefamily
detached dwellings, single-family semidetached dwellings,
and two-family dwellings shall be as follows:
(a) Front setback: 20 feet.
(b) Side setback: 10 feet.
(c) Rear setback: 20 feet.
(9) Other requirements. In all other respects, dwelling units, accessory
structures, and all other improvements located in cluster
§ 133-13 JACKSON CODE § 133-13
131:508
§ 133-14. Village Zone (V).
developments shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and
all other applicable regulations.
A. Purpose. The Village Zone (V) is for medium- to high-density
development that includes a diverse mixture of dwelling types with
associated neighborhood-scale commercial uses and service
businesses. New uses should be consistent in style and build upon the
character of the existing development. Most of this zone is, or can
reasonably be, served by both public water and public sewer. It is
generally along or near major thoroughfares and employment/service
areas to maximize accessibility and convenience. Clustering provisions
allow for higher densities if certain criteria are met. Traditional
neighborhood development (TND) should be encouraged.
B. Uses by right. The following uses, limited to one principal use per lot,
are permitted by right in the V zone, subject to applicable regulations of
Articles IV and VII:
(1) Cluster development. (See Subsection I below.)
(2) Forestry.
(3) Group home.
(4) No-impact home-based business.
(5) Personal service business.
(6) 115Single-family detached dwelling.
(7) Single-family semidetached dwelling.
(8) Two-family detached dwelling.
(9) Traditional neighborhood development. (See Subsection J below.)
C. Uses by special exception. The following uses, limited to one principal
use per lot, except for multifamily or single-family attached dwellings,
shall be permitted as special exceptions in the V Zone when authorized
by the Zoning Hearing Board (see Articles V and VI):
(1) Apartment in conjunction with a commercial establishment.
(2) Bed-and-breakfast inn.
(3) Club room, club grounds, meeting hall.
(4) Convalescent home, hospital.
115. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(6), Public buildings and facilities, was repealed
6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 210-16. This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former
Subsection B(7) through (10) as Subsection B(6) through (9), respectively.
§ 133-13 WELLS § 133-14
131:509
(5) Day-care center (child or adult) or nursery school.
(6) Day-care home (family or group).
(7) Domiciliary care home.
(8) Group quarters.
(9) Home occupation.
(10) House of worship.
(11) Medical clinic, research laboratory.
(12) Multifamily or two-family conversion.
(13) Multifamily or single-family attached dwellings.
(14) Nonconformity, expansion of.
(15) Park or other recreation area of a nonprofit nature.
(16) Personal care boarding home.
(17) Public buildings and/or facilities. [Amended 6-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 210-16]
(18) Public utility building or service structure.
(19) Restaurant, drive-through or fast-food.
(20) Restaurant, sit-down.
(21) Retail or convenience store.
(22) Rooming house.
(23) Tavern (not including drive-through).
D. Minimum lot area and lot width.
(1) Lot area and lot width (street frontage) not less than the following
dimensions shall be provided for each principal use hereafter
established in the V Zone:*
§ 133-14 JACKSON CODE § 133-14
131:510
With Public
Water and
Public Sewer
With Either
Public Water
or Public
Sewer
No Public
Water and No
Public Sewer
Use
Lot
Area
(square
feet)
Lot
Width
(feet)
Lot
Area
(square
feet)
Lot
Width
(feet)
Lot
Area
(acres)
Lot
Width
(feet)
Single-family
and twofamily
dwellings
6,000
per
dwelling
unit
60 per
dwelling
unit
25,000
per
dwelling
unit
125 per
dwelling
unit
1
(43,560
square
feet)
per
dwelling
unit
150 per
dwelling
unit
All other uses 10,000 100 25,000 125 1
(43,560
square
feet)
150
*NOTE: Additional lot area may be required if well testing, soil
limitations for on-site sewage disposal, or other factors indicate
the need for a larger lot.
E. Setbacks. Each lot shall have front, side and rear setbacks not less than
the following:
(1) Front setback: 25 feet.
(2) Side setback: 10 feet.
(3) Rear setback: 25 feet.
F. Building height. The height limit for a principal building or structure
shall be three stories but in no case more than 35 feet; however, the
maximum height limit may be increased to four stories or 45 feet,
provided that each minimum building setback is increased in size one
foot for each additional one foot of building height over 35 feet. The
height limit for an accessory building or structure shall be one story but
not over 20 feet.
G. Lot coverage. The total surface area of all buildings, structures, paving
and any other impervious surfaces shall not exceed 50% of the lot area.
H. Open area. Not less than 50% of the lot area shall be devoted to open
area, as defined in this chapter.
I. Cluster development. Within the V Zone, clustering of dwelling units is
permitted, provided that the following requirements are met:
§ 133-14 WELLS § 133-14
131:511
(1) The parcel shall have a minimum size of 10 acres.
(2) The gross density requirements for uses within a cluster
development shall be the same as for conventional development in
the V Zone; however, the following uses and corresponding lot
width and lot sizes shall be permitted for cluster development:
Dwelling Type
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
Minimum Lot
Area
(square feet)
Single-family detached
dwellings, single-family
semidetached dwellings and
two-family dwellings
40 per dwelling
unit
4,500 per
dwelling unit
Single-family attached
dwellings
20 per dwelling
unit
2,000 per
dwelling unit
Multifamily dwellings 100 20,000
(3) Whenever cluster development is proposed, a sketch plan of the
development as it would appear if designed conventionally must be
presented with the cluster development plan.
(4) All cluster developments shall be served by public or community
sewer and public water facilities.
(5) All streets, driveways, and access drives serving cluster
developments shall comply with the standards of this chapter,
Chapter 113, Subdivision and Land Development, and other
applicable regulations.
(6) Cluster developments shall be permitted to develop a maximum of
25% of the total dwelling units as multifamily dwellings, singlefamily
attached dwellings, single-family semidetached, or a
combination of the three.
(7) Open space, individual lot coverage and open area requirements.
(a) When cluster development consists entirely of single-family
semidetached dwellings and/or two-family dwellings and/or
single-family detached dwellings, a minimum of 25% of the
parcel shall remain as common open space apart from the lots
on which dwellings are to be located. The maximum lot
coverage on individual lots in instances where the
aforementioned residential use mix is proposed shall be 65%.
The minimum open area requirement for such lots shall be
35%.
(b) When cluster development consists of a mixture of any of the
dwelling types noted in Subsection I(7)(a) above with
multifamily dwellings and/or single-family attached dwellings,
§ 133-14 JACKSON CODE § 133-14
131:512
a minimum of 40% of the parcel shall remain as common
open space apart from the lots on which dwellings are to
be located. The maximum lot coverage on individual lots in
instances where the aforementioned residential use mix is
proposed shall be 75%. The minimum open area requirement
for such lots shall be 25%.
(c) Open space shall, wherever possible, preserve steep slopes,
wetlands, streams, woodlands and similar areas.
(d) Whenever possible, open space areas shall be laid out as large
contiguous areas. If two or more open space areas are
proposed, said areas shall be directly connected. All open
space areas shall be accessible from a public street or public
pedestrian walkway or sidewalk.
(e) The developer must submit a signed, notarized statement
concerning use and maintenance of the open space area(s)
which shall include any and all covenants, restrictions, and
agreements pertaining to such rights and responsibilities.
Such covenants and/or agreements shall be perpetual and
must be recorded with the approved plan.
(f) No development shall occur within the required open space
area. However, open space areas may include recreation
equipment, gazebos, benches, paths, walkways, athletic fields,
picnic shelters, and similar structures and activities.
(g) Required open space shall not include streets, parking areas,
private yards, minimum required spacing between buildings,
or required recreational areas, and similar areas typically used
for other specific purposes.
(8) Setback requirements. The minimum setback requirement for
single-family detached dwellings, single-family semidetached
dwellings, and two-family dwellings shall be as follows:
(a) Front setback: 20 feet.
(b) Side setback: eight feet.
(c) Rear setback: 20 feet.
(9) Other requirements. In all other respects, dwelling units, accessory
structures and all other improvements located in cluster
developments shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and
all other applicable regulations.
J. Traditional neighborhood development.
(1) Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to allow the
optional development and redevelopment of land consistent with
§ 133-14 WELLS § 133-14
131:513
the design principles of traditional neighborhoods. A traditional
neighborhood development (TND):
(a) Is compact;
(b) Is designed for the human scale;
(c) Provides a mix of uses, including complementary residential,
commercial, civic, and open space uses, in close proximity to
one another within the neighborhood in order to facilitate
human interactions and opportunities to meet daily retail,
office, and service needs within walking distance of residences;
(d) Provides a mix of housing styles, types, and sizes to
accommodate households of all ages, sizes, and incomes;
(e) Incorporates a system of interconnected streets with
sidewalks, bikeways, and/or transit that offer multiple routes
for motorists, pedestrians, and bicyclists and provides for the
connections of those streets to existing and future
developments;
(f) Retains existing buildings with historical features or
architectural features that enhance the visual character of the
community;
(g) Incorporates significant environmental features into the design
and provides green space and recreational opportunities;
(h) Contains buildings which are oriented toward and define the
streetscape; and
(i) Is consistent with the Jackson/Paradise Joint Comprehensive
Plan.
(2) Applicability.
(a) Traditional neighborhood development may be developed on
10 acres or more of contiguous land under single ownership at
any location within the Village District.
(b) A TND shall contain a minimum of 30 acres in order to contain
listed commercial uses. The Board of Supervisors may allow
commercial uses within smaller TNDs via the land
development plan approval process if the site of the TND is
considered appropriate for commercial development by
location, access, and market analysis. The Supervisors may
also deny commercial uses in a TND 30 acres or larger via the
land development plan review if the commercial uses proposed
would have a detrimental effect on the TND, surrounding
neighborhoods or properties, or streets abutting the TND and/
or such commercial development is not supported by market
analysis.
§ 133-14 JACKSON CODE § 133-14
131:514
(c) Whenever TND is proposed, a sketch plan of the development
as it would appear if designed conventionally must be
presented with the TND development plan.
(3) Design standards.
(a) Mix of uses. In order to achieve the proximity necessary to
make neighborhoods walkable, it is important to mix land uses.
A traditional neighborhood development shall consist of a mix
of residential uses, a community center, and open space as
listed below:
[1] Residential uses. A mix of residential dwelling types shall
be provided.
[a] The following types can occur anywhere within the
traditional neighborhood development:
[i] Single-family detached dwellings.
[ii] Single-family semidetached dwellings.
[iii] Multifamily dwellings.
[iv] Townhouses.
[v] Residential accessory uses.
[b] The minimum and maximum percentage of dwelling
unit types in the TND is as follows, according to the
size of the TND:
TND Greater
than 30 Acres
(percentage of
total dwelling
units in TND)
TND 30 Acres or
Less
(percentage of
total dwelling
units in TND)
Use MinimumMaximumMinimumMaximum
Singlefamily
detached
50% 70% 50% 70%
Singlefamily
semidetached
10% 30% 10% 30%
Townhouse 10% 30% 10% 20%
Multifamily 10% 20% 5% 10%
Live/work — 10% — 10%
Mixed-use 5% 10% — 10%
§ 133-14 WELLS § 133-14
131:515
[2] A community center, composed of a mix of commercial,
residential, civic or institutional, and open space uses as
identified below, must be provided in a traditional
neighborhood development of 50 acres or more in size.
[a] The development shall be planned so that dwelling
units are within 1/2 mile of the community center. The
community center is intended as a mixed-use area to
provide uses which meet the retail and service needs
of residents within the TND and surrounding
residential development and provide compatible
public and institutional uses of community-wide
importance. Drive-through facilities and drive-in
service are not permitted. Mixed-use buildings and
live/work buildings are permitted.
[b] The location of commercial uses is subject to land
development plan approval by the Board of
Supervisors and may be allowed on the periphery of
the TND site if designed to serve other residential
developments in addition to the TND. Such periphery
commercial uses shall be buffered from surrounding
residential areas in a manner subject to approval by
the Board of Supervisors. Nonresidential uses
intended to serve an area beyond the TND itself shall
be located to permit vehicular access from outside the
TND to minimize traffic passing through
neighborhood residential areas.
[i] Commercial uses in the community center.
Individual businesses shall not exceed 2,500
square feet in size. The following pedestrianoriented
uses are permitted:
[A] Food services (neighborhood grocery stores,
butcher shops, bakeries, restaurants,
delicatessens, cafes, confectionery, coffee
shops, and neighborhood bars or pubs).
[B] Retail uses (florists, hardware stores, news
and stationery stores, bookstores, studios and
shops of artists and artisans, pharmacies,
music or video stores, and neighborhood
retail store without gasoline service).
[C] Services (day-care centers; music, dance or
exercise studios; health salons; professional
and medical offices; barber; hair salon; drycleaning
shop; self-service laundry; and bank
or other financial institution).
§ 133-14 JACKSON CODE § 133-14
131:516
[D] Accommodations (bed-and-breakfast
establishments, small hotels or inns).
[ii] Residential uses in the community center:
[A] Single-family semidetached dwellings.
[B] Multifamily dwellings.
[C] Townhouses.
[D] Residential units located on upper floors
above commercial uses or to the rear of
storefronts.
[E] Live/work units that combine a residence and
the resident's workplace.
[iii] Civic or institutional uses in the community
center. Civic or institutional uses shall abut or be
visible from a common open space area or park.
[A] Municipal offices, fire stations, libraries,
museums, community meeting facilities, and
post offices.
[B] Transit shelters.
[C] Places of worship.
[D] Educational facilities.
[iv] Open space uses in the community center:
[A] Central common open space area.
[B] Neighborhood parks and common open space
areas.
[C] Playground.
[c] In addition to the open spaces within the community
center, open spaces shall be incorporated elsewhere in
the traditional neighborhood development. The TND
shall contain a central common open space area of a
minimum of 20,000 square feet in size and smaller
common open space areas of a minimum of 5,000
square feet in size. In no case shall the central
common open space area be less than 1.5% of the
gross acreage of the TND, provided that in the case of
a TND substantially larger than the minimum required
size, the Board of Supervisors may allow a lesser
percentage. Each neighborhood shall contain as its
central focus at least one common open space area or
§ 133-14 WELLS § 133-14
131:517
park. The size, distribution, and number of greens are
subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors.
[3] Open space uses identified below shall be incorporated in
the traditional neighborhood development as appropriate.
Large outdoor recreation areas should be located at the
periphery of neighborhoods rather than central locations.
The design of the TND shall maximize the visibility of open
spaces as vistas and perimeter greenbelts.
[a] Environmental corridors.
[b] Protected natural areas.
[c] Community parks.
[d] Streams, ponds, lakes, and other water bodies.
[e] Significant tree stands and trees of high quality.
(b) TND standards.
[1] Common open space. At least 30% of the gross acreage of
the traditional neighborhood development must be
common open space. At least 25% of the common open
space must be common open space devoted to usable
parks, greens, playgrounds, and tot lots. Ninety percent of
the lots within the areas devoted to residential uses shall
be within 1/4 mile from common open space. Large
outdoor recreation areas should be located at the
periphery of neighborhoods rather than central locations.
[2] Density. The overall density of the development shall not
exceed 5.5 dwelling units per acre. For each affordable
housing unit as defined herein, one additional dwelling
unit shall be permitted up to a maximum density of 6.5
dwelling units per acre. The applicant shall demonstrate
that the affordable housing units will be sold or rented at a
market rate for the target population and shall provide
acceptable arrangements for retaining those units for the
target population at the time of resale or rerenting.
Affordable housing units shall blend into the neighborhood
in design and appearance and be interspersed throughout
the neighborhood rather than concentrated in a particular
section.
[3] Commercial space. Where commercial uses are permitted
by the Township Supervisors, the minimum and maximum
total ground floor areas of commercial uses, as a
percentage of the traditional neighborhood development,
are as follows:
§ 133-14 JACKSON CODE § 133-14
131:518
Ground Floor Area of Commercial
Uses
Size of TND Minimum Maximum
10 to 30 acres 1% 3%
Greater than 30
acres
0.6% 5%*
*NOTE: Provided that the maximum ground floor area
shall be 85,000 square feet.
[4] Lot and block standards.
[a] Block and lot size diversity. A variety of lot sizes
should be provided that allows diverse housing
choices.
[b] Lot dimensions, setbacks, and coverages shall be as
follows, except as otherwise noted in the subsection
regarding the community center area or below:
Minimum
Lot Size
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Side
Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Lot
Coverage
Singlefamily
detached
dwelling
4,400 40 10 5 on one
side; 15
total
5 65%
Singlefamily
semidetached
dwelling
(per unit)
3,500 35 10 5 on one
side; 15
total
5 70%
Townhouse
outside
community
center
2,400 24 10 10 at
end of
row
5 70%
Townhouse
within
community
center
1,200 24 0 0 0 100%
Multifamily
building
4,000 40 10 10 5 65%
Mixed-use
building
1,200 24 10 10 5 70%
§ 133-14 WELLS § 133-14
131:519
Minimum
Lot Size
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Side
Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Lot
Coverage
Commercial
building
2,000 20 10 5 when
not
attached
10 75%
Commercial
building
abutting
residential
properties
outside the
TND, if
permitted
by the
Board of
Supervisors
10,000 60 25 20 25 70%
[5] Building setbacks in community center area.
[a] Structures in the community center area have no
minimum setback. Commercial and civic or
institutional buildings should abut the sidewalks in the
community center area.
[6] Setbacks from tract boundaries. All buildings shall be set
back a minimum of 50 feet from tract boundaries. Where a
road forms a tract boundary, the 50 feet shall be measured
from the street right-of-way line. All common parking
areas shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from tract
boundaries and screened from view of surrounding
properties. When townhouses and apartments are located
within 100 feet of a tract boundary and the abutting land is
used for single-family detached dwellings, a planting
screen shall be placed along the tract boundary between
the townhouses and apartments and the single-family
detached dwellings.
[7] Public sanitary sewer and public water service are
required.
[8] A green space of at least 25 feet in width shall be
maintained along any tract boundary which abuts lots with
existing single-family detached dwellings. Such green
space shall be landscaped in accordance with a landscape
plan approved by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 133-14 JACKSON CODE § 133-14
131:520
[9] The total impervious coverage within the TND shall not
exceed 45% of the gross tract area.
(c) Architectural standards.
[1] Guidelines for existing structures. If existing structures
have been determined to be historic or architecturally
significant, they shall be protected from demolition or
encroachment by incompatible structures or landscape
development. The United States Secretary of the Interior's
Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic Properties shall be
used as the criteria for renovating historic or
architecturally significant structures.
[2] Guidelines for new structures.
[a] Height. New structures within a traditional
neighborhood development shall be no more than
three stories and 35 feet for single-family detached
dwellings, single-family semidetached dwellings, and
townhouses, or three stories and 45 feet for
commercial, apartment, mixed-use buildings, and live/
work buildings.
[b] Entries and facades.
[i] The architectural features, materials, and the
articulation of a façade of a building shall be
continued on all sides visible from a public street,
courtyard, common open space area, or park.
[ii] The front façade of the principal building on any
lot in a traditional neighborhood development
shall face onto a street, or a common open space
area, courtyard, or park, or other common area if
rear access is provided.
[iii] The front façade shall not be oriented to face
directly toward a parking lot, except when
commercial uses are permitted to do so by the
Board of Supervisors.
[iv] Architectural elements shall define the front
entrance to all residences.
[v] New structures on the same street shall have
compatible architecture.
[vi] All residential, commercial, live/work and mixeduse
buildings in a neighborhood shall be
compatible and form an integrated streetscape.
§ 133-14 WELLS § 133-14
131:521
[vii] Garages shall be placed along alleys, unless an
alternative is approved by the Board of
Supervisors such as: garages not served by an
alley shall have an architectural treatment or
placement, such as being set back from the front
of the house or rotated so that the garage doors
do not face any adjacent streets, to minimize the
visual impact of the garage.
[viii] The façade of any building or row of buildings
facing a street shall incorporate windows and
contain surface treatments to create visual
interest and break up visual massing of building
facades.
[3] Preparation and approval of architectural standards. Prior
to final approval of the subdivision plan for a TND by the
Township, the applicant shall prepare architectural
standards which will apply within the TND. These
standards are subject to approval by the Board of
Supervisors. The applicant shall also create and
permanently maintain a town architect's office (TAO). The
TAO shall approve all building design pursuant to the
approved architectural standards prior to the issuance of a
building permit by the Township. Architectural elevation
drawings of all typical residential and nonresidential
dwellings and buildings shall be provided to the Township
as part of the development application. The style of
architectural details, such as but not limited to window
fenestration, roof pitch, door style, porch design, and
façade materials and colors, shall be subject to Township
approval.
[4] Exterior signage. A comprehensive sign program subject
to the approval of the Board of Supervisors is required for
the entire TND in order to establish a uniform theme.
Signs shall share a common style (such as shape or
material). In the community center area, signs shall be
wall signs, projecting signs, or awning signs. Projecting
signs shall be mounted perpendicular to the building face
and shall not exceed eight square feet. Wall signs shall be
sized and placed to fit within the architectural elements
but shall not exceed 16 square feet. Awning signs shall
maintain a clear height of at least 10 feet and a maximum
of six feet in depth out in front of the building. Material
shall be canvas cloth or an equivalent material, but in no
case shall shiny or reflective material as well as metal,
plastic, or glass be permitted. Lettering shall be limited to
12 inches vertically. Illumination of any sign shall be from
a concealed indirect source only.
§ 133-14 JACKSON CODE § 133-14
131:522
(d) Circulation standards. The circulation system shall provide for
different modes of transportation. The circulation system shall
provide functional links within the residential neighborhoods,
community center area, and open space and shall be connected
to existing and proposed external development when required
by the Township. The circulation system shall provide adequate
traffic capacity, provide connected pedestrian and bicycle
routes (especially off-street bicycle or multi-use paths or
bicycle lanes on the streets), and promote safe and efficient
mobility through the traditional neighborhood development.
[1] Pedestrian circulation. Convenient pedestrian circulation
systems that minimize pedestrian -- motor vehicle conflicts
shall be provided continuously throughout the traditional
neighborhood development. Where feasible and
appropriate, any existing pedestrian routes through the
site shall be preserved and enhanced. All streets, except
for alleys, shall be bordered by sidewalks on both sides
unless otherwise permitted by the Board of Supervisors.
The following provisions also apply:
[a] Residential sidewalks. Clear and well-lighted
sidewalks, three to five feet in width, depending on
projected pedestrian traffic, shall connect all dwelling
entrances to the adjacent public sidewalk.
[b] Community center sidewalks. Clear and well-lit
walkways shall connect building entrances to the
adjacent public sidewalk and to associated parking
areas. Such walkways shall be a minimum of five feet
in width.
[c] Disabled accessibility. Sidewalks shall comply with the
applicable requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
[d] Crosswalks. Intersections of sidewalks with streets
shall be designed with clearly defined edges.
Crosswalks shall be well-lit and clearly marked with
contrasting paving materials at the edges or with
other method approved by the Board of Supervisors.
[2] Bicycle circulation. Bicycle circulation shall be
accommodated on streets and/or on dedicated bicycle
paths. Where feasible and appropriate, any existing
bicycle routes through the site shall be preserved and
enhanced. Facilities for bicycle travel may include offstreet
bicycle paths (generally shared with pedestrians
and other nonmotorized users) and separate, striped, fourfoot
bicycle lanes on streets. If a bicycle lane is combined
§ 133-14 WELLS § 133-14
131:523
with a lane for parking, the combined width shall be 12
feet.
[3] Public transit access. Where public transit service is
available or planned, convenient access to transit stops
shall be provided. Where transit shelters are provided,
they shall be placed in highly visible locations that
promote security through surveillance and shall be welllighted.
[4] Motor vehicle circulation. Motor vehicle circulation shall
be designed to minimize conflicts with pedestrians and
bicycles. Traffic-calming features may be used to
encourage slow traffic speeds.
[5] Street hierarchy. Each street within a traditional
neighborhood development shall be classified according to
the following (arterial streets should not bisect a
traditional neighborhood development):
[a] Collector. This street provides access to commercial or
mixed-use buildings, but it is also part of the major
street network. On-street parking, whether diagonal
or parallel, helps to slow traffic. Additional parking is
provided in lots to the side or rear of buildings.
[b] Local street. This street provides primary access to
individual residential properties. Traffic volumes are
relatively low.
[c] Alley. These streets provide secondary access to
residential properties. Alleys may also provide
delivery access or alternate parking access to
commercial properties.
Table 1
Attributes of Streets in a Traditional
Neighborhood Development1
Collector Local Street Alley
Auto
travel
lanes
2 or 3 12-foot
lanes
2 10-foot
lanes
2 8-foot lanes
for 2-way
traffic, or 1
12-foot lane
for 1-way
traffic
Bicycle
lanes
2 4-foot lanes
combined
with parking
lanes
None None
§ 133-14 JACKSON CODE § 133-14
131:524
Table 1
Attributes of Streets in a Traditional
Neighborhood Development1
Collector Local Street Alley
Parking None, 1, or
both sides, 8
feet wide
each side
None, 1, or
both sides, 8
feet wide
each side
None (access
to individual
drives and
garages
outside rightof-
way)
Curb
and
gutter
Required Required Not required
Planting
strips*
Minimum 5
feet
Minimum 5
feet
None
SidewalksBoth sides, 5
feet minimum
Both sides, 3
to 5 feet
None
NOTES:
1 The Board of Supervisors may allow variation or
relief from these standards. The Board of Supervisors
may also allow alternative roadway concepts, such as
one-way streets and yield streets.
*Planting strips are not required in community center
areas when permission is granted by the Board of
Supervisors.
[6] Street layout. The traditional neighborhood development
should maintain the existing street grid, where present,
and restore any disrupted street grid where feasible, and
shall propose an interconnected street grid pattern. Culsde-
sac are prohibited, unless specific permission is
granted by the Board of Supervisors.
[a] Street orientation.
[i] The orientation of streets should enhance the
visual impact of common open spaces and
prominent buildings. All streets shall terminate at
other streets or at public lands, public streetscape
features, specifically designed building façades,
or gateways to public space, except local streets
may terminate in stub streets when such streets
act as connections to future phases of the
development. Local streets may terminate other
than at other streets or public lands when there is
§ 133-14 WELLS § 133-14
131:525
a connection to the pedestrian and bicycle path
network at the terminus.
[ii] Alleys shall not form the boundary of a park,
common open space area, or greenbelt unless
approved by the Board of Supervisors. If
approved, the Supervisors may require that a wall
or other screen a minimum of six feet in height be
used for separation.
[iii] Generally, there shall be a continuous network of
alleys to the rear of lots within the TND, unless
otherwise permitted by the Board of Supervisors.
[iv] To prevent the buildup of vehicular speed,
disperse traffic flow, and create a sense of visual
enclosure, long, uninterrupted segments of
straight streets shall be avoided. Streets shall be
interrupted by intersections, a vista, or a notable
street curve, or other traffic-calming means
acceptable to the Board of Supervisors.
[7] Parking requirements.
[a] In the community center, any parking lot shall be
located at the rear or side of a building. If located at
the side, landscaping acceptable to the Board of
Supervisors shall be provided along the perimeter of
the parking lot.
[b] A parking lot or garage may not be adjacent to or
opposite a street intersection, be adjacent to greens or
parks, or occupy lots which terminate at a vista.
[c] Parking lots or garages must provide not less than one
bicycle parking space for every 10 motor vehicle
parking spaces.
[d] Adjacent on-street parking to a lot or building may
apply toward the minimum parking requirements.
[e] Adjacent parking lots shall have vehicular
connections.
[f] Off-street parking may be located within 600 feet
(measured along a publicly accessible route) from the
lot containing the use to which the parking is
accessory. The lot containing the parking shall be
owned or leased by the owner of the principal use, or
the lot containing the parking shall be dedicated to
parking as long as the use to which it is accessory
§ 133-14 JACKSON CODE § 133-14
131:526
shall continue and it is owned by an entity capable of
assuring its maintenance as accessory parking.
[8] Service access. Access for service vehicles should provide
a direct route to service and loading dock areas, while
avoiding movement through parking areas. Loading areas
shall not be visible from public streets. Trash disposal
areas shall be located within buildings or an opaque
screened area which hides the trash and is located to the
side or rear of the building.
[9] Outdoor lighting.
[a] Streetlighting shall be provided along all streets in a
manner acceptable to the Township Supervisors.
Generally, more, smaller lights, as opposed to fewer,
high-intensity lights, should be used, and streetlights
shall be installed on both sides of the street at
intervals of no greater than 75 feet, unless alternative
schemes are approved by the Supervisors. The design
of lighting shall be compatible with the architecture of
the TND.
[b] Exterior lighting shall not cast glare onto adjacent
properties, and the design of such lighting is subject
to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
(e) Landscaping and screening standards. The composition and
location of landscaping shall complement the scale of the
development and its surroundings. An overall landscaping
scheme shall be prepared and is subject to approval by the
Board of Supervisors. Earthen berms may be incorporated into
the landscaping scheme. The following are minimum
standards:
[1] General screening. Where screening is required by this
chapter, it shall be at least three feet in height, unless
otherwise specified. Required screening shall be at least
50% opaque throughout the year. Required screening shall
be satisfied by one or some combination of a decorative
fence not less than 50% opaque behind a continuous
landscaped area, a masonry wall, or a hedge.
[2] Street trees. A minimum of one deciduous canopy tree per
40 feet of street frontage, or fraction thereof, shall be
required. Spacing will be determined by the species type.
Large maturing trees shall generally be planted along
residential streets and along parks, greens, greenbelts,
and civic structures. Small maturing trees shall generally
be planted along nonresidential and mixed-use streets.
Trees can be clustered and do not need to be evenly
spaced. Trees should preferably be located between the
§ 133-14 WELLS § 133-14
131:527
sidewalk and the curb, within the landscaped area of a
boulevard, or in tree wells installed in pavement or
concrete. If placement of street trees within the right-ofway
will interfere with utility lines, or if required by the
Board of supervisors, trees may be planted within the front
yard setback adjacent to the sidewalk.
[3] Parking area landscaping and screening.
[a] All parking and loading areas fronting public streets
or sidewalks and all parking and loading areas
abutting residential uses shall provide:
[i] A landscaped area at least five feet wide along the
public street or sidewalk.
[ii] Screening at least three feet in height and not less
than 50% opaque.
[iii] One tree for each 25 linear feet of parking lot
frontage.
[b] Parking area interior landscaping. The corners of
parking lots, islands, and all other areas not used for
parking or vehicular circulation shall be landscaped.
Vegetation can include turf grass, native grasses or
other perennial flowering plants, vines, shrubs or
trees. Such spaces may include architectural features
such as benches, kiosks or bicycle parking.
[4] Installation and maintenance of landscaping materials.
[a] All landscape materials shall be installed to current
industry standards.
[b] Maintenance and replacement of landscape materials
shall be the responsibility of the property owner,
homeowners' association, or condominium
association. Landscape maintenance should
incorporate environmentally sound management
practices, including the use of water- and energyefficient
irrigation systems such as drip irrigation,
pruning primarily for plant health and public safety,
and replacing dead materials annually.
[c] Plantings in immediate proximity to buildings shall
respect architectural design. Plantings toward the
street shall not obscure important buildings and shall
respect views to and from streets, porches, walks, and
public open spaces.
(f) Stormwater management. The design and development of the
traditional neighborhood development should minimize off-site
§ 133-14 JACKSON CODE § 133-14
131:528
§ 133-15. Commercial Zone (C).
stormwater runoff, promote on-site filtration, and minimize the
discharge of pollutants to ground- and surface water. Natural
topography and existing land cover shall be maintained/
protected to the maximum extent practicable and desirable.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Commercial Zone is to provide reasonable
standards for the development of commercial uses in areas where such
uses already exist and where, due to the character of undeveloped land,
the development of commercial uses is feasible. This district and its
standards are designed to allow for a cluster of commercial uses while
avoiding congestion and to provide buffer yards, screen plantings, and
other such protection necessary to separate residential from
commercial areas.
B. Uses by right. The following uses, limited to one principal use per lot,
are permitted by right in the C Zone, subject to applicable regulations
of Articles IV and VII:
(1) Animal hospital.
(2) Club room, club grounds, meeting hall (not including accessory
outdoor trap, skeet, rifle, pistol, or archery range).
(3) Commercial recreation establishment (e.g., theater, bowling alley,
arcade).
(4) Commercial school.
(5) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure, including existing
communications towers and communications equipment buildings,
provided that the proposed addition does not exceed the existing
public utility transmission tower, building or other structure by
more than 20 feet, or unless the additional height would create the
need for lighting of the structure.
(6) Contractors' office or shop.
(7) Day-care center (child or adult) or nursery school.
(8) Financial institution.
(9) Forestry.
(10) Funeral home.
(11) Greenhouse, horticultural nursery.
(12) Health fitness center or tanning salon.
(13) Home occupation.
§ 133-14 WELLS § 133-15
131:529
(14) House of worship.
(15) Laundry and dry-cleaning establishment.
(16) No-impact home-based business.
(17) Personal service business.
(18) Professional or business office.
(19) Retail or convenience store.
(20) Wholesale establishment.
C. Uses by special exception. The following uses, limited to one principal
use per lot, shall be permitted as special exceptions when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and
decide the requests for such uses according to criteria established in
Articles V and VI of this chapter.
(1) Adult-oriented facility.
(2) Apartment in conjunction with a commercial establishment.
(3) Automobile and/or recreational vehicle and/or trailer sales,
automobile body shop and/or automobile garage.
(4) Automobile washing facility.
(5) Bed-and-breakfast inn.
(6) Building materials sales.
(7) Commercial parking lot or building.
(8) Communications towers and communications equipment buildings.
(9) Convalescent home, hospital.
(10) Farm implement sales and service.
(11) Halfway house.
(12) Medical clinic, research laboratory.
(13) Mini-storage facility.
(14) Mobile home sales lot.
(15) Motel, hotel.
(16) Nonconformity, expansion of.
(17) Open-air retail.
(18) Public buildings and/or facilities. [Amended 6-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 210-16]
§ 133-15 JACKSON CODE § 133-15
131:530
(19) Public or semipublic parking lot or garage.
(20) Public utility building or service structure.
(21) Restaurant (drive-through or fast-food).
(22) Restaurant (sit-down).
(23) Service station or convenience store dispensing fuel.
(24) Shopping center, shopping mall, or shopping plaza.
(25) Tavern.
(26) Transportation (passenger) terminal (does not include public
transit stops along public streets).
D. Minimum lot area and width. Lot area and lot width not less than the
following dimensions shall be provided for each principal use hereafter
established in this zone:*
Public Water and
Public Sewer
Public Water or
Public Sewer
No Public Water and
No Public Sewer
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Lot
Width
(feet)
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Lot
Width
(feet)
Lot Area
(acres)
Lot Width
(feet)
8,000 70 30,000 125 1 (43,560
square
feet)
150
*NOTE: Additional lot area may be required if well testing, soil
limitations for on-site sewage disposal, or other factors evidence the
need for a larger lot.
E. Setbacks. Each lot shall have front, side, and rear setbacks not less than
the following:
(1) Front setback: 35 feet.
(2) Side setback: 15 feet.
(3) Rear setback: 35 feet.
F. Building height. The height limit for a principal building or structure
shall be three stories but in no case more than 35 feet; however, the
maximum height limit may be increased to five stories or 50 feet,
provided that each minimum building setback is increased in size one
foot for each additional one foot of building height over 35 feet. The
height limit for an accessory building or structure shall be two stories
but not over 25 feet.
G. Lot coverage. The total surface area of all buildings, structures, paving
and any other impervious surfaces shall not exceed 75% of the lot area.
§ 133-15 WELLS § 133-15
131:531
§ 133-16. Industrial Zone (I).
H. Open area. Not less than 25% of the lot area shall be devoted to open
area, as defined in this chapter.
I. Screens and buffers: see § 133-32.
A. Purpose. The Industrial Zone is established in order to permit and
encourage industries that will be so located and designed as to
constitute harmonious and appropriate development, contribute to the
soundness of the economic base, and otherwise further the purposes of
this chapter. In promoting these and the general purposes of this
chapter, the specific intent of this section is:
(1) To encourage the development of and continued use of land for
industrial purposes.
(2) To prohibit any use that would substantially interfere with the
development, continuation, or expansion of industrial uses in the
district.
(3) To establish reasonable standards for buildings and other
structures, the areas and dimensions of yards and other open
spaces, and the provision of facilities to minimize air and water
pollution, noise, glare, heat, vibration, and fire and safety hazards.
B. Uses by right. The following uses, limited to one principal use per lot,
are permitted by right in the I Zone, subject to applicable regulations of
Articles IV and VII:
(1) Building material sales.
(2) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure, including existing
communications towers and communications equipment buildings,
provided that the proposed addition does not exceed the existing
public utility transmission tower, building or other structure by
more than 20 feet, or unless the additional height would create the
need for lighting of the structure.
(3) Contractor's office and/or shop.
(4) Forestry.
(5) Heavy storage sales and/or service (includes wholesale
establishment).
(6) Home occupation.
(7) Industrial activities.
(8) Multi- or single-tenant professional office building.
(9) No-impact home-based business.
§ 133-15 JACKSON CODE § 133-16
131:532
(10) Offices associated with permitted uses not considered as a
separate principal use.
C. Uses by special exception. The following uses, limited to one principal
use per lot, shall be permitted as special exceptions when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and
decide requests for such uses according to criteria established in
Articles V and VI of this chapter.
(1) Airport, airstrip.
(2) Automobile washing facility.
(3) Automobile wrecking, junkyard.
(4) Communications towers and communications equipment buildings.
(5) Greenhouse, horticultural nursery.
(6) Heliport.
(7) Industrial park.
(8) Mini-storage facility.
(9) Motel, hotel.
(10) Natural extraction industry.
(11) Nonconformity, expansion of.
(12) Public buildings and/or facilities. [Amended 6-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 210-16]
(13) Public or semipublic parking lot or garage.
(14) Public utility building or service structure.
(15) Medical Clinic, research laboratory. [Amended 9-6-2011 by Ord.
No. 190-11]
(16) Sawmill operation.
(17) Solid waste disposal and/or processing facility.
(18) Truck or motor freight terminal.
D. Minimum lot area and width. Lot area and lot width not less than the
following dimensions shall be provided for each principal use hereafter
established in this zone:*
(1) Minimum lot area: 43,560 square feet (one acre).
(2) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
§ 133-16 WELLS § 133-16
131:533
§ 133-17. Floodplain Overlay Zones: Floodway (FW), Flood Fringe
(FF), and General Floodplain Area (FA).
*NOTE: Additional lot area may be required if well testing, soil
limitations for on-site sewage disposal, or other factors require the
need for a larger lot.
E. Setbacks. Each lot shall provide front, side, and rear setbacks not less
than the following:
(1) Front setback: 50 feet.
(2) Side setback: 25 feet.
(3) Rear setback: 35 feet.
F. Building height. The height limit for a principal building or structure
shall be 50 feet. The height limit for an accessory building or structure
shall be 25 feet.
G. Lot coverage. The total surface area of all buildings, structures, paving
and any other impervious surfaces shall not exceed 75% of the lot area.
H. Open area. Not less than 25% of the lot area shall be devoted to open
area, as defined in this chapter.
I. Access. Adequate access to all industrial uses shall be provided. Traffic
entrances and exits shall be at a sufficient distance or appropriately
buffered from residential dwellings so that truck noise and vibration
will be minimized.
J. Screens and buffers: see § 133-32.
K. Harmful or unpleasant effects. Satisfactory provisions shall be made to
minimize harmful or unpleasant effects (noise, odors, fumes, glare,
vibration, smoke, vapors or gases, electrical emissions, and industrial
wastes) associated with industrial uses.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these zones is to prevent the loss of property
and life, creation of health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce
and governmental services, extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure
of public funds for flood protection and relief, and the impairment of the
tax base by:
(1) Regulating uses, activities, and development which, acting alone or
in combination with other existing or future uses, activities and
development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights,
velocities, and frequencies.
(2) Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities, and development
from being located within areas subject to flooding.
§ 133-16 JACKSON CODE § 133-17
131:534
(3) Requiring all those uses, activities, and developments that do occur
in flood-prone areas to be protected and/or floodproofed against
flooding and flood damage.
(4) Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures that are
unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards.
B. Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
sought by the provisions of this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of
study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas
outside the floodplain zones, or that land uses permitted within such
zones, will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall
not create liability on the part of Jackson Township or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
C. Establishment of floodplain zones.
(1) Description of zones.
(a) Basis of zones. The various floodplain zones shall include areas
subject to inundation by waters of the one-hundred-year flood.
The basis of a delineation of these zones shall be the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance
Rate Maps (FIRMs), dated December 16, 2015, and issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or such
FIS and FIRMs (including supplements and amendments)
subsequently approved by Jackson Township. [Amended
6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 210-16]
[1] The Floodway Zone (FW) is delineated, for purposes of this
chapter, using the criteria that a certain area within the
floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the
one-hundred-year flood without increasing the water
surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any
point. The areas included in this zone are specifically
defined in Table 1 of the above-referenced Flood Insurance
Study and shown on the accompanying Flood Boundary
and Floodway Map.
[2] The Flood Fringe Zone (FF) shall be that area of the onehundred-
year floodplain not included in the Floodway
Zone. The basis for the outermost boundary of this zone
shall be the one-hundred-year flood elevations contained
in the flood profiles of the above-referenced Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) and as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map.
§ 133-17 WELLS § 133-17
131:535
[3] The General Floodplain Zone (FA) shall be that floodplain
area for which no detailed flood profiles or elevations have
been provided. Such areas are shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map accompanying the Flood
Insurance Study prepared for the Flood Insurance
Administration. Where the specific one-hundred-year flood
elevation cannot be determined for this area using other
sources of data such as the United States Army Corps of
Engineers' Floodplain Information Reports, United States
Geological Survey Flood-Prone Quadrangles, and the like,
then the applicant for the proposed use, development, and/
or activity shall determine this elevation in accordance
with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods
used correctly reflect currently accepted technical
concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, and the like
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough
technical review by the Township.
(b) Overlay concept
[1] The aforementioned floodplain zones shall be overlays to
the existing underlying zones as shown on the Official
Zoning Map, and as such, the provisions for the floodplain
zones shall serve as a supplement to the underlying zone
provisions.
[2] Where there exists any conflict between the provisions or
requirements of any of the floodplain zones and those of
any underlying zone, the more-restrictive provision of the
two shall apply.
(2) Inclusion of Zoning Map. The boundaries of the floodplain zones
are established as shown on the FIS and FIRMs, dated December
16, 2015, and issued by FEMA, or such FIS and FIRMs (including
supplements and amendments) subsequently approved by Jackson
Township. [Amended 6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 210-16]
(3) Zone boundary changes. The delineation of any of the floodplain
zones may be revised by the Board of Supervisors where natural or
man-made changes have occurred and/or more detailed studies
conducted or undertaken by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers or another qualified agency or individual documents the
advisability for such change. However, prior to any such change,
approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) or its successor agency.
(4) Interpretation of zone boundaries. Initial interpretations of the
boundaries of the floodplain zones shall be made by the Zoning
§ 133-17 JACKSON CODE § 133-17
131:536
§ 133-18. Underground Mining Overlay Zone (UM).
Officer. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any
of the zones, the person questioning or contesting the location
of the zone boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
present his or her case to the Township Zoning Hearing Board and
to submit his own technical evidence if he so desires. Should the
person choose to have the zone boundary changed to reflect moreaccurate
flooding data, he must follow the procedures to present
his case to the Board of Supervisors for a zoning amendment.
D. Zone provisions. All uses, activities, land filling, and development
occurring within a flood hazard area shall be undertaken only in strict
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 69, Floodplain
Management, and with all other applicable codes and ordinances, such
as Chapter 47, Article I, Building Permits, and Chapter 107,
Stormwater Management, where applicable, and the Department of
Environmental Protection.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Underground Mining Overlay District is to
permit the continued underground mining of a unique mineral which
will continue to contribute to the sound economic base of Jackson
Township and the residents thereof without adversely impacting the
continued use of surface as presently zoned.
B. Uses by right. The following uses are permitted by right in the UM
Zone:
(1) Underground mining.
(2) Heavy storage (in the underground mine only).
(3) Accessory uses customarily incidental to underground mining or
heavy storage.
C. Permits and approvals. All uses, activities and mining occurring within
the Underground Mining District shall be undertaken only in strict
compliance with the provisions of the mining permit issued by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. A copy of the
permit shall be delivered to the Township prior to any mining occurring
in the Underground Mining District.
D. Access. Adequate access to all underground mining uses shall be
provided. The entrance and exit to an Underground Mining District
shall only occur from the Industrial District. In addition, prior to mining,
the applicant shall provide evidence of approval from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation to tunnel under any state road necessary
to obtain access to the subject area and to utilize such tunnels to access
the underground mining.
E. Heavy storage. The heavy storage use in the Underground Mining
Overlay District may only occur in the underground mine.
§ 133-17 WELLS § 133-18
131:537
§ 133-19. Airport Safety Zones (AIR-1, AIR-2, AIR-3).
F. The Zoning Map of Jackson Township is hereby amended to designate
the following York County tax assessment parcels subject to the
Underground Mining Overlay District (UM):
33000HF00130000000
33000HF00150000000
33000HF00160000000
33000HF00170000000
33000HF00770000000
33000HF00940000000
33000HF01140000000
33000HF01180000000
G. All activities on the surface of the ground shall be conducted strictly in
accordance with the restrictions of the underlying zoning district in
which the land is located.
H. All provisions of this chapter unaffected by this article shall remain in
full force and effect.
A. Purpose and intent.
(1) State and federal laws require the limitation of building and
structural height in airport hazard areas. State guidelines set forth
recommendations for compatible land uses within airport hazard
areas as well.
(2) Properties within Jackson Township have been identified as being
within the airport hazard area of the York Airport, as defined in the
Pennsylvania Aviation Code, and require special height controls
and are therefore also subject to Township land use regulations.
(3) The height restrictions are aimed at preventing the erection of
structures that would interfere with or obstruct normal aircraft
approaches or airport operations. Such interference or obstruction
would pose a threat to the health, safety, welfare, and convenience
of the residents of the Township, as well as passengers aboard
aircraft.
(4) Airport safety zones within the hazard area are also used to impose
reasonable regulations providing for compatible land uses in
addition to needed height restrictions, thereby enhancing public
safety.
B. Lands in airport safety zones defined.
(1) The Township's airport hazard area includes areas within Jackson
Township depicted on the Airport Hazard Area for York Airport
§ 133-18 JACKSON CODE § 133-19
131:538
Plan. These areas have been plotted on a Jackson Township Zoning
Map, a copy of which may be viewed at the Township offices.
(2) Three separate zones within the airport hazard area have been
identified:
(a) Airport Safety Zone 1 (AIR-1) includes areas at either end of
the runway that are most seriously affected by the airport
operations. Areas contained within Airport Safety Zone 1 are
located in such close proximity to the airport that this chapter's
normal permitted structural height of 35 feet could pose a
safety hazard. Accordingly, height restrictions are very strict.
In addition, approval of proposed development land uses is
carefully controlled as well.
(b) Airport Safety Zone 2 (AIR-2) includes areas also seriously
affected by the airport operations. Areas contained within
Airport Safety Zone 2 are located in such close proximity to the
airport that this chapter's normal permitted structural height
(35 feet) could pose a safety hazard. Accordingly, height
restrictions are strict.
(c) Airport Safety Zone 3 (AIR-3) includes areas just beyond
Airport Safety Zone 2 and outlying areas that have particularly
high elevations. These areas include those that cannot support
structures that are higher than 35 feet up to the maximum
permitted structural height of 50 feet in § 133-16. Within this
zone, regulations permit the placement of thirty-five-foot-high
structures but require special review for structures higher
than 35 feet.
C. Relationship to other articles. The airport safety zones represent
overlay zoning districts that are concerned with permitted heights and
land uses. The underlying zoning district shall prescribe all other
zoning-related standards and uses. In those instances where the airport
safety zone prescribes a height and/or land use restriction different
than that imposed by the underlying zoning district, the mostrestrictive
standard shall apply.
D. Height regulations within Airport Safety Zones 1, 2, and 3.
(1) The property owner/applicant shall submit plans to the Township as
are reasonably necessary to determine the height of any proposed
building or structure. The Township shall forward the documents to
the York Airport owner, who shall, in turn, forward them to the
Pennsylvania Bureau of Aviation for a review by the Bureau and, if
required, to be sent by the Bureau to the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) to determine compliance with FAA guidelines
regarding objects affecting navigable airspace. The Bureau of
Aviation shall have 10 working days to issue a report to the
Township indicating whether or not a hazard/no hazard
determination by the Federal Aviation Administration is necessary.
§ 133-19 WELLS § 133-19
131:539
(2) If the York Airport owner recommends that the application does not
require a hazard/no hazard determination by the Federal Aviation
Administration and the application complies with all other
applicable provisions of Township ordinances, a building permit
application can be approved.
(3) If the York Airport owner determines that the proposed use
requires a hazard/no hazard determination by the Federal Aviation
Administration, then the York Airport owner will assist the
applicant in completing an FAA Form 7460, which is available at
the Township offices, and submit it to the Federal Aviation
Administration for determination. If the Federal Aviation
Administration issues a "no hazard" determination and the
application complies with all other applicable provisions of
Township ordinances, the Township can issue a building permit. If
the Federal Aviation Administration issues a "hazard"
determination, the application will be denied.
(4) No variances circumventing the York Airport owner's review and
hazard determination by the Federal Aviation Administration shall
be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board without expressed written
consent thereto from the Federal Aviation Administration, such
consent to be obtained by the property owner/applicant.
E. Land use regulations within Airport Safety Zones 1, 2, and 3.
(1) Uses permitted by right in AIR-1. The following uses, limited to one
principal use per lot, are permitted by right in the AIR-1 Zone:
(a) Parking lots and access drives thereto.
(b) Agriculture.
(c) Golf course.
(d) Passive open space/park facility.
(2) Uses permitted in AIR-2 and AIR-3 are those permitted in the
underlying zoning district as noted either by right or by special
exception.
§ 133-19 JACKSON CODE § 133-19
131:540
ARTICLE IV
General Regulations
§ 133-20. Applicability.
These regulations shall apply to every zoning district unless otherwise
specified in this chapter.
§ 133-21. Compliance with other municipal regulations.
In addition to complying with the requirements of this chapter, the
requirements of all other municipal ordinances and regulations, including
but not limited to Chapter 113, Subdivision and Land Development, and
Chapter 47, Building Construction, shall be applicable.
§ 133-22. Access to structures.
Every building and structure hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot
adjacent to a public street or a private street approved by the Township
Supervisors or on a lot for which a legally recorded right-of-way access to a
public street or approved private street existed prior to the effective date of
this chapter. After the effective date of this chapter, no lot shall be created
unless it abuts a public street or a private street approved by the Township
Supervisors; except that, in the case of a structure related to public sanitary
sewer and water systems, such structure may be placed on a lot which is
not adjacent to a public or private street as long as a legally recorded rightof-
way access to such a street will exist. For the purposes of this section, a
service street (alley) shall not constitute a public street or highway.
§ 133-23. Accessory uses and structures.
A. Attached structures. Any accessory structure attached to a principal
structure is considered a part of the principal structure for all
regulatory purposes.
B. Nonattached structures. Any accessory structure, standing apart from a
principal structure, is permitted in the rear yard but shall not be located
closer than five feet to any side or rear property line, except for
structures larger than 150 square feet, which shall comply with
principal structure setback requirements. In the AP and RC Zone, a
nonattached accessory structure shall be permitted in the front or side
yard, provided 1) the lot is five acres or more, 2) the nonattached
structure has a minimum front setback of 100 feet and 3) the
nonattached structure shall be at least 100 feet from any residence on
adjoining properties. [Amended 9-6-2011 by Ord. No. 190-11;
6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 210-16]
(1) Utility sheds may be located within a required side setback area
but shall not be located closer than five feet to any side property
line.
§ 133-20 WELLS § 133-23
131:541
(2) No apartment(s) or living quarters shall be located in an accessory
structure.
(3) Farm produce stands may be placed in a front yard area, but shall
not be placed within a street right-of-way. When located in a zone
other than an AP or RC Zone, such stands must be removed when
products are no longer on sale. (See § 133-44.)
(4) The maximum height of an accessory structure in a particular zone
shall be as required in the height regulations of that zone.
(5) The combined maximum size of the building area of all accessory
structures on a lot (measured in square feet) is regulated by the
size of the lot on which they are located multiplied by 0.025 (2.5%).
(6) Other than as listed above, for all other requirements, a
nonattached structure is considered the same as a principal
structure.
C. Fences and walls. No fence or wall (except a retaining wall or a wall of a
building permitted under the terms of this chapter) shall be erected to a
height of more than four feet in a front or side yard area or more than
six feet in any rear yard area in any residential zone or upon any lot
used for residential purposes in any other zone. In a C or I Zone, a fence
may be erected to eight feet in height in any yard area but no higher.
The above fencing height restrictions apply universally, except as
modified in Article VI of this chapter.
(1) Fences may be located up to but shall not be located on the lot line.
(2) No fencing may be erected that inhibits sight distance at a street
intersection.
(3) In the case of a fence or wall erected adjacent to a driveway in any
zone, the maximum height of such fence or wall or portion thereof
shall be such that adequate sight distance between the driveway
and the street or road is provided as required for driveways in
§ 133-34D.
D. Satellite dish antennas. Receiver dishes over 36 inches in diameter are
subject to the following constraints:
(1) Such devices shall not be roof-mounted.
(2) Such devices shall not be placed in any required setback area.
(3) Such devices must be located to the rear of the dwelling unit on any
residential lot.
(4) No dish antenna on a residential lot shall exceed an overall height
of 18 feet above the ground or an overall diameter of 12 feet.
(5) No more than one dish antenna is permitted per building lot.
§ 133-23 JACKSON CODE § 133-23
131:542
§ 133-24. Outdoor swimming pools.
(6) Such devices must be appropriately screened or fenced so as not to
be visually obtrusive to neighboring properties.
E. Satellite dish antennas 36 inches or less in diameter are permitted by
right in all zoning districts, subject to the following criteria:
(1) Demonstration by the applicant that compliance with the
applicable yard, setback, and height restrictions would result in the
obstruction of the antenna's reception window, if it were groundmounted;
furthermore, that such obstruction involves factors
beyond the applicant's control.
(2) The satellite dish antenna must be set back at least the horizontal
distance equal to its maximum height above ground, from all
property lines.
(3) The allowance of a satellite dish antenna(s) shall in no way place
liability upon the Township for the obstruction of the antenna's
reception window due to permitted construction on adjoining or
nearby properties. Any arrangements made to protect the
antenna's reception window shall be between private parties and
not the Township.
(4) To protect aesthetics, such devices must be placed so that the dish
is not visible from the front of the property. If this results in the
obstruction of the satellite's reception window, every effort should
be made to install the satellite dish in a way that is least visually
obtrusive to surrounding properties.
(5) A maximum of two satellite dishes per structure are permitted.
Installation of any additional dishes may be permitted in the case of
multiple-family dwellings when approved by the Township.
A. Every outdoor swimming pool shall conform to all applicable
requirements of state law.
B. An outdoor swimming pool is permitted only in a side or rear yard area
and must be at least 10 feet from all lot lines. This requirement applies
to any part of the pool structure.
C. Every outdoor swimming pool, spa, or hot tub, if not covered by a rigid,
secure cover which eliminates potential access by children and
unauthorized persons, must be completely surrounded by a fence or
wall that has a height of not less than four feet above the ground. The
fence or wall shall be constructed so as not to have openings, holes, or
gaps larger than two inches in any dimension. All gates or doors
opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing
and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door securely closed at
all times when not in actual use, except that the door of any dwelling
which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped.
§ 133-23 WELLS § 133-24
131:543
§ 133-25. Unenclosed storage.
D. An outdoor aboveground pool that has a water-containing wall of at
least four feet in height serving in lieu of the fencing requirement in
Subsection C shall have access by a removable or retractable ladder,
which must be removed or retracted when not in use. In the event that
an outdoor swimming pool that has a part or all of its water-containing
wall or barrier above the level of the surrounding ground and does not
have a retractable or removable ladder that is accessible at ground
level at a height less than four feet or has a fixed ladder or steps, said
wall or barrier shall not be construed to satisfy fencing requirements,
and a separate fence meeting all of the requirements of Subsection C
above must be provided. In such cases, the fence may be affixed to or
upon the water-containing wall of a swimming pool or may be entirely
separate from it, as long as all other requirements of this section are
met.
E. Water shall not be discharged from any swimming pool onto any
adjoining property.
A. Vehicle storage.
(1) Except as provided in § 133-63 of this chapter, in all zones,
dismantled or partially dismantled or abandoned automobiles,
tractors, recreational vehicles, trailers, and trucks must be parked
or stored within an enclosed building.
(2) In a residential zone, any vehicle that exceeds eight feet in height
or exceeds 21 feet in length, when not placed within an enclosed
building, shall be placed between the front wall of the principal
building and the rear setback line. Such vehicles may not be placed
within a side setback area.
B. Outdoor stockpiling. In a Residential, Village, or Agricultural Zone, tire
stockpiles, metal pipes, automobile parts, and similar objects and
materials must be stored in a garage or an enclosed storage structure.
In a commercial or industrial zone, such items must be stored in a
garage or enclosed storage structure or be completely shielded by
landscaping, walls, or fencing so as to screen the object(s) in all seasons
of the year from the street or adjoining properties. All such storage
must be accessory to an existing principal building, except as provided
in § 133-63 of this chapter.
C. Trash or junk. Except as provided in § 133-63 of this chapter and in
other Township ordinances, the accumulation of trash or junk out-ofdoors
for a period in excess of 15 days is prohibited in all zones. (See
§ 133-46.)
D. Front yard. In all zones, no outdoor stockpiling of any material or
outdoor storage of trash is permitted between the front wall of the
principal building and the street line. Automobile wrecking and
§ 133-24 JACKSON CODE § 133-25
131:544
§ 133-26. Setback modifications.
junkyard operations are exempt, so long as such uses comply in all
other respects with applicable regulations.
A. Front setbacks of buildings on built-up streets. Where at least two
buildings are fronting on the same side of a street as the lot in question,
within the same block as the lot in question, set back a lesser distance
than required, and not more than 100 feet from the lot in question, the
average of the lesser setbacks shall become the required minimum
front setback for the lot.
B. To protect residential uses from adverse influences of traffic and
restrict major thoroughfares to their traffic function, buildings
(including residential and nonresidential buildings) along these
thoroughfares must be set back at least 50 feet from the right-of-way
line of the thoroughfare. Major thoroughfares are or will be any arterial
streets and collector streets specified in the Jackson/Paradise Joint
Comprehensive Plan.
C. Sight distance. Proper sight lines must be maintained at all street
intersections. Corner lots must have a clear sight triangle with sides at
least 75 feet in length measured along the center line of the street. This
does not apply to alleys. No building or construction is permitted within
such triangles. However, obstructions or plantings less than three feet
in height, as measured from the grade of the roadway, shall be
permitted. Posts, columns and trees shall be permitted if not
obstructing the clear sight triangle.
D. Setback on corner lots. Corner lots shall have two front setbacks, the
second of which exists in lieu of one side setback.
E. Setback on reverse-frontage or double-frontage lots. In the case of
reverse-frontage or double-frontage lots, two front setbacks and two
side setbacks shall be provided.
F. Accessory or appurtenant structures. The setback regulations do not
apply in the following cases:
(1) School bus shelters (as long as no obstacle to sight distance);
telephone booths; cornices, eaves, chimneys, steps, canopies,
marquees, and similar extensions; unenclosed and uncovered
porches; unenclosed and uncovered patios; and articles of
decoration and ornamentation.
(2) Open fire escapes.
(3) Fences and walls, which must conform to regulations contained in
§ 133-23C.
§ 133-25 WELLS § 133-27
131:545
§ 133-27. Height modifications.
The height regulations do not apply to the following projections and
structures, provided that the height of any such projection or structure
above its base, or the average grade level if self-supporting, shall not be
greater than the shortest distance measured along a horizontal plane from
such base to any lot line:
§ 133-28. Minimum habitable floor area.
All dwelling units must conform to the minimum habitable floor area as
follows:
§ 133-29. Signs.
A. Structures such as chimneys, water towers, standpipes, flagpoles,
television antennas, radio towers, or cranes and other support
structures or devices.
B. Structures on buildings such as clock towers, cupolas, water tanks, and
other mechanical appurtenances, if such structures, at any level, do not
cover more than 25% of the roof on which they are located.
C. Parapet walls or cornices solely for ornamental purposes if not in excess
of five feet in height.
D. Farm buildings and structures.
A. Single-family detached dwellings: 700 square feet per dwelling unit.
B. All other dwellings: 500 square feet per dwelling unit.
A. General regulations for all signs.
(1) Determination of size. The size of the sign shall refer to the area of
the sign facing, including any border framing or decorative
attachments. In the case of open signs made up of letters, figures
and designs, the space between such letters, figures and designs
shall be included. Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of
all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign;
except that where two such faces are placed back-to-back and at no
point more than three feet from one another, the area of the sign
shall be taken as the area of one face if the two faces are of equal
area or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal
size.
(2) Location/projection of signs.
(a) Signs must be located so that they do not interfere with any
clear sight triangle, as defined by this chapter.
(b) For all uses, an advertising sign and a business sign must be at
least 60 feet apart, and no sign exceeding 30 square feet in
§ 133-27 JACKSON CODE § 133-29
131:546
area may be located within 75 feet of a Residential, Village, or
Agricultural Zone.
(c) No sign shall project over a public sidewalk area or over a
public highway or street unless specifically authorized by other
Township or state regulations.
(d) No sign shall project more than 35 feet above the ground.
(3) Illumination of signs.
(a) Flashing, rotating, animated, and intermittent lights are
permitted only in the Commercial Zone within the Township.
No flashing, rotating, animated, or intermittent lights or signs
with red, amber, and green light configurations that simulate
traffic control signals are permitted.
(b) Signs permitted in the residential zones shall be illuminated
only by indirect lighting and shall not be illuminated between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(c) A sign may be illuminated only if the lighting is so screened
that it is not directed or reflected toward any adjacent
residence or so it does not obstruct the vision of motorists. No
spotlights or floodlights shall be higher than 15 feet above
ground level.
(d) Signs which are illuminated in the colors red, green, or amber,
either by colored bulbs or tubing, or in high reflection by the
use of special preparations such as fluorescent paint or glass,
may not be located within a radius of 200 feet of a highway
traffic light or similar safety device or from the center of any
street intersection.
(4) Signs painted on buildings. Advertising painted upon, or displayed
upon, a barn or other building or structure shall be regarded as an
advertising sign, and the regulations pertaining thereto shall apply.
(5) Signs within a building. Nothing in these regulations shall be
construed as prohibiting signs intended for viewing principally
from within a building or signs temporarily attached to the inside
face of a display window and/or door, announcing a sale or similar
feature, provided that the latter shall not occupy more than 33 1/
3% of the total display window or door area. Such signs shall be
permitted in addition to any of the specific sign types designated on
the charts to follow.116
(6) Construction and maintenance. Signs must be constructed of
durable materials, maintained in good condition, and not allowed to
become dilapidated.
116. Editor's Note: Sign Charts A and B are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 133-29 WELLS § 133-29
131:547
(7) Termination of enterprise. Upon termination or abandonment of a
use in any district, all signs pertaining to the enterprise must be
removed within 30 days of such termination.
B. Permitted permanent signs. Only the types of permanent signs listed on
Chart A, which follows,117 shall be permitted throughout the Township.
Permanent signs must conform to the standards set forth in Chart A as
well as satisfy the general regulations of Subsection A. Building permits
shall be required for all permanent signs.
C. Permitted temporary signs. Only the types of temporary signs listed on
Chart B, which follows,118 are permitted throughout the Township.
Temporary signs must conform to the standards set forth in Chart B as
well as satisfy the general regulations of Subsection A.
D. Advertising signs. Advertising signs shall be permitted in the
Commercial Zone, subject to the provision of Subsection A and the
following criteria:
(1) No advertising sign shall exceed an overall size of 300 square feet
nor exceed 35 feet in height.
(2) No advertising sign or billboard shall be located within 500 feet of
another advertising sign.
(3) All advertising signs shall be a minimum of 50 feet from all side and
rear property lines.
(4) All advertising signs shall be set back a minimum distance from the
street right-of-way line that is equal to the height of the sign or 10
feet, whichever is greater. Where the top of the sign is level, that is,
perpendicular to a vertical plumb line, the height of the sign shall
be determined by measuring the distance from ground level to the
highest point on the sign nearest the street right-of-way. In cases
where the top of the sign is slanted or of irregular elevation, the
minimum required setback from the street right-of-way shall be
equal to the distance from the highest point of the sign to the
ground level.
(5) No advertising sign shall obstruct the vision of motorists or
adjoining commercial or industrial uses which depend upon
visibility for identification.
E. Portable signs. Portable signs shall be permitted in a Commercial Zone,
subject to the following requirements:
(1) A sign permit must be obtained from the Township Zoning Officer.
(2) The sign may be illuminated only by indirect lighting.
117. Editor's Note: Sign Chart A is included at the end of this chapter.
118. Editor's Note: Sign Chart B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 133-29 JACKSON CODE § 133-29
131:548
(3) The placement of such signs shall not interfere with traffic or sight
distance at street intersections or access to a public right-of-way.
(4) No portable signs shall contain changeable copy.
F. Prohibited signs. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
to erect any sign in the Township unless it is specifically permitted in
this section. Unlawful signs include but are not limited to:
(1) Any sign which, by color, shape or location, conflicts with or
resembles a traffic signal device.
(2) Signs attached to rocks, utility poles, traffic signposts, traffic signal
or control devices, street signs, or historical markers.
(3) Signs attached to trees, shrubs or any living vegetative matter.
(4) Any sign, outside of the Commercial Zone, which advertises or
publicizes an activity or business not conducted on the premises,
except civic event signs.
(5) Signs erected without the permission of the property owner or
authorized agent.
(6) Signs that create hazards to operators of vehicles and pedestrian
traffic; signs which may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be
confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device.
(7) Flashing, rotating, animated, and intermittent signs, other than in
the Commercial Zone, subject to the restrictions of this section.
(8) Any sign that obstructs free ingress to or egress from a required
door, window, fire escape or other required exit.
(9) Signs or lettering on vehicles parked for extended periods of time
to circumvent the regular sign regulations.
(10) Abandoned signs.
(11) Signs that exhibit statements, words or pictures of obscene or
pornographic subjects including those that depict sexual conduct
and /or depict sexually explicit nudity.
(12) Roof signs.
(13)Wall signs that cover windows or architectural detail.
(14) Pennants.
(15) Signs with reflective backgrounds or elements.
(16) Beacon lights.
(17) National trademark signs and logos of companies other than the
business on the premises.
§ 133-29 WELLS § 133-29
131:549
(18) Banners exceeding in size more than 10% of the façade of the
structure on which they are used; banners used for more than 30
days unless permission is secured from the Township Supervisors.
(19) Banners suspended over roadways, public driveways, or access
drives.
G. Exempt signs. The following signs shall be allowed without a sign
permit and shall not be included in the determination of the number or
sign area of other signs allowed within a zoning district, subject to the
restrictions of this section:
(1) Government/regulatory signs.
(2) Real estate signs.
(3) Political signs.
(4) Public interest signs.
(5) Memorial signs.
(6) Yard sale signs.
(7) Address signs.
(8) Interior signs.
(9) Civic event signs on premises.
(10) Home occupation signs smaller than two square feet.
H. Regulation of legally nonconforming signs. Signs on the premises of
legally nonconforming uses, such as an office in a residential area, may
remain until the existing use of the premises is discontinued, subject to
the regulations of this section.
(1) If a legally nonconforming sign lists more than one business, new
businesses may be added without affecting the nonconforming
status of the sign. However, the sign may not be altered in any way
that extends the sign's nonconformity in any manner.
(2) Nothing in this section shall relieve the owners or users of legally
nonconforming signs, or the owners of the property on which
legally nonconforming signs are located, from any provisions of this
section regarding the safety, maintenance, and repair of signs.
(3) Should 50% or more of any legally nonconforming sign be damaged
by any means, it shall be removed and not reconstructed except in
conformity with the provisions of this section.
(4) Any business that has closed shall remove any signs associated
with the business within 60 days after it closes. The owner of the
premises shall have the responsibility to ensure such signs are
removed within the sixty-day period.
§ 133-29 JACKSON CODE § 133-29
131:550
§ 133-30. Parking.
(5) The existence of a legally nonconforming sign on a single- or
multiple-occupancy premises shall not prevent the erection or
placement of another sign on the premises if the new sign meets
the requirements of this section. However, the total number of
signs and the size and area of the signs shall not exceed the
requirements of this section.
(6) A legally nonconforming sign shall immediately lose its legally
nonconforming designation if the sign is altered in any way. At that
point, the sign shall be immediately brought into compliance with
this section and a new permit secured, or the sign shall be
removed.
A. Size of parking space. The parking space must have an area of not less
than 200 square feet, exclusive of passageways and driveways
appurtenant to the space and giving access to it. The parking space
must be a minimum rectangular size of 10 feet wide by 20 feet long.
Where five or more parking spaces are required, the total parking area,
including passageways and driveways, must average 300 square feet
per required parking space.
B. Spaces required.
(1) Off-street parking spaces must be provided for all uses and for each
building erected or enlarged in accordance with the following
schedule. Uses not specifically listed shall comply with the
requirements of the most-similar use listed.
Type of Use
Minimum of 1 Parking Space for
Each
Residential dwelling 1/2 dwelling unit (2 spaces per dwelling
unit)
Rooming house Bedroom
Hotel, motel, bed-andbreakfast
Guest sleeping room and each
employee
Group home Occupant
Home occupation Nonresident employee, plus 2
additional spaces for the home
occupation
Office building 300 square feet of gross floor area
Retail store or shop 200 square feet of gross floor area
Convenience store 75 square feet of gross floor area
§ 133-29 WELLS § 133-30
131:551
Type of Use
Minimum of 1 Parking Space for
Each
Eating establishment
(eat-in)
80 square feet of gross floor area and
ground area (excluding parking)
devoted to patron use on the property,
or 3 seats, whichever requirement is
greater
Eating establishment
(fast-food)
2 seats and every 2 employees
Bowling alley, billiard
room
1/2 lane (2 spaces per lane or table)
Other recreational
establishment
200 square feet of gross floor area
Outdoor athletic facility 4 seats of spectator seating; however, if
no spectator seating is provided, a
temporary parking area shall be
provided on the site
Automobile repair,
service station
400 square feet of gross floor area and
ground area devoted to repair and
service facilities
Shopping center,
shopping mall, shopping
plaza
200 square feet of gross floor area
School Staff member, plus 1 space per
classroom in an elementary or junior
high school and 1 space per 5 students
of projected building capacity in a
senior high school or college
Other commercial
building
400 square feet of gross floor area
Convalescent home,
hospital
1/2 bed (2 spaces per bed)
Auditorium, house of
worship, theater, and
other such place of
public assembly
200 square feet of gross floor area but
not less than 4 seats
Professional office of
veterinarians,
physicians, or dentists
5 spaces for each veterinarian,
physician, or dentist
Animal hospital Per employee and per 4 animals of
capacity
Financial institution 100 square feet of gross floor area, plus
1 for each employee
§ 133-30 JACKSON CODE § 133-30
131:552
Type of Use
Minimum of 1 Parking Space for
Each
Industrial and wholesale
establishment
11/2 employees on major shift, but at
least 1 space for each 5,000 square feet
of gross floor area
Funeral home 100 square feet of gross floor area
Adult-oriented facility 100 square feet of gross floor area, plus
1 for each employee
Club, lodge, and other
similar place
100 square feet of gross floor area
Outdoor open air retail 1/2 vendor (2 spaces per vendor space)
Outdoor sales - vehicle
sales
20% of sales area to be reserved for
customer parking
(2) In the case of an addition or enlargement of a building existing on
the date of adoption of this chapter, parking spaces must be
provided to the extent to which the required spaces of the altered
or enlarged building exceed those applicable to the original
building or use.
C. Location. Except as restricted elsewhere in this chapter, a ground-level
parking area/lot is permitted in any yard area, provided that it is at least
10 feet from any property line. The parking area must be on the same or
nearby lot. If on a nearby lot, the nearest point of the parking lot shall
be not further than the following distances to the nearest point of the
property served: 100 feet in the case of a commercial use, 300 feet in
the case of an industrial or institutional use, and 200 feet in the case of
a residential use.
D. Layout. Parking areas must be arranged so there will be no need for
motorists to back over public rights-of-way.
E. Parking area adjacent to street. For multifamily and nonresidential use
where a parking area or other area open to movement of vehicles abuts
the right-of-way of a public street, a pipe railing, post-and-chain
barricade, raised curbs, or equally effective device satisfactory to the
Township Engineer must line the public right-of-way, except at access
points, so that parked vehicles will not extend into the street right-ofway
or sidewalk.
F. Paving. For all uses in Residential, Village and Agricultural Zones, and
commercial, industrial, and multifamily residential uses in other zones,
all required parking areas and all access drives shall be paved with
concrete or bituminous paving material or other paving material
acceptable to the Township Engineer.
G. Drainage. All parking lots shall be drained to prevent damage to other
properties or public streets. All parking lots shall be designed to
prevent the collection of standing water on any portion of the parking
§ 133-30 WELLS § 133-30
131:553
§ 133-31. Loading.
lot surface. The Township Engineer must approve the grading and
drainage plan for a parking lot of more than five vehicles.
H. Marking of parking spaces. Each parking space for a multifamily,
commercial, institutional, or industrial use in a parking area or lot shall
be clearly marked by a permanent, durable, contrasting material.
I. Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided if the parking lot is to be
used at night. Such lighting shall be arranged so as not to reflect or
glare on adjoining properties or streets.
A. Spaces required. Any building erected, converted, or enlarged for any
nonresidential use shall provide adequate off-street areas for loading
and unloading of vehicles. Such areas shall be provided in addition to,
and independent of, any parking area requirements. Off-street loading
spaces must be provided in accordance with the following schedule:
Type of Use Number of Loading Spaces
Commercial 1 space for a gross floor area of 5,000 to
25,000 square feet, and 1 additional
space for each 40,000 square feet of
gross floor area in excess of the first
25,000 square feet
Office, financial institution,
theater, auditorium, hotel,
hospital, or other
institution; bowling alley or
other indoor recreational
establishment
1 space for a gross floor area of 10,000 to
100,000 square feet, and 1 additional
space for each 100,000 square feet in
excess of the first 100,000 square feet
Industry or manufacturing 1 space for a gross floor area of 2,000 to
25,000 square feet, and 1 additional
space for each 20,000 square feet of
gross floor area in excess of the first
25,000 square feet
Wholesale, storage, or
warehousing (excludes
mini-storage facilities, for
which no loading spaces
are required)
1 space per establishment, and 1
additional space for each 40,000 square
feet in excess of the first 10,000 square
feet
B. Size. The minimum sizes of loading spaces are as follows:
§ 133-30 JACKSON CODE § 133-31
131:554
§ 133-32. Screens and buffers.
Use
Length
(feet)
Width
(feet)
Height if Covered or
Obstructed
(feet)
Industrial, wholesale,
and storage uses
60 12 15
All other uses 40 12 15
C. Surfacing. All loading areas must be surfaced with a bituminous or
concrete paving material.
D. Location. The loading area must be arranged so that there will be no
need for vehicles to back over public rights-of-way or cause the stacking
of vehicles on a public street. Except in the Industrial Zone, no loading
area shall be located between the front wall of a principal building and
the street line.
E. Drainage. All loading areas shall be drained so as to prevent damage to
other properties or public streets. All loading spaces shall be designed
to prevent the collection of standing water on any portion of the loading
area surface.
F. Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided if the loading area is to be
used at night. Such lighting shall not reflect or project glare on
adjoining properties or streets.
G. Screening. All loading areas shall be screened from adjacent properties
in accordance with § 133-32 below.
A. Where a Commercial or Industrial Zone or use abuts a Residential,
Village, or Agricultural Protection Zone or use, except for street
frontage, the following shall apply:
(1) A fence, hedge, earthen berm, or screen acceptable to the
Township must be erected on the site of any use to screen any such
use from the view of the Residential, Village or Agricultural
Protection Zone or use.
B. The space along the side and rear lot lines in a Commercial Zone
abutting a Residential, Village or Agricultural Protection Zone for 50
feet in depth shall not be used for commercial operations, building, or
storage. The interior 25 feet may be used for parking and access drives.
The exterior 25 feet must be naturally landscaped and have no
impervious ground cover.
C. Where an outdoor recreation use, other than a golf course, adjoins a
Residential, Village, or Agricultural Protection Zone, on-site fencing
must be constructed or trees and shrubs planted to form an effective
visual and physical barrier.
§ 133-31 WELLS § 133-32
131:555
§ 133-33. Drainage.
§ 133-34. Driveways.
D. In all instances where an industrial use adjoins a Residential, Village, or
Agricultural Protection Zone or use, a buffer yard at least 75 feet wide
must be located on the site. The interior 25 feet of the buffer adjacent to
the use shall not be occupied by any building or used for storage but
may be used for parking and access drives. The exterior 50 feet of the
buffer adjoining a Residential, Village, or Agricultural Protection Zone
shall not be used for building, storage, parking, or loading and must be
naturally landscaped and have no impervious ground cover.
A. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner.
Plans shall be subject to the review and approval of the Board of
Supervisors upon recommendation of the Township Engineer. Drainage
plans shall be consistent with local and regional drainage plans and
shall comply with Chapter 107, Stormwater Management, as amended
from time to time.
A. Width. Within 10 feet of the street right-of-way, driveways may not
exceed 20 feet in width.
B. Number. The number of driveways may not exceed two per lot on any
one street frontage. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant permission
by special exception for additional driveways where required to meet
exceptional circumstances and where frontage or unusual length exists.
C. Offsets. Driveways may not enter a public street within:
(1) Forty feet of the street right-of-way line of any intersecting street.
(2) Five feet of a fire hydrant.
(3) Twenty-five feet of another driveway on the same property.
(4) Three feet of an adjoining property line.
D. Sight distances. A driveway must be located in safe relationship to sight
distance and barriers to vision as provided by the PennDOT standards
for safe stopping sight distances.
E. Slope. The driveway may not exceed a slope of 8% within 25 feet of the
street right-of-way line.
F. Paving. The portion of a driveway within a street right-of-way and for a
distance of 25 feet beyond that right-of-way shall be paved with a
concrete, bituminous, or other paving material acceptable to the
Township Engineer to prevent gravel or other loose material from being
carried onto the street.
§ 133-32 JACKSON CODE § 133-34
131:556
§ 133-35. Access drives.
G. Cuts. Where a driveway enters a bank through a cut, unless a retaining
wall is used, the shoulders of the cut may not exceed 50% in slope
within 25 feet of the point at which the drive intersects the street rightof-
way. The height of the bank must not exceed three feet within 10 feet
of the roadway.
H. All lots must have a separate driveway located on the lot which that
drive serves, i.e., one driveway may not serve more than one lot, except
for preexisting, land-locked lots of record.
A. Width. Access drives shall require a twenty-four-foot right-of-way. The
minimum pavement width for access drives shall be 24 feet (two twelvefoot
traffic lanes).
B. Number.
(1) The number of access drives may not exceed one per lot or tract on
any one street frontage. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant
permission by special exception for additional access drives where
required to meet exceptional circumstances and where frontage of
unusual length exists.
(2) Where access from an arterial or collector street may be necessary
for several adjoining lots, the Township may require that such lots
be served by one or more combined access drives to limit possible
traffic hazards on such streets.
C. Location and design. Access drives shall have the following
characteristics:
(1) The grade and vertical and horizontal alignment of access drives
shall conform to the specifications for minor streets as stated in
Article X of Chapter 113, Subdivision and Land Development.
(2) No part of an access drive shall be located closer than three feet to
a property line.
(3) At its intersection with a street, no part of any access drive shall be
nearer than 50 feet to the intersection of any two street right-ofway
lines.
(4) Sight distance. A driveway must be located in safe relationship to
sight distance and barriers to vision as provided by the PennDOT
standards for safe stopping sight distances.
D. Paving. All access drives shall be paved with concrete or a bituminous
paving material, unless another suitable paving material is approved by
the Township. All access drives must meet the minimum construction
and materials specifications of the Township; however, if special
conditions warrant, the Township may require more-stringent
provisions.
§ 133-34 WELLS § 133-36
131:557
§ 133-36. Illumination.
Where a use involves exterior lighting, the lighting must be so located and
shielded that no objectionable illumination or glare is cast upon adjoining
properties or any adjacent public street.
A. Applicability.
(1) Outdoor lighting shall be required for safety and personal security
for uses that operate or have activity during hours of darkness
where there is public assembly and traverse, including but not
limited to the following uses: residential developments containing
lot sizes of less than 20,000 square feet, residential developments
of greater than 10 lots, multifamily residential developments, and
commercial, industrial, municipal, recreational and institutional
uses.
(2) The Township Supervisors may require that lighting be
incorporated for other uses or locations or restrict lighting in any of
the above uses when deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes
of this chapter.
(3) The glare-control requirements herein contained apply to lighting
in all above-mentioned uses as well as but not limited to sign,
architectural, landscape, recreational and residential lighting.
(4) Temporary decorative lighting may be exempted from the
requirements of this chapter when approved by the Zoning Officer
for periods of short duration.
B. Criteria.
(1) Illumination levels
(a) Lighting, where required or permitted by this chapter, shall
have intensities and uniformity ratios in accordance with the
current recommended practices of the Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) as contained in
the IESNA Lighting Handbook or separately in IESNA
Recommended Practices.
(b) Future amendments to said recommended practices shall
become a part of this chapter without further action of the
Township.
(c) Examples of intensities for typical outdoor applications, as
extracted from the Lighting Handbook, are presented below
but are not all-inclusive:
§ 133-36 JACKSON CODE § 133-36
131:558
Use/Task
Maintained
Footcandle
Uniformity
Ratio
[1] Streets, local commercial 0.9 avg. 6:1
avg:min
Streets, local residential 0.4 avg. 4:1
avg:min
[2] Parking, multifamily residential:
* Low vehicular/pedestrian
activity
0.2 min. 4:1
avg:min*
* Medium vehicular/pedestrian
activity
0.6 min. 4:1
avg:min*
[3] Parking, industrial/commercial/
institutional/municipal
* High activity, e.g., regional
shopping centers/fast-food
facilities, major athletic/civic/
cultural events
0.9 min. 4:1
avg:min*
* Medium activity, e.g.,
community shopping centers,
office parks, hospitals,
commuter lots, cultural/civic/
recreational events
0.6 min. 4:1
avg:min*
* Low activity, e.g.,
neighborhood shopping,
industrial employee parking,
schools, church parking
0.2 min. 4:1
avg:min*
[4] Sidewalks, walkways, and
bikeways
* Commercial 1.0 avg. 5:1
avg:min
* Residential 0.5 avg. 5:1
avg:min
[5] Building entrances, commercial,
industrial, institutional
5.0 avg. —
[6] Service station pump islands 20.0 avg. 4:1
avg:min
[7] Car dealerships 20.0 max. 5:1
max:min
§ 133-36 WELLS § 133-36
131:559
NOTES:
1. Illumination levels are maintained horizontal footcandles
on the task, e.g., pavement or area surface.
2. Uniformity ratios dictate that average illuminance values
shall not exceed minimum values by more than the
product of the minimum value and the specified ratio, e.g.,
for high-activity commercial parking, the average
illuminance shall not exceed 3.6 footcandles (0.9 x 4).
* In no case shall the maximum to minimum uniformity ratio
for parking be in excess of 20:1.
(2) Lighting fixture design.
(a) Fixtures shall be of a type and design appropriate to the
lighting application and aesthetically acceptable to the
Township Supervisors.
(b) For the lighting of predominantly horizontal surfaces, such as
but not limited to, roadways, areas of vehicular and pedestrian
passage, loading areas, and parking areas, fixtures, whether
freestanding, wall-mounted, or any other type, shall be aimed
straight down and shall meet IESNA full-cutoff criteria.
(c) Where the use of fixtures meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria is
not practical or possible, fixtures shall be equipped with
aiming and/or light-redirecting devices, such as shields, visors,
baffles, skirts or hoods, when necessary to direct or redirect
offending light distribution.
(d) The use of floodlighting, spotlighting, noncutoff wall-mounted
fixtures, internally illuminated decorative globes and spheres,
lanterns and other fixtures not meeting IESNA full-cutoff
criteria shall be permitted only with the approval of the
Township, based upon acceptable justification and
achievement of adequate glare control.
(e) NEMA-head fixtures, also known as "barn lights" or "dusk-todawn
lights," shall not be permitted where they are visible
from other uses, unless fitted with a reflector or shield to
render them full-cutoff.
(3) Control of nuisance and disabling glare.
(a) All outdoor lighting, whether or not required by this chapter,
on private, residential, commercial, industrial, municipal,
recreational or institutional property shall be aimed, located,
designed, fitted and maintained so as not to present a hazard
to drivers or pedestrians by impairing their ability to safely
traverse and so as not to create a nuisance by projecting or
§ 133-36 JACKSON CODE § 133-36
131:560
§ 133-37. Demolition.
Demolition of any structure must be completed within 12 months of the
start of such demolition. Completion consists of tearing the structure down
to grade, filling any resulting cavity to grade and removing all resulting
debris from the lot. A structure may be partly demolished only if a building
remains and the demolition of the part is completed as required in the
previous sentence.
§ 133-38. Buildings under construction.
A building, the foundation of which was completed before the effective
date of this chapter, may be constructed without being bound by the
reflecting objectionable light onto a neighboring use or
property.
(b) The use of floodlights and spotlights shall be so installed or
aimed that they do not project their output beyond the
boundaries of the property on which they are located.
(c) Unless otherwise permitted by the Township Supervisors, e.g.,
for safety or security or businesses that operate all night or
past 11:00 p.m., lighting for commercial, industrial, municipal,
recreational and institutional applications shall be controlled
by automatic switching devices, such as time clocks or
combination motion detectors and photocells, to permit
reducing or extinguishing outdoor lighting fixtures between
11:00 p.m. and dawn to mitigate light trespass, nuisance glare
and skylighting consequences.
(d) Lighting proposed for use after 11:00 p.m., or after normal
hours of operation of a business, whichever is earlier, for
commercial, industrial, institutional or municipal applications
shall be reduced by at least 50% from then until dawn, unless
supporting a specific purpose and approved by the Township
Supervisors.
(e) All illumination for advertising signs, buildings and/or
surrounding landscapes for decorative, advertising or esthetic
purposes is prohibited between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise, except
that such lighting situated on the premises of a commercial
establishment may remain illuminated while the establishment
is actually open for business and until one hour after closing.
(f) Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the
primary means for controlling glare. Rather, glare control shall
be achieved primarily through the use of such means as cutoff
fixtures, shields and baffles, and appropriate application of
fixture-mounting height, wattage, aiming angle and fixture
placement.
§ 133-36 WELLS § 133-38
131:561
requirements of this chapter, provided that the construction is completed
within one year after the effective date of this chapter. In like manner, a
building, the foundation of which was completed before an amendment, may
be constructed if the construction is completed within one year after the
amendment.
§ 133-39. Division of developed lots.
No lot may be formed from part of a lot occupied by a building unless the
remaining portion of the original lot and each newly created lot will meet all
the applicable provisions of this chapter and Chapter 113, Subdivision and
Land Development.
§ 133-40. Lots of record.
On a lot held in single and separate ownership on the effective date of this
chapter or any amendment thereto that does not fulfill the regulations for
the minimum lot area or lot width for the zone in which it is located, a
building may be erected, altered, and used and the lot may be used for a
conforming (permitted) use, provided that the setback requirements are not
less than the minimum specified herein for the lots in that zone.
§ 133-41. Nonconformities.
A. Continuance.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, the lawful use of land
or buildings existing at the date of the adoption of this chapter may
be continued, even though such use of land or building does not
conform to the use regulations specified by this chapter for the
zone in which such land or building is located.
(2) Any nonconforming lot or structure lawfully existing at the date of
the adoption of this chapter may be continued.
B. Expansion or alteration.
(1) Upon application for a special exception, and in accordance with
the provisions of Articles V and VI, the Zoning Hearing Board may
approve the expansion of a use of land or building that is not in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Any alteration that will reduce the extent of a nonconformity shall
not require the approval of a special exception.
C. Replacement.
(1) A nonconforming use, if discontinued or abandoned for a period of
one year, may be replaced only by a conforming use.
(2) A dimensional nonconformity may be replaced only in conformance
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 133-38 JACKSON CODE § 133-41
131:562
§ 133-42. Lot width modification.
The minimum lot width for residential properties abutting the turnaround
circle of a cul-de-sac street may be calculated at the minimum front setback
line rather than the street line, but in no case shall the lot width at the street
line be less than 50 feet.
§ 133-43. Status of subdivision or land development plan.
D. Restoration. If any nonconformity is destroyed by reason of windstorm,
fire, explosion or other act of God or a public enemy to an extent of
more than 75% of the market value as appraised for tax assessment
purposes, then such destruction shall be deemed complete destruction,
and the nonconformity may not be rebuilt, restored, or repaired except
upon issuance of a variance in accordance with § 133-53 of this chapter.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition of any wall, floor or roof that has been declared unsafe.
E. Discontinuance or abandonment. A nonconforming use shall be
adjudged as discontinued or abandoned when there occurs a cessation
of any such use or activity by an apparent act or failure to act on the
part of the tenant or owner to reinstate such use within a period of one
year from the date of cessation or discontinuance. Such use shall not
thereafter be reinstated and the structure shall not be reoccupied
except in conformance with this chapter.
F. Reversion. No nonconformity shall, if once changed to conform to the
regulations of this chapter, be changed back again to a nonconformity.
G. Zone changes. Whenever the boundaries of a zone shall be changed so
as to transfer an area from one zone to another zone of a different
classification, the foregoing provisions shall also apply to any
nonconforming uses or dimensional nonconformities existing therein or
created thereby.
H. Identification and registration. Nonconforming uses and
nonconforming structures may be identified and registered by the
Zoning Officer.
A. From the time an application for approval of a subdivision or land
development plan, whether preliminary or final, is duly filed as provided
in Chapter 113, Subdivision and Land Development, and while such
application is pending approval or disapproval, no change or
amendment of this chapter shall adversely affect the applicant. The
applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance with the Zoning
Ordinance as it stood at the time the application was duly filed. In
addition, when a preliminary application has been duly approved, the
applicant shall be entitled to final approval in accordance with the
terms of the approved preliminary application as hereinafter provided.
However, if an application is properly and finally denied, any
§ 133-41 WELLS § 133-43
131:563
§ 133-44. Sale of agricultural commodities.
The retail sale of agricultural commodities is permitted in the AP, RC, or C
Zone on the property where they were produced as long as the seller is an
occupant of the property on which the products are sold and the sale of such
products is clearly accessory to the principal use.
§ 133-45. Display units and/or vending machines.
No newspaper sales machines, vending machines, or any type of display unit
may be placed on a public sidewalk or other public right-of-way.
§ 133-46. Storage receptacles, dumpsters, and other waste
receptacles.
§ 133-47. Forestry.
subsequent application shall be subject to the intervening change in
this chapter.
B. When a preliminary or final subdivision or land development plan has
been approved or approved subject to conditions acceptable to the
applicant, no subsequent enactment or amendment in this chapter or
the plan shall be applied to affect adversely the right of the applicant to
commence and to complete any aspect of the approved development in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.119
A. Location. Dumpsters and other waste receptacles for regular, long-term
use are not permitted on public rights-of-way or public sidewalks but
may be placed on a lot if such receptacles are not located in or on any
required parking area. Such devices shall be included in calculated lot
coverage.
B. Screening. Dumpsters and waste receptacles for regular, long-term use
must be screened from the view of adjacent Residential, Village, or
Agricultural Protection Zones and residential uses.
C. Temporary storage receptacles, dumpsters, and waste receptacles may
be placed on a lot for no more than 60 days. Such receptacles are not
permitted on public rights-of-way or public sidewalks unless there are
special circumstances that are approved by the Township Zoning
Officer.
A. Intent. It is the intent of the following regulations to conserve forested
open space and its environmental, economic, recreation, wildlife and
amenity values by promoting good forest stewardship; to protect the
rights of adjoining property owners; and to minimize the potential for
adverse environmental impacts.
119. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 133-43 JACKSON CODE § 133-47
131:564
B. Applicability. Forestry activities, including timber harvesting, shall be a
permitted use by right in all zoning districts. These regulations apply to
all timber harvesting within the Township where the project area
exceeds two acres for clear-cutting operations and five acres for
selective cutting operations. These provisions do not apply to the
cutting of trees for the personal use of the landowner or for
precommercial timber stand improvement. These provisions apply to
privately and publicly owned property. These provisions apply to any
site where there will be clearing of trees for any purpose, if lumber will
be removed from the site.
C. Notification and preparation of a logging plan.
(1) Notification of commencement or completion. For all timber
harvesting operations with a project area exceeding two acres for
clear-cutting operations and five acres for selective cutting
operations, the landowner shall notify the Zoning Officer at least 10
business days before the operation commences and within five
business days before the operation is complete. No timber
harvesting shall occur until the notice has been provided.
Notification shall be in writing and shall specify the land on which
harvesting will occur, the expected size of the harvest area, and, as
applicable, the anticipated starting or completion date of the
operation.
(2) Logging plan. Every landowner on whose land timber harvesting is
to occur shall have a written logging plan in the form specified by
this chapter. No timber harvesting shall occur until the plan has
been prepared. The provisions of the plan shall be followed
throughout the operation. The plan shall be available at the harvest
site at all times during the operation and shall be provided to the
Zoning Officer upon request. The plan shall incorporate best
management practices (BMPs) for forestry found in the
publications Best Management Practices for Pennsylvania Forests,
Best Management Practices for Silvicultural Activities in
Pennsylvania's Forest Wetlands, and Controlling Erosion and
Sedimentation from Timber Harvesting Operations.
(3) Responsibility for compliance. The landowner and the operator
shall be jointly and severally responsible for complying with the
terms of the logging plan.
D. Contents of the logging plan.
(1) Minimum requirements. As a minimum, the logging plan shall
include the following:
(a) Design, construction, maintenance, and retirement of the
access system, including haul roads, skid roads, skid trails, and
landings.
§ 133-47 WELLS § 133-47
131:565
(b) Design, construction, and maintenance of water-control
measures and structures, such as culverts, broad-based dips,
filter strips, and water bars.
(c) Design, construction, and maintenance of stream and wetland
crossings.
(d) The general location of the proposed operation in relation to
municipal and state highways, including any accesses to those
highways.
(2) Map. Each logging plan shall include a sketch map or drawing
containing the following information:
(a) Site location and boundaries, including both the boundaries of
the property on which the timber harvest will take place and
the boundaries of the proposed harvest area within that
property;
(b) Significant topographic features related to potential
environmental problems;
(c) Location of all earth-disturbance activities, such as roads,
landings, and water-control measures and structures;
(d) Location of all crossings of waters of the commonwealth;
(e) The general location of the proposed operation to municipal
and state highways, including any accesses to those highways.
(3) Compliance with state law. The logging plan shall address and
comply with the requirements of all applicable state regulations,
including but not limited to the following:
(a) Erosion and sedimentation control regulations contained in
Title 25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102, promulgated
pursuant to the Clean Streams Law (35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.). An
erosion and sedimentation plan shall be on-site and shall be
approved by the York County Conservation District when
required.
(b) Stream crossing and wetlands protection regulations
contained in Title 25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 105,
promulgated pursuant to the Dam Safety and Encroachments
Act (32 P.S.§ 693.1 et seq.).
(4) Relationships of state laws, regulations, and permits to the logging
plan. Any permits required by state laws and regulations shall be
attached to and become part of the logging plan. An erosion and
sedimentation pollution control plan that satisfies the requirements
of Title 25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102, shall also satisfy the
requirements for the logging plan and associated map specified in
§ 133-47 JACKSON CODE § 133-47
131:566
Subsection D(3)(a) and (b) of this section, provided that all
information required by those subsections is included or attached.
E. Forest practices. The following requirements shall apply to all timber
harvesting operations in the Township:
(1) Felling or skidding on or across any public thoroughfare is
prohibited without the express written consent of the Township or
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, whichever is
responsible for maintenance of the thoroughfare.
(2) No tops or slash shall be left within 25 feet of any public
thoroughfare or private roadway providing access to adjoining
residential property.
(3) All tops and slash between 25 and 50 feet from a public roadway or
private roadway providing access to adjoining residential property
or within 50 feet of adjoining residential property shall be lopped to
a maximum height of four feet above the ground.
(4) No tops or slash shall be left on or across the boundary of any
property adjoining the operation without the consent of the owner
thereof.
(5) Litter resulting from a timber harvesting operation shall be
removed from the site before it is vacated by the operator.
(6) Skid trail, skid road, haul road, and landing area design shall be
consistent with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection guidelines.
(7) Routes using municipal roads shall be approved by the Township
Supervisors. The Supervisors will also set the maximum gross
weight permissible on municipal roads.
(8) Hours during which harvesting can occur are subject to the
approval of the Township Supervisors.
(9) Landing or staging areas and haul or skid roads shall be restored
and reseeded after the harvest is complete. Site access roads shall
be closed to the general public.
F. Responsibility for road maintenance and repair; road bonding. Pursuant
to Title 75 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, Chapter 49; and
Title 67 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 189, the landowner and the
operator shall be responsible for repairing any damage to municipal
roads caused by traffic associated with the timber harvesting operation
to the extent the damage is in excess of that caused by normal traffic
and may be required to furnish a bond to guarantee the repair of such
damages. No mud or debris shall remain on public roads.
G. Enforcement.
§ 133-47 WELLS § 133-47
131:567
§ 133-48. Private mailboxes.
(1) The Zoning Officer or other party designated by the Township
Supervisors shall be the enforcement officer for this section.
(2) Inspections. The Zoning Officer or other designated party may go
upon the site of any timber harvesting operation before, during, or
after active logging to:
(a) Review the logging plan or any other required documents for
compliance with this section; and
(b) Inspect the operation for compliance with the logging plan and
other on-site requirements of these regulations.
A. Private mailboxes and/or newspaper tubes are permitted, provided that
no portion of the mailbox and/or newspaper tube or supporting
structure shall extend beyond the back edge of the street curb where
curbs are installed. Along streets with no curb, no portion of the
mailbox and/or newspaper tube shall extend to within two feet of the
cartway edge.
B. If a property utilizes a curbside mailbox for mail delivery, said mailbox
must comply with the manufacturer's specifications under the United
States Postal Service (USPS) Standard 7 (Mailboxes, City and Rural
Curbside). The box should bear the Township-designated street address
and may bear the owner's name and street name. Advertising on the
boxes or supports is prohibited, with the exception of newspaper names
on delivery tubes attached to mailbox supports.
C. Curbside mailbox supports must meet the height criteria established by
the USPS. Any pole recommended by the manufacturers of mailboxes
conforming to the appropriate governmental regulations shall be
acceptable. Support structures that do not conform to postal
regulations are prohibited. A pole or post providing the equivalent
support or size of a wood 6 x 6 inch post shall represent the maximum
support allowed for a mailbox. Box supports designed to prevent
vandalism by providing protection from destruction rather than support
of the box are not permitted on the right-of-way of streets, roads, and
highways within the Township.
D. Any existing mailbox structure otherwise prohibited that is located in
the right-of-way of any road in the Township shall be permitted to
remain if found not to be a traffic hazard by the Township Engineer. A
mailbox structure shall be classified as a traffic hazard if one or more of
the following conditions apply:
(1) It is located so to obstruct any part of a clear sight triangle at or
within 75 feet of any intersection.
§ 133-47 JACKSON CODE § 133-48
131:568
§ 133-49. Alternative energy requirements.
(2) It is located in the vicinity of a road curve so that the inertia of a
motor vehicle that fails to negotiate the curve could cause it to
collide with the structure.
(3) If the structure impairs the view of approaching traffic or of any
traffic signs, markings, or signals.
(4) The structure is so close to the cartway to present a threat of
collision to oversize loads and bicyclists traveling along the road or
berm of the road.
A. Intent. The alternative energy requirements are designed to recognize
the need for conservation of energy and natural resources to facilitate
the utilization of renewable resources. These regulations are designed
to allow the installation of renewable energy devices and provide the
opportunity for individuals to reduce energy dependence by
encouraging the productive use of solar and wind energy components.
B. Definitions. The following terms are specifically designed for use within
this section:
ACTIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system that
requires external mechanical power to move collected heat.
ENERGY STORAGE FACILITY — Equipment consisting of containers,
heat exchangers, piping, and other transfer mechanisms (including
fluids, gases, or solids), controls, and related structural support for
transporting and storing collected energy (from solar energy systems),
including structural elements designed for use in passive solar energy
systems.
PASSIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system that uses
natural and architectural components to collect and store energy
without using any external mechanical power.
SOLAR COLLECTOR — A freestanding or fixed device, or combination
of devices, structures, or part of a device or structure that transforms
direct solar energy into thermal, chemical, or electrical energy that
contributes significantly to a structure's energy supply.
SOLAR ENERGY — Radiant energy (direct, diffused and reflected)
received from the sun.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A complete design or assembly consisting
of a solar energy collector, an energy storage facility (where used), and
components for the distribution of transformed energy.
SKYSPACE — The open space between a solar or wind collector and the
sun or prevailing wind that must be free of obstructions that may shade
or impede the collector to an extent that would reduce its cost-effective
operation.
§ 133-48 WELLS § 133-49
131:569
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM — A device that converts wind
energy to mechanical or electrical energy; commonly referred to as
"windmills."
WIND ROTOR — The blades, and hub to which the blades are attached,
that are used to capture wind for the purpose of energy conversion.
The wind rotor is used on a pole or tower along with other generating
and electrical storage equipment and forms a wind energy conversion
system.
C. Solar, wind and alternate energy standards. The use of solar, wind and
alternate energy systems is encouraged within these regulations and
permitted within any zoning district. Although the installation of such
systems is not mandatory, where they are utilized, the following shall
apply:
(1) Active and passive solar systems, wind energy systems and similar
alternate energy systems, including customary energy storage
accessories, shall be permitted for the production, collection,
movement, distribution or storage of heated water, air or other
medium that is intended for conveyance to a principal or accessory
building. Systems may include the following, subject to the
requirements contained herein:
(a) Solar panels with a combined glazing area of 65 square feet or
less may be placed in any required yard but shall not be closer
than two feet from any property line.
(b) Solar panels with a combined glazing area in excess of 65
square feet, provided that:
[1] Solar panels attached to a principal structure shall comply
with the zoning setbacks prescribed for a principal
structure in the applicable zoning district.
[2] Solar panels that are freestanding or attached to an
accessory structure shall comply with the accessory
structure requirements of this chapter.
(c) Solar greenhouses attached to principal structures shall meet
all yard requirements for a principal structure in the applicable
zoning district. Solar greenhouses attached to accessory
structures shall meet all yard requirements specified for
accessory structures in this chapter.
(d) Detached solar greenhouses shall meet all yard requirements
specified for accessory structures in this chapter.
(e) Wind energy conversion systems, provided that:
[1] The structure supporting the wind rotor unit shall be
located a minimum distance of 1,500 feet from any
§ 133-49 JACKSON CODE § 133-49
131:570
residential structure. The height of such structures shall
not exceed 75 feet.
[2] Towers may be ground- or roof-mounted and shall be
securely fastened as per manufacturer's specifications or a
demonstrable equivalent to achieve maximum safety and
prevent collapse or fall. Any propeller or turning device
that reacts to wind velocity shall have a governor to
control the speed of revolutions. Such governor may
include a rudder that turns the propeller away from the
wind, individually spring-mounted paddles that turn away
from the wind, or other suitable manufacturer's device.
Towers shall be locked or secured to prevent unauthorized
access, and in no case shall a permanently mounted ladder
be affixed less than 10 feet from grade level.
D. Protection and maintenance. The improvements required and
permitted within this section shall be protected and maintained to
ensure the environmental benefits of nonpolluting, replenishable
alternate energy. The following requirements shall apply:
(1) Protection.
(a) Where a solar or wind energy system has been installed to
serve an existing structure, it shall be the responsibility of the
property owner to secure any easements or restrictive
covenants necessary to protect the skyspace affecting the solar
or wind energy system. Such an agreement shall be negotiated
between owners of affected properties, but it is not a
requirement for approval of a building and zoning permit for
the solar or wind energy system.
(b) Maximum height requirements of this chapter shall not apply
to roof-mounted solar collector systems.
(2) Maintenance.
(a) Energy systems shall be maintained in a safe manner. Broken
glass or other potentially hazardous conditions shall be
promptly repaired.
(b) A disconnected or abandoned energy system shall be
dismantled and removed from the property within 60 days of
such abandonment.
E. Plans and permits.
(1) Plans depicting solar or wind energy installations shall be
submitted at the time of application for a building and proposed use
permit. Information may be included on the required plot plan
specified in this chapter or submitted on a separate plan. In
§ 133-49 WELLS § 133-49
131:571
§ 133-50. Prohibited uses.
addition to the information required elsewhere within this chapter,
plans shall include:
(a) Exact size and location of proposed solar or wind energy
conversion system.
(b) Any associated apparatus, structures, or architectural features
necessary for the efficient operation of a solar or wind energy
device.
(2) Building and proposed use permits. A building and proposed use
permit shall be required for installation of, expansion of or
alteration to any of the energy systems described within this
section. Applicable procedures of this chapter shall apply during
the processing of such permit applications. Where desired, the
Zoning Officer may refer plans to any other applicable agencies for
review and comment prior to formal action on the permit
application.
A. No building or structure may be erected, altered, or used and no lot or
premises may be used for any activity which is noxious, injurious, or
offensive by reason of dust, smoke, odor, fumes, noise, vibration, gas,
effluent discharge, illumination, or similar substances or conditions.
B. No land or structures in any zoning district shall be used or occupied in
any manner that creates any nuisance in a manner or an amount that
will adversely affect the reasonable use or value of the surrounding
area or adjoining premises or be dangerous to public health or safety.
C. No building or structure may be erected within a street right-of-way
except for official traffic signs, utility poles, streetlights, street signs,
United States Postal Service mailboxes, and other similar structures
approved by the Township Supervisors. No decorative pillars, statuary,
or gates are permitted within the street right-of-way.
§ 133-49 JACKSON CODE § 133-50
131:572
ARTICLE V
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 133-51. Membership; organization; powers and duties.
A. Membership of Board.
(1) The membership of the Board shall, upon the determination of the
Board of Supervisors, consist of either three or five residents of the
Township appointed by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. The
terms of office of a three-member board shall be three years and
shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire
each year. The terms of office of a five-member board shall be five
years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member
shall expire each year. If a three-member board is changed to a fivemember
board, the members of the existing three-member board
shall continue in office until their term of office expires under prior
law. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint two additional
members to the Zoning Hearing Board with terms scheduled to
expire in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. The
Zoning Hearing Board shall promptly notify the Board of
Supervisors of any vacancies that occur. Appointments to fill
vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term.
Members of the Board shall hold no other office in the Township.
(2) The Board of Supervisors may appoint by resolution at least one but
no more than three residents of the Township to serve as alternate
members of the Zoning Hearing Board. The term of office of an
alternate member shall be three years. When seated pursuant to
the provisions of Subsection B, an alternate shall be entitled to
participate in all proceedings and discussions of the Board to the
same and full extent as provided by law for Board members,
including specifically the right to cast a vote as a voting member
during the proceedings, and shall have all the powers and duties
set forth in this section and as otherwise provided by law.
Alternates shall hold no other office in the Township. Any alternate
may participate in any proceeding or discussion of the Board but
shall not be entitled to vote as a member of the Board or be
compensated pursuant to Section 907 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended,120 unless
designated as a voting alternate member pursuant to Subsection B.
B. Organization of Board.
(1) The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who
shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For
the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum
shall be not less than a majority of all the members of the Board,
but the Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own
120. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10907.
§ 133-51 WELLS § 133-51
131:573
membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf, and the parties
may waive further action by the Board as provided in § 133-52.
(2) If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum
is not reached, the Chairman of the Board shall designate as many
alternate members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be
needed to provide a quorum. Any alternate member of the Board
shall continue to serve on the Board in all proceedings involving the
matter or case for which the alternate was initially appointed until
the Board has made a final determination of the matter or case.
Designation of an alternate pursuant to this subsection shall be
made on a case-by-case basis in rotation according to declining
seniority among all alternates.
(3) The Board may make, alter, and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of Jackson Township and
laws of the commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records
of its business, which records shall be the property of the
Township, and shall submit a report of its activities to the Board of
Supervisors once a year.
C. Powers. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
hear and render final decisions in the following matters:
(1) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,
except those brought before the Board of Supervisors pursuant to
Sections 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.121
(2) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption, which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of said chapter.
(3) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including but
not limited to the granting or denial of any permit or failure to act
on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease-and-desist
order, or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming
use, structure, or lot.
(4) Appeals from a determination by the Township Engineer or the
Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of any
floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such provision within a land
use ordinance.
(5) Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter and the
flood hazard ordinance122 or such provisions within a land use
ordinance, pursuant to § 133-53.
121. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.1 and 10916.1.
122. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Floodplain Management.
§ 133-51 JACKSON CODE § 133-51
131:574
§ 133-52. Public hearings.
(6) Applications for special exceptions under this chapter or the
floodplain or flood hazard ordinance123 or such provision within a
land use ordinance, pursuant to § 133-54.
(7) Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged
with the administration of any transfers of development rights or
performance density provision of this chapter.
(8) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under Section
916.2, Procedure to Obtain Preliminary Opinion, of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as reenacted
and amended.124
(9) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Township
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance, or
provision thereof, with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management, insofar as the same is related
to development not involving subdivision and land development or
planned residential development applications.
D. Board calendar. Each application or appeal filed in the proper form with
the required data must be numbered serially and be placed upon the
calendar of the Board by the Zoning Officer. Applications and appeals
must be assigned for hearing in the order in which they appear on the
calendar. However, for good reason, the Board may order the advance
of the application or appeal. A hearing must be held within 60 days from
the date of the applicant's request, unless the applicant has agreed, in
writing, to an extension of time.
A. Notice; conduct of meeting.
(1) Public written notice shall be given to the applicant, the Zoning
Officer, to each property owner within 200 feet of the property
involved, and to any person who, at least two weeks prior to the
scheduled hearing, has made request for the same. Written notices
shall be given at such time and in such manner as shall be
prescribed by ordinance or, in the absence of ordinance provisions,
by rules of the Board. In addition to the written notice provided
herein, written notice of the hearing shall be conspicuously posted
on the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing.
(2) The Board of Supervisors may prescribe reasonable fees with
respect to hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said
hearings may include notice and advertising costs and necessary
administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs,
however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing
123. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Floodplain Management.
124. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 133-51 WELLS § 133-52
131:575
Board, expenses for engineering, architectural, or other technical
consultants or expert witness costs.
(3) The first hearing before the Board or hearing officer shall
commence within 60 days from the date of receipt of the applicant's
application, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an
extension of time. Each subsequent hearing before the Board or
hearing officer shall be held within 45 days of the prior hearing,
unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the
record. An applicant shall complete the presentation of his case-inchief
within 100 days of the first hearing. Upon the request of the
applicant, the Board or hearing officer shall ensure that the
applicant receives at least seven hours of hearings within the 100
days, including the first hearing. Persons opposed to the
application shall complete the presentation of their opposition to
the application within 100 days of the first hearing held after the
completion of the applicant's case-in-chief. An applicant may, upon
request, be granted additional hearings to complete the case-inchief,
provided that the persons opposed to the application are
granted an equal number of additional hearings. Persons opposed
to the application may, upon the written consent or consent on the
record by the applicant and Township, be granted additional
hearings to complete their opposition to the application, provided
that the applicant is granted an equal number of additional
hearings for rebuttal.
(4) The hearings shall be conducted by the Board, or the Board may
appoint any member as a hearing officer. The decision or, where no
decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Board;
however, the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in
addition to the Township, may, prior to the decision of the hearing,
waive decision or findings by the Board and accept the decision of
the hearing officer as final. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply,
but irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence may be
excluded.
(5) The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with
any issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all
parties to participate; shall not take notice of any communication,
reports, staff memoranda, or other materials, except advice from
the Board's Solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity
to contest the material so noticed; and shall not inspect the site or
its surroundings with any party or his representative unless all
parties are given an opportunity to be present.
B. Representation; statements. Parties to the hearings shall be the
Township, any person affected by the application who has made timely
appearance of record before the Board, and any other person, including
civic or community organizations, permitted to appear by the Board.
The Board shall have the power to require that all persons who wish to
§ 133-52 JACKSON CODE § 133-52
131:576
be considered parties enter appearances, in writing, on forms provided
by the Board for that purpose.
(1) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
(2) Statements are to be made in the following order or as the
Chairman may direct:
(a) Applicant or appellant.
(b) Zoning Officer and other officials.
(c) Any private citizen.
(3) The applicant or appellant must be given an opportunity for
rebuttal.
C. Witnesses. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the
hearing officer presiding shall have the power to administer oaths and
issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and
documents requested by the parties.
D. Decision procedure.
(1) The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing
before the Board or hearing officer. Where the application is
contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by
findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, together with the
reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of this
chapter or of any ordinance, rule, or regulation shall contain a
reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the
conclusion is deemed appropriate in light of the facts found. If the
hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, and there has been no
stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Board shall
make its report and recommendations available to the parties
within 45 days, the parties shall be entitled to make written
representations thereon to the Board prior to the final decision or
entry of findings, and the Board's decision shall be entered no later
than 30 days after the report of the hearing officer. Except for
challenges filed under Section 916.1 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code,125 where the Board fails to render
the decision within the period required by this subsection or fails to
commence, conduct, or complete the required hearing as provided
in § 133-52A of this chapter, the decision shall be deemed to have
125. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.1.
§ 133-52 WELLS § 133-52
131:577
§ 133-53. Variances.
been rendered in favor of the applicant, unless the applicant has
agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time
(2) When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant
because of the failure of the Board to meet or render a decision as
hereinabove provided, the Board shall give public notice of said
decision within 10 days from the last day it could have met to
render a decision in the same manner as provided in Subsection A
of this section. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right
of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(3) A copy of the final decision of the findings shall be delivered to the
applicant personally or mailed to him or her, even if no decision is
called for, not later than the day following the date of the decision.
A copy of said decision shall also be delivered or mailed to the
Township Zoning Officer in the same manner as noted for the
applicant. To all other persons who have filed their name and
address with the Board not later than the last day of the hearing,
the Board shall provide, by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the
decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full
decision or findings may be examined.
(4) Whenever the Board imposes a condition or conditions with respect
to the granting of an application or appeal, this condition must be
stated in the order of the Board and in the permit issued pursuant
to the order by the Zoning Officer. This permit remains valid only as
long as the condition or conditions upon which it was granted or
the conditions imposed by this chapter are adhered to.
E. Records. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall
keep a stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for
a stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing officer, or shall be paid by
the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is
made; and in either event, the cost of additional copies shall be paid by
the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
A. Filing of variance.
(1) An application may be made to the Zoning Hearing Board for a
variance where it is alleged that the provisions of this chapter
inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The application
must be made on a form provided for that purpose by the Zoning
Officer. It must be filed with the Board and copies given to the
Zoning Officer and Township Planning Commission. The applicant
must provide all the information requested on the form, together
§ 133-52 JACKSON CODE § 133-53
131:578
§ 133-54. Special exceptions.
with any other information and data that may be required to advise
the Board of the variance, whether such information is called for by
the official form or not.
(2) Unless otherwise specified or extended by the Board, a variance
authorized by it expires if the applicant fails to obtain a building
permit or use certificate within six months from the date of the
decision authorizing the variance.
B. Referral to Planning Commission. All applications for a variance shall
be referred to the Planning Commission for a report.
C. Standards for variance. Where there is unnecessary hardship, the
Board may grant a variance in the application of the provisions of this
chapter, provided that the following findings are made:
(1) There are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape or
exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to
the particular property and that the unnecessary hardship is due to
such conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally
created by the provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or
zone in which the property is located.
(2) Because of such physical circumstances or conditions, no
possibility exists that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(3) The unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.
(4) The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of
the neighborhood or zone in which the property is located or
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property or be detrimental to the public
welfare.
(5) The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance
that will afford relief and represent the least modification possible
of the regulation in issue.
D. Conditions. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of this chapter.
A. Filing of special exceptions.
(1) For any use permitted by special exception, a special exception
must be obtained from the Zoning Hearing Board. In addition to the
§ 133-53 WELLS § 133-54
131:579
information required on the building permit application, the special
exception application must show:
(a) Ground-floor plans and elevations of proposed structures.
(b) Names and addresses of adjoining owners.
(2) Unless otherwise specified or extended by the Zoning Hearing
Board, a special exception authorized by the Board expires if the
applicant fails to obtain, where required to do so, a building permit
or use certificate within six months of the date of the authorization
of the special exception.
B. Temporary special exceptions. A temporary special exception must be
obtained from the Zoning Hearing Board for any nonconformity that is,
or will be, seasonal or temporary.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a temporary special
exception for a nonconforming use or structure, existing or new,
that is beneficial to the public health or general welfare or
necessary to promote the proper development of the community
and is seasonal in nature.
(2) The temporary special exception may be issued for a period not
exceeding one year and may be renewed for an aggregate period
not exceeding three years. The nonconforming structure or use
must be completely removed upon the expiration of the special
exception, without cost to the Township.
C. Referral to Planning Commission. All applications for a special
exception shall be referred to the Township Planning Commission for a
review.
D. Conditions. The Zoning Hearing Board, in passing upon special
exception applications, may attach conditions considered necessary to
protect the public welfare and the Comprehensive Plan, including
conditions that are more restrictive than those established for other
uses in the same zone.
E. Application of extent-of-use regulations. The extent-of-use regulations
as set forth in this chapter must be followed by the Zoning Hearing
Board. Where no extent-of-use regulations are set forth for the
particular use, the Board must impose extent-of-use requirements as
necessary to protect the public welfare and the Comprehensive Plan.
F. The Zoning Hearing Board may issue, upon application, only such
special exceptions that the Board, by the provisions of this chapter, is
specifically authorized to issue. The granting of a special exception
when specifically authorized by the terms of this chapter shall be
subject to the following standards and criteria. The applicant for a
special exception shall demonstrate, as a condition to approval of his or
§ 133-54 JACKSON CODE § 133-54
131:580
her application, compliance with these criteria and those criteria
specified elsewhere in this chapter for the use in question.
(1) Such use shall be one that is specifically authorized as a use by
special exception in the zoning district wherein the applicant seeks
a special exception. The use shall meet all applicable regulations of
this chapter.
(2) Such special exception shall only be granted subject to any
applicable conditions and safeguards as required by this chapter.
(3) Such use shall not adversely affect the character of the general
neighborhood, the conservation of property values, the health and
safety of residents or workers on adjacent properties and in the
general neighborhood, or the reasonable use of neighboring
properties. The use of adjacent properties shall be adequately
safeguarded.
(4) Such use shall be of such size and so located and laid out in relation
to its access streets that vehicular and pedestrian traffic to and
from such use will not create undue congestion or hazards
prejudicial to the general neighborhood. The surrounding streets
shall be sufficient to accommodate any expected increase in traffic
generated by the proposed use.
(5) Services and utilities, such as water supply, sewage disposal, and
stormwater drainage, shall be made available to adequately service
the proposed use by the applicant.
(6) There shall be control of the development of highway frontage so as
to limit the number of points for ingress and egress and consider
their location with due regard for safety factors.
(7) Consideration shall be given to the desirability of the proposed
location of an industrial or commercial use with respect to probable
effects upon street or highway traffic and assurance of adequate
access arrangements to protect against undue traffic congestion
and hazard.
(8) Consideration shall be given to such other considerations as may
be set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended, from time to time.
(9) The proposed use shall not have an adverse effect upon the logical
and economic extension of public services and facilities, such as
public water, sewer, police and fire protection, and public schools.
(10) The proposed use does not impair the achievement of any Township
Comprehensive Plan. In granting a special exception, the Board
may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition
to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of this chapter and the Pennsylvania
§ 133-54 WELLS § 133-54
131:581
§ 133-55. Procedures for application to the Zoning Hearing Board.
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, which conditions may
include but are not limited to harmonious design of buildings,
planting and maintenance of shrubbery or trees as a sight or sound
barrier, and the minimizing of potentially noxious, offensive, or
hazardous elements.
G. The Zoning Hearing Board shall exercise any other power specifically
granted to the Board under the terms of this chapter or the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
H. The applicant for a special exception shall have the burden of proof,
which shall include the burden of going forward with the evidence, and
the burden of persuasion on all questions of fact which are to be
determined by the Zoning Hearing Board.
I. Special standards. In addition to the general standards for all special
exceptions as contained in § 133-54F, the specific standards for
particular uses as listed in Article VI must be met prior to the granting
of a special exception.
A. The Board shall act in accordance with the procedures specified by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,126 and by this
chapter. All appeals and applications made to the Board shall be in
writing, on forms prescribed by the Board. Every appeal or application
shall refer to the specific provision of this chapter involved and shall
exactly set forth the interpretation that is claimed, the grounds for any
challenges to the validity of this chapter, the use for which a special
exception is sought, or the details of the variance that is applied for, and
the grounds on which it is claimed that the variance should be granted,
as the case may be. All appeals and any stay of proceedings shall be in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended.
B. Applications and appeals, together with the required filing fee as
established by the Township Supervisors, shall be submitted to the
Zoning Officer. As a minimum, all material required for a proposed use
permit shall be submitted with the application. The applicant shall also
submit a description of the operations proposed in sufficient detail to
indicate the effects of those operations proposed in producing traffic
congestion, noise, glare, water pollution, fire hazards, safety hazards,
or other potentially harmful activities.
126. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 133-54 JACKSON CODE § 133-56
131:582
§ 133-56. Submission of applications for special exceptions and
variances to Township Supervisors.
The Zoning Officer shall forward a copy of any application for a special
exception or variance to the Township Board of Supervisors prior to the
hearing held by the Zoning Hearing Board on such application.
§ 133-56 WELLS § 133-56
131:583

ARTICLE VI
Standards for Special Exception Uses
§ 133-57. Requirement of specific standards.
In addition to the general standards for all special exceptions as contained
in § 133-54, the specific standards for the particular uses allowed by special
exception are set forth in this article. These standards must be met prior to
the granting by the Zoning Hearing Board of a special exception for such
uses in applicable zones.
§ 133-57.1. Accessory dwelling unit. [Added 6-7-2016 by Ord. No.
210-16]
In any zone where a single-family detached dwelling is permitted and
subject to the requirements of that zone, except as herein modified and
provided, an accessory dwelling unit is permitted by special exception:
A. Addition of one dwelling unit.
(1) A single-family detached dwelling unit may be constructed or
converted and may allow a second kitchen to provide one additional
dwelling unit for a family member. For the purposes of this section,
the term "provide" shall mean either the accessory dwelling unit
shall be constructed completely within an existing principal
building or by an addition to the original single-family detached
dwelling, provided the addition meets all setback and coverage
requirements. For the purpose of this section, family member(s)
shall include and be restricted to the following family relationship
to a record owner of the property:
(a) Grandparent(s) over 65, or under 65 with a medical necessity.
(b) Parent(s) over 65, or under 65 with a medical necessity.
(c) Children or grandchildren, either with a medical necessity.
(d) Sibling with a medical necessity
(2) Proof of a medical necessity, in the form of a letter from a doctor or
physician, shall be provided to the Zoning Officer at the time of
application and shall be verified in January of each year of duration
of the special exception.
B. A special exception issued under this section shall expire at the time the
family members for whom the special exception has been granted
vacate the property as their primary residence. Upon expiration of the
special exception, the second kitchen shall be removed from the
accessory dwelling unit. The principal single-family detached dwelling
in question shall be owner-occupied during the duration of the special
exception, proof of which shall be supplied on an annual basis in the
month of January to the Zoning Officer.
§ 133-57 WELLS § 133-57.1
131:585
C. Under no circumstance shall there be more than two family members
who occupy the accessory dwelling unit (excluding any health care
providers who are caring for an occupant of the accessory dwelling
unit).
D. A second mailbox is not allowed, and no additional street address
number will be assigned.
E. Off-street parking in addition to that required for the principal singlefamily
detached dwelling unit is required for an accessory dwelling
unit. That required additional parking is one space per added bedroom.
F. Only one accessory dwelling unit may be established upon a lot.
Including the principal dwelling, there shall be a maximum of two
dwelling units per lot.
G. No accessory dwelling unit shall be subdivided from the principal use,
and no accessory dwelling unit shall be sold separately from the
principal use.
H. Additions and alterations to the principal single-family detached
dwelling to accommodate the accessory dwelling unit shall be made to
the side or rear of the building, provided that all setback and coverage
requirements are met; and no addition or alteration to the principal
residential building, to accommodate an accessory dwelling unit, shall
be made to the building facade or into the front yard.
I. The accessory dwelling unit may have an entrance separate from the
entrance to the single-family detached dwelling, but an entrance
exclusively for an accessory dwelling unit shall not be located on the
building front facade.
J. The accessory dwelling unit shall be connected within the principal
single-family detached dwelling to the principal use via an interior
doorway with a working and usable door, as means of access for
purposes of supervision and emergency response.
K. Vehicular access to the accessory dwelling unit shall be limited to the
same driveway to the street right-of-way that serves the principal
single-family detached dwelling.
L. The accessory dwelling unit shall physically be connected to the
existing principal residential building's sewage system and water
supply system. A proposed accessory dwelling unit to be added to an
existing dwelling unit attached to the public sewer system shall be
required to purchase a second EDU of sewage capacity at the thencurrent
tapping fee, and quarterly invoices for sewage rates for the
accessory dwelling unit, as well as the principal residence, shall be
billed to the record owner of the principal single-family dwelling unit.
M. If other than public sewer and public water systems are to be used, the
applicant shall submit evidence that the total number of bedrooms of
§ 133-57.1 JACKSON CODE § 133-57.1
131:586
§ 133-58. Adult-oriented facility.
In the C Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as herein
modified and provided:
the principal use and the accessory dwelling unit on the site will not
exceed the maximum capacities for which the systems were designed,
unless those systems are to be expanded, in which case the expansion
approvals are to be submitted. Any connection to or addition to an
existing individual on-lot sewage system shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Sewage Enforcement Officer or Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
N. No separate utility system or connection serving the accessory dwelling
unit shall be constructed or used, including but not limited to electric,
gas and water.
O. In the event an accessory dwelling unit is approved in the AP Zone, such
accessory dwelling unit shall not be counted against the permitted
number of dwellings or group homes as provided in § 133-9B(1)(a)
above.
P. Deed restriction; agreement with Township.
(1) The record owner of the property shall grant a deed restriction
limiting such use in accordance with the foregoing provisions in
favor of Jackson Township. Additionally, the record owner shall
execute a separate agreement with Jackson Township, which
agreement shall:
(a) Describe the dimensions and location of the accessory dwelling
unit.
(b) Identify the occupant or occupants of the accessory dwelling
unit.
(c) Be in a recordable form acceptable to Jackson Township so as
to provide notice at the York County Recorder of Deeds office.
(2) All costs related to the preparation and recording of the foregoing
documents shall be the responsibility of the applicant for the
accessory dwelling unit and shall be paid to Jackson Township prior
to issuance of any building permit and occupancy permit.
A. No materials, merchandise, film, or service offered for sale, rent, lease,
loan, or for view shall be exhibited, displayed, or graphically
represented outside of a building or structure.
B. Any building, structure, or room used and occupied as an adult-oriented
facility shall be windowless or have an opaque covering over all
windows or doors of any area in which materials, merchandise, film,
service, or entertainment are exhibited or displayed; and no sale
materials, merchandise, film, or offered items of service or
§ 133-57.1 WELLS § 133-58
131:587
§ 133-59. Airport or airstrip.
In an I Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as herein
modified and provided:
entertainment shall be visible from outside the structure. The use
shall not be in coordination with the sale or consumption of alcoholic
beverages.
C. No sign shall be erected upon the premises depicting or giving a visual
representation of the type of materials, merchandise, film, service, or
entertainment offered therein.
D. Each and every entrance to the structure shall be posted with a notice
that the use is an adult-oriented facility and that persons under the age
of 18 are not permitted to enter and warning all others that they may be
offended upon entry.
E. No part of an adult-oriented facility shall be located within 1,000 feet of
a property containing a school, house of worship, or child day-care
facility (as defined herein).
F. Parking shall be established at the minimum ratio of one parking space
for each 100 square feet of gross floor area and one parking space for
each employee.
G. Buffers and screens shall be provided as necessary to adequately
protect neighboring properties. This includes but is not limited to
fences, walls, plantings, and open spaces
H. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan
A. This use can be considered as an accessory use to an existing or
proposed principal use, provided that all applicable provisions for its
establishment are satisfied.
B. The proposed facility shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation
Administration and the Pennsylvania Bureau of Aviation governing the
use of airports.
C. Certification that the site has been inspected and licensed by the
Bureau of Aviation of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
must be submitted to the Township prior to use of the site.
D. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
§ 133-58 JACKSON CODE § 133-59
131:588
§ 133-60. Apartment in conjunction with a commercial
establishment.
In the V and C Zones and subject to the requirements of the zone in which
it is located, except as herein modified and provided:
§ 133-61. Automobile and/or recreational vehicle and/or trailer
sales, automobile body shop and/or automobile garage.
In the C Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as herein
modified and provided:
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
A. Apartments are permitted as an accessory use above the first floor of a
commercial use.
B. A separate entrance must be provided for the residential use.
C. The open area, that is, that part of the lot not covered by buildings or
structures, provided for the lot must include a minimum of 400 square
feet of area for each dwelling unit.
D. All parking, habitable floor area, and other applicable requirements of
this chapter shall be satisfied in addition to those required for the
commercial use.
E. Apartments in cellars are prohibited.
F. Apartments in detached accessory buildings are prohibited
A. For automobile, recreational vehicle, or trailer sales, the lot must be
improved with a building.
B. All service and/or repair activities shall be conducted within a wholly
enclosed building.
C. No outdoor storage of parts, equipment, lubricants, fuel, or other
materials used or discarded as part of the service or repair operation
shall be permitted.
D. The demolition or junking of automobiles is prohibited.
E. All vehicles shall be repaired and removed from the premises within a
six-week period.
F. All exterior vehicle storage areas shall be screened from adjoining
residentially zoned properties or residential uses.
§ 133-59 WELLS § 133-61
131:589
§ 133-62. Automobile washing facility.
In the C and I Zones and subject to the requirements of the zone in which
the use is located, except as herein modified and provided:
§ 133-63. Automobile wrecking or junkyard.
In the I Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as herein
modified and provided:
G. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
A. All structures housing washing apparatus shall be set back at least 50
feet from any street right-of-way line and 25 feet from any side property
line.
B. Trash receptacles must be provided and routinely emptied to prevent
the scattering of litter.
C. The facility shall be limited to the washing, waxing, and cleaning of
automobiles.
D. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
E. Sufficient on-site stacking lanes shall be provided to prevent vehicle
backup on adjoining roads: 100 feet for self-service, and 300 feet for
full-service.
F. A drying area shall be provided.
G. Public sewers must be utilized if available; otherwise, all wastewater
must be deposited in a disposal system approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
H. A water feasibility study must be submitted to ensure that adequate
water supply is available and that the use will not adversely affect the
water supply of neighboring properties.
I. If the facility is adjacent to a residential use, the hours of operation
shall be limited to one hour past dawn to one hour prior to dusk.
§ 133-61 JACKSON CODE § 133-63
131:590
§ 133-64. Bed-and-breakfast inn.
In an AP, RC, R-1, R-2, R-3, V, or C Zone and subject to the requirements of
the zone in which located, except as herein modified and provided:
A. The maximum lot area shall be five acres.
B. The minimum lot width shall be 300 feet.
C. Setbacks: Any area used for this purpose must be at least 75 feet from
any property line and 100 feet from any street line.
D. The area to be used must be completely enclosed with a six-foot-high
fence so constructed as not to have any openings greater than six
inches in any direction and shall be screened as necessary to protect
neighboring properties.
E. It must comply with all applicable state regulations and Chapter 76,
Junkyards.
F. No garbage or other organic waste shall be stored on the premises.
G. All exterior vehicle storage areas shall be screened from adjoining
residentially zoned properties or residential uses.
H. Buffers and screens shall be provided as necessary to adequately
protect neighboring properties. This includes but is not limited to
fences, walls, plantings, and open spaces.
I. Junk and debris shall not reach a height above eight feet from the
surface.
J. The premises shall be maintained so as not to constitute a public
nuisance or health hazard to the community or nearby residents or to
create a place for the breeding of rodents or vermin.
K. The manner of storage, arrangement of junk, and drainage facilities
shall be designed to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water and to
facilitate access for inspection purposes and fire fighting.
L. Fluids, such as antifreeze, oil, and gasoline, from junked vehicles and
equipment shall not be drained upon or allowed to spill upon the
ground. Such fluids shall be disposed of in the appropriate manner,
such as oil-reclamation centers and the like.
M. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
A. Guest stays shall be limited to a maximum of 14 consecutive days.
§ 133-63 WELLS § 133-64
131:591
§ 133-65. Building materials sales.
In the C Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as herein
modified and provided:
§ 133-66. Campground (includes recreational vehicle parks).
In the RC Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as
herein modified and provided:
B. The maximum number of guest rooms shall be five.
C. A minimum of one off-street parking space per guest room shall be
provided in addition to the required parking for the dwelling unit.
D. One sign may be erected on the property. The maximum size shall be
two square feet, and it may be illuminated only by indirect lighting.
E. The inn must comply with local regulations, including but not limited to
fire, health, and building codes, where applicable.
F. Bed-and-breakfast operations shall be conducted so as to be clearly
incidental and accessory to the primary use of the site as a single-family
dwelling.
G. Meals shall be served only to overnight lodgers.
A. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicles trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
B. All outdoor storage and display areas shall be screened from adjoining
roads and properties.
A. The minimum lot area shall be five acres.
B. Setbacks. All campsites shall be located at least 50 feet from any
property line or street line.
C. The proposed campground must comply with the appropriate health,
sanitary, and safety regulations of the Township and the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
D. Guest stays shall be limited to a maximum of 14 consecutive days.
E. No more than 20 campsites shall be permitted per acre. A parking
space for one automobile shall be provided at each campsite, which will
not interfere with the convenient and safe movement of traffic, or
equivalent parking shall be provided in a common area or lot.
§ 133-64 JACKSON CODE § 133-66
131:592
§ 133-67. Cemetery.
In an AP, RC, or R-2 Zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in
which located, except as herein modified and provided:
F. Buffers and screens shall be provided as necessary to adequately
protect neighboring properties. This includes but is not limited to
fences, walls, plantings, and open spaces. All campsites shall be
screened from adjoining residential uses.
G. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
H. All campgrounds shall furnish Township-approved centralized sanitary
sewage and garbage collection facilities that shall be set back a
minimum of 100 feet from any property line.
I. An internal road system shall be provided. The pavement width for the
access drive entranceway shall be at least 24 feet as required by
§ 133-35. The pavement width for internal drives shall be a minimum of
16 feet. All internal drives must be improved to a mud-free condition,
passable for vehicles in all types of weather.
J. Any accessory retail or service commercial uses shall be set back at
least 100 feet from any property line. Such accessory commercial uses
shall be solely designed and constructed to serve the campground's
registered guests and their visitors. Any parking spaces provided for
such uses shall have vehicular access from the campground's internal
road rather than the public street. The parking requirements for such
uses shall be those required for the retail stores in § 133-30B of this
chapter.
K. Sewer and water facilities approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection must be utilized.
L. The use must comply with all applicable state and local laws and
regulations.
A. All burial plots, mausoleums, chapels, and associated equipment
storage facilities shall be located at least 30 feet from all property or
street lines.
B. Buffers and screens shall be provided as necessary to adequately
protect neighboring properties. This includes but is not limited to
fences, walls, plantings, and open spaces.
C. No burial plots or facilities are permitted in flood hazard areas.
§ 133-66 WELLS § 133-67
131:593
§ 133-68. Club room, club grounds, or meeting hall.
In an AP, RC, or R-3 Zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in
which located, except as herein modified and provided:
§ 133-69. Commercial parking lot or building.
In the C Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as herein
modified and provided:
D. Pet cemeteries must meet all of the above applicable requirements.
A. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
B. Buffers and screens shall be provided as necessary to adequately
protect neighboring properties. This includes but is not limited to
fences, walls, plantings, and open spaces.
C. The use shall not be in association with adult-oriented facilities.
D. The use shall not constitute a public or private nuisance.
A. Not more than 80% of the lot area shall be covered with impervious
surfaces.
B. No sale, rental, service, or repair operation is permitted.
C. The design of the parking facility must be approved by the Township
Engineer with regard to layout, access, drainage, and dimensions of
aisles.
D. Buffers and screens shall be provided as necessary to adequately
protect neighboring properties. This includes but is not limited to
fences, walls, plantings, and open spaces. All commercial parking lots
or buildings shall be screened from adjoining residential uses.
E. To protect other vehicles and pedestrians in the immediate area of such
a use, railing, fencing, posts and chains, or similar protective barriers
must be located on the perimeter of the parking areas, except at access
drives.
F. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
§ 133-67 JACKSON CODE § 133-69
131:594
§ 133-70. Communications tower and communications equipment
building.
In the RC, C, or I Zone, communications towers and communications
equipment buildings are permitted by special exception, subject to the
requirements of the zone in which located, except as herein modified and
provided:
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
A. Evidence.
(1) Any applicant proposing construction of a new communications
tower shall present evidence of the following:
(a) That the tower must be in that location to function properly
within the applicant's existing and already constructed grid;
(b) That, despite the best efforts of applicant, it is not possible to
co-locate the proposed antennas on an existing tower, building,
or structure; and
(c) That the proposed height of the tower is the minimum required
to properly function in the applicant's grid.
(2) The foregoing evidence shall not be based upon financial
considerations.
B. In the RC, C, or I Zone, the maximum height of any communications
tower, together with the communications antenna, shall be 150 feet;
provided, however, that such height may be increased to no more than
200 feet if the required setbacks from adjoining property lines (not
lease or license lines) are increased by one foot of lateral distance for
each one foot of height in excess of 150 feet.
C. The foundation and base of any communications tower shall be set back
from any property line (not lease or license line) at least 50 feet.
D. A communications tower may be located on a lot occupied by other
principal structures and may occupy a leased or licensed parcel within
a lot meeting the minimum lot size requirements of this chapter.
E. The minimum lot area for communications towers shall be 12,000
square feet for each tower.
F. Climbing access to the tower shall be secured from use by unauthorized
persons, and the perimeter of the site shall be secured by a fence with a
minimum height of eight feet, topped by barbed wire to limit
accessibility to the general public. One off-street parking area shall be
provided within the fenced area. The parking area need not be paved,
lighted, or striped unless the surrounding area is also paved, lighted, or
§ 133-69 WELLS § 133-70
131:595
striped, or unless the Board determines that paving, lighting, or
striping is required to keep in character with the neighborhood.
G. Access shall be provided to the communications tower and
communications equipment building by a public or private street,
easement or right-of-way. In the case of an easement or right-of-way, the
easement or right-of-way shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width and
shall comply with the requirements set forth in § 133-35.
H. Buffers and screens shall be provided as necessary to adequately
screen the fenced area to a height equal to the height of the fence.
Natural landscaping shall be preferable. The applicant shall use all
reasonable efforts to minimize disturbance and tree removal.
I. No signs or lights shall be mounted on a communications tower, except
as shall be required by the Federal Communications Commission,
Federal Aviation Administration or other governmental agency that has
jurisdiction. Any such required lighting shall, whenever practical, be
directed away from adjoining properties. No strobe lights shall be
permitted unless no alternatives are permitted by law. The Zoning
Hearing Board, in its discretion, may prohibit any tower for which lights
may be required.
J. The applicant shall submit certification from a Pennsylvania registered
professional engineer that a proposed communications tower will be
designed and constructed in accordance with the current Structural
Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting
Structures, published by the Electrical Industrial Association/
Telecommunications Industry Association, or with the current American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) Standards for Communications
Towers.
K. The communications tower must be capable of supporting other users,
and the applicant must agree to permit co-location of other users upon
any reasonable request. Such request can be denied only for
technological, engineering, or structural reasons.
L. The communications equipment building shall comply with the required
yard, setback, and height requirements of the applicable zoning district
for an accessory structure.
M. The owner, licensee or operator shall annually certify to Jackson
Township that the tower is structurally sound and remains in use. If a
communications tower remains unused for a period of 12 consecutive
months or becomes structurally unsafe, the owner, licensee, operator or
landowner shall dismantle and remove the communications tower and
any associated buildings within six months of the expiration of such
twelve-month period. The applicant shall submit a bond or letter of
credit in an amount equal to the cost of removal or demolition of said
tower, the amount of which shall be determined by the Township
Engineer. The bond or letter of credit shall be used in the event the
owner, licensee, operator or landowner shall fail to dismantle and
§ 133-70 JACKSON CODE § 133-70
131:596
§ 133-71. Convalescent home or hospital.
In the R-3, V, or C Zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in which
located, except as herein modified and provided:
§ 133-72. Day-care center (child or adult) or nursery school.
[Amended 9-6-2011 by Ord. No. 190-11]
In the R-1, R-2, R-3 or V Zone, subject to the requirements of that zone,
except as herein modified and provided:
remove the abandoned communications tower within the abovereferenced
six-month time period. [Amended 9-6-2011 by Ord. No.
190-11]
N. The applicant shall submit a certificate of insurance evidencing general
liability coverage of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence and property
damage coverage of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence, covering the
communications tower, communications antennas and communications
equipment buildings. Jackson Township shall be named as an additional
insured on the insurance policy. Such liability coverage shall not be
cancelable without at least 30 days' prior written notice to the
Township. Annual policy renewal certifications shall be submitted to the
Township; if coverage lapses or is canceled, the Township shall have the
right to order the demolition or removal of the tower and any associated
structures.
O. All applicants for special exception under this section shall notify, in
writing, all owners of public or private airports in Jackson Township of
their intention to construct a communications tower. Such notice shall
indicate the date, time, place and matter to be considered at a public
meeting of the Zoning Hearing Board and shall include a brief
description of the location and height of the proposed tower and state
that interested persons may attend the forthcoming meeting(s) and will
be heard. Such notice shall be by certified mail (return receipt
requested), at the applicant's expense. The applicant shall furnish the
Township with copies of the notice as well as return receipts or other
evidence of compliance with the requirements of this section prior to
Zoning Hearing Board approval.
A. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
B. Buffers and screens shall be provided as necessary to adequately
protect neighboring properties. This includes but is not limited to
fences, walls, plantings, and open spaces.
§ 133-70 WELLS § 133-72
131:597
§ 133-73. Day-care home (family or group).
In the RC, R-1, R-2, R-3, or V Zone and subject to the requirements of the
zone in which located, except as herein modified and provided:
§ 133-74. Domiciliary care home.
In the AP, RC, R-3, or V Zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in
which located, except as herein modified and provided:
A. The facility shall obtain a certificate of licensure from the Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare and provide a copy of said certificate to
the Township prior to occupancy approval by Jackson Township.
B. Outdoor play areas for children, including at least 65 square feet per
individual enrolled, must be located in a side or rear yard and be
sufficiently enclosed so as to provide for the health and safety of the
children as determined by the Zoning Hearing Board. All outdoor play
areas shall be wholly or partially shaded by trees or a pavilion(s).
C. At least one parking space for each employee plus one space for each
100 square feet of habitable floor area shall be provided.
D. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
A. The facility shall obtain a certificate of registration from the
Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare and provide a copy of said
certificate to the Township.
B. Outdoor play areas, including at least 260 square feet per group or
family, must be located in a side yard or to the rear of the dwelling and
be sufficiently enclosed so as to provide for the health and safety of the
children as determined by the Zoning Hearing Board. All outdoor play
areas shall be wholly or partially shaded by trees or a pavilion(s).
C. Day-care operations shall be conducted so as to be clearly incidental
and accessory to the primary use of the property as a residential
dwelling.
A. If applicable, the facility must be certified by the York County Area
Agency on Aging prior to occupancy approval by Jackson Township.
B. Domiciliary care operations shall be conducted as an accessory use to
the primary use of the property as a single-family residence.
§ 133-72 JACKSON CODE § 133-74
131:598
§ 133-75. Farm implement sales and service.
In an AP, RC, or C Zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in which
located, except as herein modified and provided:
§ 133-76. Greenhouse or horticultural nursery.
In an AP, RC, or I Zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in which
located, except as herein modified and provided:
C. The domiciliary care home must be owner-occupied, and only family
members residing on the premises shall provide the care associated
with a domiciliary care facility.
D. No facilities for cooking or dining shall be provided in individual rooms
or suites.
E. The home must comply with all local regulations, including but not
limited to fire, health, and building codes.
A. The lot must be improved with a building containing an office, display
room, and appurtenant facilities.
B. All service or repair activities shall be conducted within a wholly
enclosed building.
C. No outdoor storage of parts, equipment, lubricants, fuel, or other
materials used or discarded as part of the service or repair operation
shall be permitted.
D. All exterior vehicle storage areas shall be screened from adjoining
residential uses or residential zones.
E. The demolition or junking of implements and equipment is prohibited.
F. No vehicles, implements, or equipment shall be stored if not awaiting
repair or resale.
G. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
A. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation), access shall be by an arterial or
collector street as designated in the Township's Comprehensive Plan.
§ 133-74 WELLS § 133-76
131:599
§ 133-77. Group quarters.
In the R-3 or V Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as
herein modified and provided:
B. The display and sale of items not grown or planted on the premises shall
be incidental to the nursery operation. The display and sales area for
such items shall be limited to a total of 25% of the gross display and
sales area of the property.
C. The display, sale, or repair of motorized nursery, lawn or garden
equipment shall not be permitted.
D. All structural improvements, such as parking and loading facilities,
shall be screened from adjoining properties where the use abuts a
residential zone.
E. In an AP or RC Zone, one freestanding or attached sign advertising the
use may be permitted, the maximum size of which shall be 12 square
feet. Such sign must be at least 10 feet from all lot lines.
A. A minimum of 250 square feet of habitable floor area shall be provided
for each occupant.
B. A common kitchen and dining facility shall be provided, and no cooking
or dining facilities shall be provided in individual rooms or suites. This
provision is not intended to require such facilities if the affiliated
institution provides them elsewhere.
C. Each group quarters shall provide one off-street parking space for each
occupant.
D. All group quarters shall comply with all applicable building, health, and
fire codes.
E. All group quarters shall be connected to water and sanitary sewage
facilities approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
F. Group quarters may be an accessory or principal use but must be
directly affiliated with a parent religious, educational, charitable, or
philanthropic institution.
G. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
§ 133-76 JACKSON CODE § 133-77
131:600
§ 133-78. Halfway house.
In the C Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as herein
modified and provided:
§ 133-79. Heliport.
In an I Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as herein
modified and provided:
H. The Zoning Hearing Board may attach certain conditions to approval in
order to preserve and protect the character of the zoning district and
health, safety and welfare of the public.
A. A minimum of 250 square feet of habitable floor area must be provided
for each occupant, including any staff.
B. A common kitchen and dining facility shall be provided, and no cooking
or dining facilities shall be provided in individual rooms or suites. This
provision is not intended to require any kitchen and dining facilities if
an affiliated institution provides them elsewhere.
C. All halfway houses shall be connected to water and sanitary sewage
facilities approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
D. All halfway houses shall comply with the rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry and all other
applicable building, safety, and fire codes of the federal, state, or local
government.
E. All halfway houses shall provide one off-street parking space for each
occupant and each employee.
A. This use may be considered as an accessory use to an existing or
proposed principal use, provided that all applicable provisions for its
establishment are satisfied.
B. The proposed heliport shall be constructed, operated, and maintained
in accordance with the published rules and regulations of the Federal
Aviation Administration and the Pennsylvania Bureau of Aviation
governing the use of heliports.
C. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
§ 133-77 WELLS § 133-79
131:601
§ 133-80. Home occupation.
D. Certification that the site has been inspected and licensed by the
Bureau of Aviation of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
must be submitted to the Township prior to use of the site.
A. Subject to the requirements below, the following home occupations and
professions may be authorized only in a dwelling unit in an AP, RC, R-1,
R-2, R-3, or V Zone: physician, dentist, clergyman, lawyer, engineer,
accountant, architect, teacher, artist, licensed insurance or real estate
agent, seamstress, barber, beautician, and similar service occupations
and professions.
B. Regulations for permitted home occupations and professions:
(1) Employees. No person other than a resident of the dwelling unit
may practice the occupation. No more than one person shall be
employed to provide secretarial, clerical, or other assistance.
(2) Pupils. No more than two pupils may receive instruction at a time.
(3) Coverage. Not more than 30% of the habitable floor area of the
dwelling unit may be devoted to a home occupation or profession.
(4) Appearance. The character or external appearance of the dwelling
unit must be that of a dwelling. No display of products may be
shown so as to be visible from outside the dwelling. A nameplate
not larger than two square feet in area is permitted and may be
illuminated only by indirect lighting.
(5) Parking. Garages shall not be considered parking area for home
occupations. Besides the required parking for the dwelling unit,
additional parking is required as follows:
(a) Two spaces for the home occupation and one space for a
nonresident employee.
(b) Each space shall not have direct access to the street in order to
avoid vehicles backing into the flow of traffic.
(c) Two additional spaces for a physician, dentist, barber, or
beauty shop are permitted.
(6) Sales. There shall be no stock-in-trade stores or commodities kept
for sale that are not goods produced on the premises or used in
connection with a permitted home occupation.
(7) The following types of home occupations may be authorized in an
accessory structure only in the AP or RC Zone: farm implement and
equipment repair, vehicle repair, woodworking, blacksmithing, and
similar small shop work.
§ 133-79 JACKSON CODE § 133-80
131:602
§ 133-81. House of worship.
In the AP or V Zone, a house of worship shall comply with the following
requirements:
(8) Such home occupations in the AP or RC Zone shall comply in all
other respects with the regulations for other home occupations
permitted in dwellings with regard to numbers of persons involved,
parking areas, signs, and displays. In instances where the repair of
vehicles or equipment is concerned, such must be enclosed within
an accessory structure or appropriately screened from view as
determined by the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. The primary organization utilizing the facility shall be a nonprofit
organization registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Principal structures shall have minimum side yards of 50 feet each; all
other setbacks and structures shall be sited in compliance with the
regulations of the AP or V Zone.
C. One single-family residence is permitted as an accessory use when
located upon the same lot as the principal place of worship, subject to
the following conditions:
(1) The total floor area of the residential use shall not exceed 25% of
the floor area of the principal structure.
(2) The residents must be directly involved in the operation of the
place of worship.
(3) All residential structures shall comply with the structure height
and setback requirements of the AP or V Zone.
D. Educational or day-care facilities are permitted as accessory uses when
located on the same lot as the principal place of worship and subject to
the following conditions:
(1) If education or day-care is offered below the college level, an
outdoor play area shall be provided at a rate of 100 square feet per
individual enrolled. Off-street parking lots shall not be used as
outdoor play areas. Outdoor play areas shall not be located within
the front yard and must be set back 25 feet from all property lines.
Outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by a six-foot-high
fence and shall be screened from adjoining residentially zoned
properties. Any vegetative materials located within the outdoor
play areas shall be of a nonharmful type (not poisonous or thorny).
All outdoor play areas must provide a means of shade, such as
shade trees or a pavilion(s).
(2) Enrollment shall be defined as the largest number of students and/
or children under day-care supervision at any one time during a
seven-day period.
§ 133-80 WELLS § 133-81
131:603
§ 133-82. Industrial park.
In the I Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as herein
modified and provided:
(3) Passenger drop-off areas shall be provided and arranged so that
passengers do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the
site.
(4) All structures accommodating education and day-care uses shall be
governed by the location, height, and bulk standards applicable to
principal uses permitted within the AP or V Zone.
(5) Unless the applicant can demonstrate that the off-street parking
associated with the place of worship is sufficient for the proposed
use, one off-street parking space shall be provided for each six
students enrolled below grade 10, and/or one off-street parking
space for each three students in grades 10 and above.
E. The use shall comply with all other applicable regulations of this
chapter and other Township ordinances, including but not limited to the
requirements for landscaping, off-street parking (except as noted
below), and signage.
F. Parking.
(1) All parking shall be in accordance with § 133-30 of this chapter.
(2) Where the place of worship includes accessory use(s) other than
the worship services, the use of shared parking shall be
encouraged. In such cases, the amount of required off-street
parking provided need not be equal to that amount required of all
uses on the site, only the amount required for that particular use.
(3) Off-street parking areas shall be designed and constructed to
prevent traffic from backing onto public streets.
(4) All required parking shall be located on the site of the facility.
(5) Off-street parking areas shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet
from all street right-of-way lines and 30 feet from any adjoining
residential properties.
A. Permitted uses. All uses permitted in the Township's Industrial Zone
shall be permitted.
B. Lot area. Minimum lot area must be provided equal to that required if
individual lots were to be subdivided and sold to tenants.
C. Lot width: 300 feet minimum. Individual parcels within the park shall
have a lot width of at least 150 feet.
D. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
§ 133-81 JACKSON CODE § 133-82
131:604
§ 133-83. Kennel.
In an AP or RC Zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in which
located, except as herein modified and provided:
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by local streets in the I Zone that are connected to
arterial or collector streets, or by an arterial or collector street as
designated in the Township's Comprehensive Plan.
E. Public or community water and public or community sewer facilities
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
must be utilized.
F. Individual parcels within the park shall have minimum setbacks as
required for other uses in the I Zone.
G. All internal streets providing access to parcels within the park shall be
constructed to Township specifications. Such streets shall remain
private until such time as the Township agrees to accept the dedication
of such streets.
A. The minimum lot area shall be three acres.
B. Setbacks. All animal runs, fenced enclosures, and similar structures
shall comply with minimum setback requirements.
C. All animals must be housed within a screened enclosure except while
exercising.
D. All outdoor running or activity areas must be enclosed to prevent the
escape of the animals.
E. Satisfactory evidence must be presented to indicate that adequate
disposal of animal waste will be provided in a manner that will not
create a public health hazard or nuisance.
F. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
G. Any building or area used for the housing, feeding, watering, or running
of animals shall be set back at least 1,000 feet from any land in the R-1,
R-2, R-3, or V District or from any residential use.
§ 133-82 WELLS § 133-83
131:605
§ 133-84. Medical clinic or research laboratory.
In an AP, R-3, V, C, or I Zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in
which located, except as herein modified and provided:
§ 133-85. Mini-storage facility.
In a C or I Zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in which
located, except as herein modified and provided:
H. Outdoor runs shall have a double evergreen screen at least six feet high
around them. No animal shall be permitted to use the outdoor runs from
9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
I. The applicant shall demonstrate a working plan to minimize noise
emanating from animals boarded at the site. All buildings should be
adequately soundproofed.
A. Setbacks. All buildings shall be located at least 50 feet from all property
or street lines in an R-3 or V Zone.
B. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
C. Buffers and screens shall be provided as necessary to adequately
protect neighboring properties. This includes but is not limited to
fences, walls, plantings, and open spaces.
D. Accessory services, including laboratories and pharmacies for the use
of patients visiting medical practitioners in the clinic, may be permitted
as part of the clinic facility, subject to the following specific conditions:
(1) All entrances to parts of the building in which these accessory
services are provided shall be from within the building, and any
direct access from the street is prohibited.
(2) The hours during which these services are provided shall be the
same as those during which medical practitioners are receiving
patients.
(3) Signs or other evidence advertising or indicating the provision of
these services visible from outside the building are prohibited in
the R-3 or V Zone, except that one sign not exceeding two square
feet in area may be attached to the building. Any illumination of the
sign must be white, nonflashing, and limited to an enclosed lamp
design.
§ 133-83 JACKSON CODE § 133-85
131:606
§ 133-86. Mobile home park.
In the R-3 Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as
herein modified and provided:
A. Parking for the individual storage units shall be provided by parking/
driving lanes adjacent to the buildings. These lanes shall be at least 20
feet wide where access to storage units is only on one side of the aisle
and at least 30 feet wide where access to storage units is on both sides
of the aisle.
B. If a manager's or business office is located on the site, at least four
parking spaces must be provided adjacent to the office.
C. The servicing or repair of stored equipment shall not be conducted on
the premises. Also no business activities, other than rental of storage
units, shall be conducted on the premises.
D. The storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive
materials, or hazardous chemicals is prohibited.
E. If a parking area is to be provided for the outdoor storage of
recreational vehicles, such parking shall be in addition to any required
parking. Storage of partially dismantled, wrecked, or inoperative
vehicles shall not be permitted.
F. All outdoor lights shall be shielded and designed to direct light onto the
uses established and away from adjacent property.
G. Buffers and screens shall be provided as necessary to adequately
protect neighboring properties. This includes but is not limited to
fences, walls, plantings, and open spaces.
H. All access drives, parking, and loading areas must be paved with
concrete or asphalt so as to render such areas passable in all weather
conditions.
I. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
A. The minimum lot area for the park shall be two acres.
B. Each mobile home lot (not including the street right-of-way) must not be
less than 8,000 square feet in area and not less than 70 feet wide at the
street right-of-way line.
§ 133-85 WELLS § 133-86
131:607
§ 133-87. Mobile home sales lot.
In the C Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as herein
modified and provided:
C. Public or community water and public or community sewer facilities
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
must be utilized.
D. The setback of all buildings and structures within the mobile home park
shall comply with the setback requirements for the R-3 Zone, that is,
where setbacks on street frontage and adjoining property lines are
concerned, the setbacks for the zone apply to the mobile home park as a
single lot. Setbacks for each individual mobile home lot within the
mobile home park are listed in Subsection E of this section.
E. Setback requirements for individual mobile home lots. Each mobile
home lot within the mobile home park shall adhere to the following
minimum setback requirements; however, in no case shall the distance
between any two mobile homes be less than 20 feet in any direction:
(1) Front setback: 20 feet.
(2) Side setback: five feet.
(3) Rear setback: 10 feet
F. The Zoning Hearing Board may require additional screen planting or
may further restrict the proximity of mobile homes or other
improvements to adjoining properties or may attach such other
conditions or safeguards to the use of land for a mobile home park as
the Board may deem necessary to protect the general welfare.
G. A mobile home park and extension thereof shall also comply with all
applicable state or municipal regulations now in effect or hereafter
enacted.
A. The lot shall be improved with a building containing an office, display
room, and appurtenant facilities.
B. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
C. All displayed mobile homes must comply with setback requirements.
§ 133-86 JACKSON CODE § 133-88
131:608
§ 133-88. Motel or hotel.
In the C or I Zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in which
located, except as herein modified and provided:
§ 133-89. Multifamily or two-family conversion.
In the R-3 or V Zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in which
located, except as herein modified and provided:
§ 133-90. Multifamily or single-family attached dwelling.
In the V Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as herein
modified and provided:
A. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
B. Public water and public sewer approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection must be utilized.
C. All structures shall be set back at least 25 feet from the side property
lines.
A. Sewer and water systems approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection must be utilized. Conversions shall be
reviewed by the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer to determine
the adequacy of the existing system.
B. There shall be a minimum of 4,000 square feet of lot area per dwelling
unit.
C. Where an existing dwelling is converted to a multifamily or two-family
dwelling, the character of the existing structure shall be maintained,
except for the addition of a fire escape if necessary.
D. Parking, minimum habitable floor area, and all other applicable
requirements of this chapter shall be met.
E. The structure shall comply with all applicable rules and regulations,
including but not limited to fire, health, safety, and building codes.
F. Dwelling units in cellars are prohibited.
G. Dwelling units in detached accessory buildings are prohibited
A. In the case of a multifamily dwelling where the dwelling units are
located on a single lot and share with other units a common yard area,
§ 133-88 WELLS § 133-90
131:609
for example, garden apartments, the following requirements shall
apply:
(1) The minimum lot area shall be one acre (43,560 square feet).
(2) The minimum lot width shall be 150 feet.
(3) The maximum height shall be three stories.
(4) A maximum density of 10 dwelling units per acre shall be
permitted.
(5) Paved area. Not more than 20% of the lot area shall be paved with
an impervious surface, for example, driveways, parking areas, or
walkways.
(6) Public or community water and public or community sewer
facilities approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection must be utilized.
(7) Distance between buildings. Where two or more multifamily
dwellings are located on a single lot or parcel, the minimum
distance between principal buildings shall be 50 feet.
(8) All parking areas shall be located at least 10 feet from any property
line or street line.
(9) Buffers and screens shall be provided as necessary to adequately
protect neighboring properties. This includes but is not limited to
fences, walls, plantings, and open spaces.
(10) In the case of row dwellings, there shall be no more than six
dwellings in any one row.
(11) A minimum side setback of 25 feet shall be provided.
B. In the case of single-family attached dwellings, where individual
dwelling units are located on separate lots, for example, townhouses
and row houses, the following requirements shall apply:
(1) The minimum lot area for each lot shall be 4,000 square feet, unless
otherwise permitted by this chapter.
(2) The minimum lot width for each lot shall be 20 feet.
(3) In the case of row dwellings, there shall not be more than six
dwelling units in any one row.
(4) Dwelling units at the end of a row shall have a minimum side
setback of 25 feet.
(5) Public or community water and public or community sewer
facilities approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection must be utilized.
§ 133-90 JACKSON CODE § 133-90
131:610
§ 133-91. Natural extraction industry.
In the I Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as herein
modified and provided:
§ 133-92. Nonconformity, expansion of.
In all zones and subject to the requirements of the zone in which located,
except as herein modified and provided:
C. Provisions for the future maintenance of all common areas for either
multifamily or single-family attached dwellings, including but not
limited to parking and recreation, shall be explicitly provided with the
proposed project. The provisions and any agreements, such as bylaws
for a property owners' association, shall be subject to the approval of
the Township Solicitor.
A. An open excavation shall be enclosed by a fence or wall that completely
encloses the portion of the property in which the excavation is located;
said fence or wall shall be not less than four feet in height and shall be
so constructed as to have openings no larger than six inches; and if
pickets are used, the openings shall not exceed six inches.
B. No quarry wall shall be nearer than 150 feet to any property line or
street line.
C. In the case of an open excavation, a slope no greater than 20% shall
extend from property or street lines to the edge of the excavation.
D. No stock or waste pile shall exceed 35 feet in height. Such piles shall be
screened from adjoining properties.
E. A plan for the reclamation of the site following completion of extractive
uses shall be submitted for review and report of the Planning
Commission and approval of the Zoning Hearing Board. Such plan will
consider the grading and reuse of the site and deal with drainage, soil
erosion, and other problems that may be created by the extractive use.
F. Buffer zone. The operation must be completely encircled by a buffer
zone having a minimum width of 50 feet. No activity involved in the
extractive operation process shall be performed within this area.
G. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
§ 133-90 WELLS § 133-92
131:611
§ 133-93. Open-air retail (flea market).
In the C Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as herein
modified and provided:
A. Expansion of the nonconformity shall be confined to the lot on which it
is located on the effective date of this chapter or any amendment
thereto creating the nonconformity.
B. The total of all such expansion shall not exceed an additional 35% of the
area of those buildings, structures, or land area devoted to the
nonconforming use as they existed on the date on which such buildings,
structures, or use first became nonconformities.
C. Provision for access drives, off-street parking, and off-street loading
shall be consistent with standards required by this chapter.
D. Provision for yards, building height, and building area shall be
consistent with the standards required for permitted uses in the zone in
which the nonconformity in question is located.
E. Appearance should be harmonious with surrounding properties. This
feature includes but is not limited to landscaping and enclosure of
principal and accessory uses, sign control, and maintenance in good
condition of all improvements and open spaces.
F. Buffers and screens shall be provided as necessary to adequately
protect neighboring properties. This includes but is not limited to
fences, walls, plantings, and open spaces.
G. The expansion shall not create new dimensional nonconformities or
further increase existing dimensional nonconformities.
H. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
A. The retail sales area shall be defined as the area of the smallest
rectangle or other regular geometric shape that encompasses all
display stands, booths, tables, or stalls, plus all adjoining aisles and
walkways from which consumers may inspect items for sale. The retail
sales area shall include all indoor and outdoor areas as listed above.
B. The retail sales area shall be set back at least 50 feet from all property
lines and shall be calculated as part of the maximum permitted lot
coverage, regardless of its surface treatment.
§ 133-92 JACKSON CODE § 133-93
131:612
§ 133-94. Outdoor commercial recreational establishment.
In the RC Zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in which located,
except as herein modified and provided:
§ 133-95. Park or other recreation area of a nonprofit nature.
In the AP, RC, R-1, R-2, R-3, or V Zone and subject to the requirements of
the zone in which located, except as herein modified and provided:
C. Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of one space per 250
square feet of retail sales area and shall be designed and used in
accordance with this chapter.
D. Off-street loading shall be provided as otherwise required by this
chapter for retail sales operations. The retail sales area, as defined
above, shall be used to calculate the required number of loading spaces.
E. The outdoor display and sale of merchandise shall not begin prior to
one hour before sunrise and shall cease no later than one hour past
sunset.
F. Any exterior public address system shall be arranged and designed to
prevent objectionable impact on adjoining properties.
G. Trash receptacles shall be provided for all outdoor retail sales area(s)
and shall be routinely emptied to prevent the scattering of litter and
debris. All applications for this use shall include a plan for the cleanup
of litter.
A. Setbacks. The area to be used for recreational purposes must be set
back at least 50 feet from any property or street line.
B. For an outdoor recreational use, other than a golf course, buffers and
screens shall be provided as necessary to adequately protect
neighboring properties. This includes but is not limited to fences, walls,
plantings, and open spaces. The use shall be located a minimum of 100
feet from a residential zoning district or use.
C. Exterior lighting shall be directed away from all adjoining properties.
D. To the extent possible, existing trees and natural vegetation shall be
preserved.
E. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
F. Operations shall not result in vehicle backups on adjacent roads.
§ 133-93 WELLS § 133-95
131:613
§ 133-96. Personal care boarding home.
In the RC or V Zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in which
located, except as herein modified and provided:
§ 133-97. Public buildings and/or facilities. [Amended 6-7-2016 by
Ord. No. 210-16]
In any zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in which located,
except as herein modified and provided:
A. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
B. The Zoning Hearing Board shall decide the appropriateness of the
design of parking, lighting, and similar features of the proposed use to
minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties.
C. To the extent possible, existing trees and vegetation shall be preserved.
A. The applicant must secure a license from the Pennsylvania Department
of Public Welfare and submit a copy of said license to the Township
prior to occupancy approval by Jackson Township.
B. No kitchen or dining facilities shall be permitted in individual rooms or
suites.
C. The facility must meet all applicable fire, health, safety, and building
codes.
D. Water and sewer systems approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection must be utilized. If existing sewage disposal
facilities are to be utilized, certification must be submitted to ensure
that such facilities are capable of adequately servicing the proposed
use.
E. At least one parking space for each employee plus one parking space
for each bedroom shall be provided.
A. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
§ 133-95 JACKSON CODE § 133-97
131:614
§ 133-98. Public or semipublic parking lot or garage.
In a C or I Zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in which
located, except as herein modified and provided:
§ 133-99. Public utility building or service structure.
In any zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in which located,
except as herein modified and provided:
B. Outdoor storage of materials shall be prohibited in a Residential or
Village Zone.
C. Screening or fencing may be required where determined appropriate to
form an effective visual barrier between the use and adjoining
properties.
D. There shall be no specific minimum lot size; however, each lot shall
provide front, side, and rear setbacks that comply with the
requirements of the zone in which located. Such uses shall be exempt
from lot coverage and open area requirements of the zone in which
located, provided that the stormwater management plan is approved by
the Township.
A. Not more than 80% of the lot shall be covered with impervious surfaces.
B. To protect other vehicles and pedestrians in the immediate area of such
a use, railing, fencing, posts and chains, or similar protective barriers
must be located on the perimeter of the parking areas, except at access
drives or exits.
C. Buffers and screens shall be provided as necessary to adequately
protect neighboring properties. This includes but is not limited to
fences, walls, plantings, and open spaces. All parking lots or garages
shall be screened from adjoining residential uses.
D. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
A. In an R-1, R-2, R-3 or V Zone, the permitted building or structure shall
not include the storage of vehicles or equipment used in the
maintenance of any utility.
B. In zones other than a Residential or Village Zone, unhoused equipment
shall be enclosed within a fence, wall, or evergreen plantings, not less
than six feet in height.
§ 133-97 WELLS § 133-99
131:615
§ 133-100. Regulated shooting grounds.
In an AP or RC Zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in which
located, except as herein modified and provided:
§ 133-101. Restaurant, drive-through or fast-food.
In the V or C Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as
herein modified and provided:
C. There shall be no specific minimum lot size; however, each lot shall
provide front, side, and rear setbacks that comply with the
requirements of the zone in which located. Such uses shall be exempt
from lot coverage and open area requirements of the zone in which
located, provided that the stormwater management plan is approved by
the Township.
A. Adjacent areas must be predominantly undeveloped, and any range or
firing area must be at least 450 feet from any property or street line and
1,000 feet from any existing residential use.
B. A minimum of 25 parking spaces must be provided in addition to one
space for each employee/operator of the facility.
C. All the requirements for a land development plan must be met, for
example, stormwater management plan, sedimentation and erosion
plan, and sewer and water requirements, and any other applicable
provisions of Township ordinances must be adhered to.
D. The site must be a minimum of 100 acres. Any and all other
requirements of Title 34 of the Pennsylvania Game and Wildlife Code or
other applicable state regulations must be met. A copy of any required
state license or permit must be provided prior to approval by Jackson
Township.
A. The drive-through service shall have access to either an arterial or
collector road.
B. Exterior trash receptacles shall be provided and routinely emptied so to
prevent litter.
C. All drive-through window lanes shall be separated from the internal
accessways of the parking lot.
D. Any exterior speaker/microphone system shall be arranged and/or
screened to minimize the impact of objectionable noise impact upon
adjoining properties.
E. All exterior seating and play areas shall be completely enclosed by a
fence having a minimum height of three feet.
F. No part of the subject property shall be located within 200 feet of any
residential zoning district or use.
§ 133-99 JACKSON CODE § 133-101
131:616
§ 133-102. Restaurant, sit-down.
In the V or C Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as
herein modified and provided:
§ 133-103. Retail or convenience store.
In the V Zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in which located,
except as herein modified and provided:
G. Uses providing outdoor activities shall provide sufficient screening and/
or landscaping measures to mitigate visual and/or audible impacts on
adjoining properties.
H. As part of the special exception criteria, the applicant shall submit a
traffic impact study to demonstrate that adequate ingress and egress
facilities can be provided.
I. The applicant shall demonstrate adequate stacking lanes can be
provided to prevent vehicle backups onto adjoining roads. The stacking
lanes shall not count as parking spaces.
A. The applicant shall furnish evidence of an approved water supply and
sewage disposal.
B. All off-street parking and/or loading areas shall be screened from
adjoining residents and roads.
C. All restaurant seating shall be provided within the completely enclosed
building, except that limited exterior seating may be provided if:
(1) Such seating is situated and designed so as not to adversely impact
nearby residences;
(2) Such seating is accessory to the principal interior seating
accommodations;
(3) During use, such seating is continuously supervised by an
employee or owner of the restaurant;
(4) Any lighting or music systems serving such seating are designed
and operated so as not to constitute a nuisance to adjoining
properties;
(5) The applicant shall furnish and implement a working plan for the
continuous cleanup of litter and debris that may result from
outdoor seating; and
(6) Such seating is removed during seasons when not in use.
A. The applicant must furnish evidence as to how the use will be controlled
so as to not constitute a nuisance due to noise or loitering outside the
store.
§ 133-101 WELLS § 133-103
131:617
§ 133-104. Rooming house.
In the V Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as herein
modified and provided:
B. A minimum of one parking space for each 75 square feet of gross floor
area shall be provided. In addition, any accessory uses shall also
require those spaces required by § 133-30B of this chapter.
C. Exterior trash/recycling receptacles shall be provided and routinely
emptied to prevent the scattering of litter, and the applicant shall
furnish and continuously implement a working plan for the cleanup of
litter and debris.
D. The subject property shall have a minimum width of 125 feet.
E. The subject property shall front on an arterial or collector road, as
defined herein.
F. The subject property shall be set back at least 300 feet from any lot
containing a school, day-care facility, playground, library, hospital, or
nursing, rest or retirement home.
G. All structures (including gasoline pump islands, but not permitted
signs) and machinery shall be set back at least 50 feet from any street
right-of-way line.
H. Access driveways shall be a minimum of 28 feet wide and separated by
100 feet from one another if located along the same frontage, as
measured from edge to edge.
I. All ventilation equipment associated with fuel storage tanks shall be set
back 100 feet and oriented away from any adjoining residential uses.
J. All automated teller machines shall be located, or contain convenient
parking spaces, so that the on-site movement of vehicles will not be
hampered by those cars belonging to persons using the automated
teller machines.
K. Any exterior microphone/speaker system and external lighting shall be
arranged and/or screened to comply with those regulations contained
within Chapter 113, Subdivision and Land Development.
A. Any structure proposed as a rooming house or boardinghouse shall
have a habitable floor area, in addition to that required for the person
or family operating the facility, of at least 300 square feet for each
roomer or boarder.
B. No facilities for cooking or dining shall be provided in individual rooms
or suites.
§ 133-103 JACKSON CODE § 133-104
131:618
§ 133-105. Sawmill operation.
In an AP, RC, or I Zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in which
located, except as herein modified and provided:
§ 133-106. School.
In the RC, R-1, or R-2 Zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in
which located, except as herein modified and provided:
C. All rooming houses and boardinghouses shall comply with all applicable
local regulations, including but not limited to fire, health, safety, and
building codes.
A. The minimum lot area shall be three acres.
B. No saw or other machinery shall be less than 75 feet from any property
or street right-of-way line.
C. All power saws and machinery shall be secured against tampering and
locked when not in use.
D. All machinery used in the sawmill operation shall be located at least
500 feet from any R-1, R-2, R-3, or V Zone.
E. Buffers and screens shall be provided as necessary to adequately
protect neighboring properties. This includes but is not limited to
fences, walls, plantings, and open spaces.
F. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
A. All buildings shall be set back at least 100 feet from any Residential or V
Zoning Districts.
B. No part of a school property shall be located within 1,000 feet of a
property containing an adult-oriented facility (as defined herein) or
within 300 feet of a property containing an automobile filling station.
C. For schools providing education to minors, an outdoor play area shall
be provided at the rate of 100 square feet per individual enrolled. Offstreet
parking areas shall not be used as outdoor play areas. Outdoor
play areas shall not be located within the front yard and must be set
back at least 25 feet from all property lines. Outdoor play areas shall be
completely enclosed by a fence not less than six feet high and shall be
screened from adjoining properties in the Residential and V Zoning
Districts. All plant materials within the outdoor play areas shall be
§ 133-104 WELLS § 133-106
131:619
nonharmful types (that is, shall not be poisonous or thorny). All outdoor
play areas shall be wholly or partially shaded by trees or a pavilion(s).
D. "Enrollment" shall be defined as the largest number of students on the
site at any one time during a seven-day period.
E. Passenger drop-off and pick-up areas shall be provided and arranged so
that students need not cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the site.
F. Off-street parking areas shall be designed to prevent incoming traffic
from backing onto public streets. All required parking shall be located
on the site of the facility. Parking areas shall be set back a minimum of
25 feet from all street rights-of-way and 30 feet from adjoining
properties in the R or V Zoning Districts.
G. Sufficient exterior lighting shall be required to provide convenience and
safety for people utilizing the facility but shall be arranged to prevent
glare on adjoining properties and streets.
H. The use shall emit no obnoxious noise, glare, dust, odor, vibration,
electrical disturbance, or any other perceptible impact at or beyond the
lot line.
I. All outdoor storage, parking, and loading areas shall be screened from
adjoining residential uses.
J. Consideration shall be given to traffic problems. If the nature of the
school facility is such that it will generate a medium or high volume of
vehicular traffic, that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation standard and the latest
edition of the Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers), then access should be by an arterial or collector street as
designated in the Township Comprehensive Plan.
K. Stadiums are subject to the following additional regulations:
(1) Required parking will be determined based upon a combination of
the types of activities proposed and the schedule listed in this
chapter. In addition, an unimproved grassed overflow parking area
for peak-use periods shall be required. Such overflow parking
area(s) shall be accessible only from the interior driveways of the
permanent parking lot. Overflow parking areas shall be designed
and fenced or landscaped to prevent vehicles from crossing
adjoining properties or directly accessing adjoining roads. Soil
erosion, sedimentation control, and stormwater runoff shall be
managed in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations. If,
at any time after the opening of the facility, the Supervisors
determine that traffic backups are occurring on adjoining roads,
and such backups are directly related to the size or design of the
parking area(s), the Supervisors can require the applicant to revise
the design of the parking lot(s) and/or provide additional on-site
parking spaces or paved or grassed overflow parking areas.
§ 133-106 JACKSON CODE § 133-106
131:620
§ 133-107. Service station or convenience store dispensing fuel.
In the C Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as herein
modified and provided:
(2) Any booths or other structures used for the collection of admission
and/or parking fees shall be set back and arranged to prevent
vehicle backups on adjoining roads during peak arrival periods.
Any other collection of fees, such as by roaming parking lot
attendants, shall be conducted in such a manner as to prevent
vehicle backups on adjoining roads. If, at any time after opening,
the Township determines that traffic backups are occurring on
adjoining roads, and such backups are directly related to the means
of access to the subject property, the Township can require the
applicant to revise such means to relieve the undue congestion.
(3) The applicant shall furnish expert evidence that the proposed use
will not be detrimental to the use of adjoining properties due to
hours of operation, noise, light, litter, dust, and pollution.
(4) Uses involving outdoor activities and/or display shall provide
sufficient screening and/or landscaping measures to mitigate visual
and/or audible impacts on adjoining properties.
(5) No outdoor storage is permitted.
(6) Any exterior public address system shall be designed and operated
so that the audible levels of any messages conveyed over the
system will not exceed the ambient noise level generally
attributable to the use as measured at each property line.
A. Buildings must be set back at least 40 feet from the street line.
B. Gasoline pumps and all service equipment must be set back at least 25
feet from any lot line or street right-of-way line and located so that
vehicles stopped for service will not extend over the property line.
C. Access drives must be located as follows:
(1) Side lot line offset: 10 feet.
(2) Minimum separation of drives on same lot: 25 feet.
D. All lights must be diverted toward the facility or downward on the lot.
E. No outdoor stockpiling of tires or outdoor storage of trash is permitted.
An area enclosed by a wall, fence, or vegetative material and screened
from view of adjoining properties shall be provided whenever outdoor
storage is required. No materials may be stored so as to create a fire
hazard.
F. All merchandise, except vending machines and oil racks, shall be
displayed within a building.
§ 133-106 WELLS § 133-107
131:621
§ 133-108. Shopping center, shopping mall, or shopping plaza.
In the C Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as herein
modified and provided:
§ 133-109. Solid waste disposal and/or processing facility.
In the I Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as herein
modified and provided:
G. The convenience store shall be in compliance with § 133-103 of this
chapter.
H. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
A. The minimum lot area shall be three acres.
B. The minimum lot width shall be 250 feet.
C. All buildings must be set back at least 50 feet from any property line
and 75 feet from a street line.
D. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
E. A buffer yard shall be provided on the site as per § 133-32 of this
chapter.
F. Landscaping requirements as per Jackson Township ordinance must be
adhered to as well as the lighting, parking, loading, and signage
requirements of this chapter.
A. Any processing of solid waste, including but not limited to incineration,
shredding, compaction, material separation, recycling, derivation of
fuel from refuse, and pyrolysis, shall be conducted within a wholly
enclosed building.
B. No refuse shall be deposited or stored and no building or structure shall
be located within 200 feet of any property line or within 1,000 feet of
any land within an R-1, R-2, R-3, or V Zone.
§ 133-107 JACKSON CODE § 133-109
131:622
C. In addition to the provisions of § 133-32 of this chapter, a buffer yard at
least 50 feet wide shall be located along all property lines. No
structures, storage, parking, or any other related activity or operation
shall be permitted within this area. The buffer shall be naturally
landscaped and have no impervious cover.
D. Any area used for the unloading, transfer, storage, processing,
incineration, or deposition of refuse must be completely screened from
ground-level view at the property line. (The use of an earthen berm is
encouraged where practicable.) In addition, such areas must also be
completely enclosed by an eight-foot-high fence, with no openings
greater than two inches in any direction.
E. All uses shall provide sufficiently long stacking lanes into the facility so
that vehicles waiting to be weighed will not backup onto public roads.
F. Access to the site shall be limited to those times when an attendant is
on duty. In order to protect against indiscriminate and unauthorized
dumping, all areas of the site shall be protected by locked barricades,
fences, gates, or other means designed to deny access to the area at
unauthorized times or locations.
G. Hazardous waste as described by the Department of Environmental
Protection shall not be disposed of within the proposed use.
H. The unloading, processing, transfer, and deposition of solid waste shall
be continuously supervised by a qualified facility operator.
I. Any waste that cannot be used in any disposal process, or material that
is to be recycled, shall be stored in leak- and vectorproof containers.
Such containers shall be designed to prevent their being carried by
wind or water.
J. All storage of solid waste shall be indoors in a manner that is leak- and
vectorproof. During normal operation, no more solid waste shall be
stored on the property than is needed to keep the facility in constant
operation; but in no event shall such waste be stored for more than 72
hours.
K. A contingency plan for the disposal of solid waste during a facility
shutdown shall be submitted to the Township.
L. All structures shall be set back at least a distance equal to their height.
M. The applicant shall submit an analysis of raw water needs (groundwater
or surface water) from either private or public sources, indicating the
quantity of water required. If the source is from a municipal system, the
applicant shall submit documentation that the public authority will
supply the water needed. Where an on-site water supply is to be used, a
water feasibility study must be provided to enable the Township to
evaluate the impact of the proposed development on the groundwater
supply and on existing wells. The purpose of the study will be to
§ 133-109 WELLS § 133-109
131:623
determine if there is an adequate supply of water for the proposed
development and to estimate the impact of the new development on
existing wells in the vicinity. The water feasibility study shall be
reviewed by the Township Engineer. A water feasibility study shall
include the following information:
(1) Calculations of the projected water needs.
(2) A geologic map of the area with a radius of at least one mile from
the site.
(3) The location of all existing and proposed wells within 1,000 feet of
the site, with notation of the capacity of all wells.
(4) The location of all existing on-lot sewage disposal systems within
1,000 feet of the site.
(5) The location of all streams within 1,000 feet of the site and all
known point sources of pollution.
(6) A determination of the long-term yield on the basis of the geologic
formations underlying the site.
(7) A determination of the effects of the proposed water supply system
on the quantity and quality of water in nearby wells, streams, and
the groundwater table.
(8) A statement of the qualifications and the signature(s) of the
person(s) preparing the study.
N. The applicant shall provide an analysis of the physical conditions of the
primary road system serving the proposed use. The analysis shall
include information on current traffic flows on this road system and
projections of traffic generated by the proposed use. Improvements to
the road shall be provided by the applicant to ensure safe turning
movements to and from the site and safe through movement on the
existing road.
O. No use and occupancy permit shall be issued for a solid waste disposal
facility until the operator shall have submitted to the Zoning Officer
proof that the facility complies with the regulations of the Department
of Environmental Protection and has been permitted in writing by said
agency.
P. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
§ 133-109 JACKSON CODE § 133-110
131:624
§ 133-110. Tavern.
In the C or V Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as
herein modified and provided:
§ 133-111. Transportation (passenger) terminal.
In the C Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as herein
modified and provided:
§ 133-112. Trap, skeet, rifle, pistol, or archery range (outdoor,
commercial).
In the RC Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as
herein modified and provided:
A. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
B. Buffers and screens shall be provided as necessary to adequately
protect neighboring properties from any adverse effects of the use or
vehicular traffic. This includes but is not limited to fences, walls,
plantings, and open spaces.
C. The use shall not constitute a public or private nuisance.
D. The use must be more than 300 feet from any church, hospital,
charitable organization, school, or public playground.
E. The use must be more than 200 feet from any other facility licensed by
the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
A. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
A. Adjacent areas must be predominantly undeveloped, and the range
area must be at least 450 feet from any property or street right-of-way
line. A use involving firearms must also be located at least 1,000 feet
from any existing residential use.
B. Except for trap and skeet ranges, an earthen background berm must be
provided within 20 feet of the target farthest from the firing line to
prevent wild or ricocheting bullets or wild or stray arrows. Such berm
§ 133-110 WELLS § 133-112
131:625
§ 133-113. Truck or motor freight terminal.
In the I Zone and subject to the requirements of that zone, except as herein
modified and provided:
shall have a slope of not less than one vertical to two horizontal and
must extend at least eight feet above the ground level at the highest
target. The crest of the berm at the eight-foot minimum height limit
shall be at least four feet in width as measured between the wall of the
berm facing the range and the opposite wall.
C. Earthen side berms must be provided immediately adjacent to the
range and must extend from the firing line to the background berm. The
side berms shall meet the same design qualifications as set forth for
background berms in Subsection B above.
D. An alternative barrier, whether natural or man-made, which duplicates
the effect of the berm may be substituted if approved by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
E. For ranges involving firearms, targets mounted only on target posts
shall be permitted. For such uses, no targets of any kind shall be set
directly on the ground.
F. No target shall extend above six feet in height or be located so that the
trajectory from the firing line to the target would cause a projectile to
exceed the height of the berm required in Subsection B above.
G. Warning signs must be posted at least 10 feet from the outside of the
berms.
H. The firing range shall be free of gravel and other hard surface materials
and be adequately drained.
I. Adult supervision must be provided for children under 16 years of age.
J. Firing hours shall be from one hour after dawn until one hour prior to
dusk.
K. Trap and skeet ranges shall be exempt from Subsections B, C, D, E, and
F above.
L. Storage of live ammunition and firearms shall be located in a secure
area away from public areas.
M. Consideration shall be given to potential traffic volumes and problems.
If the proposed use will generate a medium or higher volume of traffic,
that is, in excess of 750 vehicle trips per day (as per the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standard and the latest edition of the
Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers),
access shall be by an arterial or collector street as designated in the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
§ 133-112 JACKSON CODE § 133-113
131:626
A. Access shall be by local streets in the I Zone that are connected to
arterial or collector streets, or by an by an arterial or collector street as
designated in the Township Comprehensive Plan, unless otherwise
permitted by the Township Supervisors.
B. Satisfactory provision shall be made to minimize harmful or unpleasant
effects such as noise, odors, fumes, glare, vibration, or smoke.
C. A buffer yard at least 100 feet wide must be located on the terminal site
in all situations where the site adjoins an R-1, R-2, R-3, or V Zone. This
yard shall be naturally landscaped, have no impervious cover, and shall
not be used for parking, building, loading, or storage purposes.
§ 133-113 WELLS § 133-113
131:627

ARTICLE VII
Supplemental Regulations
§ 133-114. Applicability.
These regulations shall apply to the following uses allowed by right, in
addition to the regulations of the zoning district, unless otherwise specified
in this chapter.
§ 133-115. Animal hospital.
Within the AP, RC, and C Zones, animal hospitals shall comply with the
following requirements:
§ 133-116. Apartments and multifamily dwelling units.
Within the R-3 Zone, multifamily dwelling units shall comply with the
following requirements:
A. All animal boarding buildings and structures that are not wholly
enclosed as well as outdoor animal pens, stalls, and runways shall be
set back a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines.
B. All outdoor running areas shall be enclosed to prevent the escape of the
animals.
C. All animal wastes shall be cleaned up daily and disposed of properly.
D. The applicant shall demonstrate a working plan to minimize noise
emanating from animals boarded at the site. All buildings should be
adequately soundproofed.
E. All outdoor storage, parking, and loading areas shall be visibly screened
from adjoining properties that are in the R-1, R-2, R-3, or V District and
from adjoining existing residential uses.
F. Any building or area used for the housing, feeding, watering, or running
of animals shall be set back at least 1,000 feet from the nearest
property line.
G. Outdoor runs shall have a double evergreen screen at least six feet high
around them. No animal shall be permitted to use the outdoor runs from
9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
H. Animal hospitals shall comply with the parking requirements of
§ 133-30B.
A. Apartments in cellars are prohibited.
B. 127Each dwelling unit within a multifamily building or residence shall be
designed with a private entrance for each unit, whether said entrance is
127. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which stated that no more than one apartment in a
detached accessory building was permitted on a lot, was repealed 9-6-2011 by Ord. No.
§ 133-114 WELLS § 133-116
131:629
from the exterior of the building or by way of a common entry or
corridor.
C. Fire escapes and outside stairways shall be located on the side or rear
of the building.
D. A use and occupancy permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Officer
prior to the initial occupancy of any apartment.
E. Determination of the total minimum lot area required for apartments or
principal uses with apartments shall be the sum total of the lot area
required for each apartment plus the lot area required for any principal
use.
F. In addition to the requirements listed in Subsections A through F above,
apartment buildings containing two or more apartments located above
the first floor shall meet the following conditions:
(1) Two exitways, accessible to each apartment and reasonably remote
from each other, shall be required.
(2) At least one entrance stairway to each apartment shall be by an
interior corridor.
G. Apartments may be established in single-family dwellings, provided
that the following conditions are met in addition to those listed in this
section as well as applicable regulations contained in Article IV:
(1) An apartment established within a single-family dwelling shall be
clearly accessory to the single-family dwelling use.
(2) Only one apartment shall be permitted to be added to any existing
single-family dwelling.
(3) The area of such an apartment shall not exceed 30% of the
habitable floor area of the existing single-family dwelling before the
apartment was established.
H. If apartments are established in conjunction with an existing
nonconforming use, the following requirements shall be applied:
(1) A structure containing a nonconforming use shall not be extended
or enlarged to accommodate the addition of apartment uses. Only
portions of the structure existing on the date of adoption of this
chapter may be converted for apartments.
(2) The number of apartments established shall not exceed the
maximum number of units allowed by lot area contained in this
chapter, minus one apartment for each story of the structure
remaining in nonconforming status. The minimum lot area
190-11. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections C
through I as Subsections B through H, respectively.
§ 133-116 JACKSON CODE § 133-116
131:630
§ 133-117. Commercial livestock operations.
Within the AP Zone, commercial livestock operations shall comply with the
following requirements:
requirement for the nonconforming nonresidential use shall not
apply when calculating the number of apartments permitted.
(3) The number of off-street parking spaces shall not be reduced; and,
in all cases, a minimum of the off-street parking spaces required by
this chapter for the nonconforming use plus the apartments shall
be provided.
A. Any building or area used for the housing, feeding, watering, or running
of animals shall be set back at least 1,000 feet from the nearest
property line.
B. Until such time as the Pennsylvania Nutrient Management Act: 3
Pa.C.S.A. § 501 et seq., is implemented, the applicant must submit a
nutrient management plan for the proposed use that has been reviewed
and approved by the York County Conservation District. After
implementation of the Pennsylvania Nutrient Management Act, the
applicant shall submit a copy of an approved nutrient management plan
for the proposed use that has been reviewed and approved by the
appropriate reviewing agency. All subsequent operations and activities
shall be conducted in accordance with such plans. If, at any time, the
nutrient management plan is amended, the applicant must again submit
the amended plan to the Zoning Officer.
C. The applicant shall furnish evidence from the York County Conservation
District that the proposed use has an approved conservation plan. All
subsequent operations and activities shall be conducted in accordance
with such conservation plan. If, at any time, the conservation plan is
amended, the applicant must again furnish evidence from the York
County Conservation District that the amended plan has been
approved.
D. The applicant shall submit, abide by, and demonstrate a working
knowledge of written qualified evidence describing those methods that
will be used to do the following:
(1) Minimize odor on nearby properties and minimize fly, rodent, and
other pest infestations on the applicant's property as well as nearby
properties. Unless these methods employ the best possible
techniques and materials that can be practicably applied to the
proposed use, the application will be denied.
(2) Dispose of dead animals according to the regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture. In the event of a
catastrophic event in which mass disposal is warranted, the
Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture can require whatever
§ 133-116 WELLS § 133-117
131:631
§ 133-118. Commercial recreational establishments.
Within the C Zone, commercial recreation establishments shall comply with
the following requirements.
§ 133-119. Farm produce stands.
Within the AP and RC Zones, farm produce stands shall comply with the
following requirements:
disposal methods are deemed appropriate to safeguard animal and
public health.
(3) Comply with the above-required nutrient management plan and
conservation plan.
E. Any exhaust or ventilation fans employed shall be oriented and directed
away from the closest residence that is not that of the operator. If said
fans are within 1,000 feet of the closest residential property line that is
not that of the operator, then the applicant shall construct a dispersion
buffer between the exhaust of the fan and that/those residence(s). Such
dispersion buffer shall include a vegetative berm that will effectively
disperse or redirect fan exhaust so that no direct exhaust velocity is
perceptible at the property line.
F. Any driveway or access drive providing for vehicular access to the
proposed use shall maintain a fifty-foot-wide radius for all turns and
intersections.
G. All buildings used for the housing of livestock shall be fitted with a solid
concrete slab or slotted floor.
A. All such uses shall front upon and have access to an arterial or collector
road.
B. All outdoor recreation and activity areas shall be set back at least 50
feet from all property lines and structures.
C. Screening shall be provided along any adjoining residential zoning
districts.
D. All such uses shall comply with all other applicable regulations of this
chapter and other Township ordinances, including but not limited to the
requirements for landscaping, off-street parking, and signage.
A. Direct commercial sales of agricultural commodities may occur upon
property owned or operated by a landowner. The landowner must
produce not less than 50% of the commodities to be sold. Under
circumstances of crop failure due to reasons beyond the control of the
landowner, direst sales may be authorized without regard to the 50%
limitation.
§ 133-117 JACKSON CODE § 133-119
131:632
§ 133-120. Financial institutions.
Within the C Zone, financial institutions shall comply with the following
requirements:
§ 133-121. Funeral homes.
Within the C Zone, funeral homes shall comply with the following
requirements:
§ 133-122. Group home.
In the RC, R-1, R-2, R-3, or V Zone and subject to the requirements of that
zone, except as herein modified and provided:
B. No building or structure shall be placed between the street and the
building setback line.
C. An off-street area shall be provided to accommodate parking and shall
be sited to enable customer vehicles to pull off the cartway and park
safely. This area may but need not be an improved parking lot.
A. All drive-through window lanes shall be separated from the parking
lot's interior driveways.
B. All automated teller machines shall be located, or contain convenient
parking spaces, so that the on-site movement of vehicles will not be
hampered by those cars belonging to persons using the automated
teller machine(s).
C. Sufficient stacking lanes shall be provided associated with drivethrough
windows to prevent vehicle backups on adjoining roads.
D. Any exterior microphone or speaker system shall be arranged and/or
screened to prevent objectionable noise impact on adjoining properties.
E. The use shall comply with all other applicable regulations of this
chapter and other Township ordinances, including but not limited to the
requirements for landscaping, off-street parking, and signage.
A. Public sewer and public water facilities shall be utilized.
B. A crematory shall be allowed as an accessory use, provided that it
complies with all local, state, and federal regulations.
C. The use shall comply with all other applicable regulations of this
chapter and other Township ordinances, including but not limited to the
requirements for landscaping, off-street parking, and signage.
A. A plan showing the layout of the facility, specifically identifying all
rooms or other areas of the property to be used and the uses to be made
there, and all of the services to be provided.
§ 133-119 WELLS § 133-122
131:633
§ 133-123. Heavy storage, sales, and/or service (includes wholesale
establishments).
Within the I Zone, heavy storage, sales, and/or service shall comply with the
following requirements:
§ 133-124. Houses of worship.
Within the RC and R-2 Zones, houses of worship shall comply with the
following requirements:
B. The applicant shall meet all safety requirements for such facilities as
required by any federal, state or local law. Group homes shall be
registered and licensed as required by either the federal government or
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and shall be in compliance with all
applicable rules and regulations of the licensing body.
C. Traffic shall not exceed normal residential levels, and ingress and
egress must be from safe and proper locations.
D. Each group home shall provide off-street parking as required for singlefamily
dwellings.
E. A common kitchen and dining facility shall be provided, and no cooking
or dining facilities shall be provided in individual rooms or suites.
F. The use and occupancy relationship by its residents shall be the
functional equivalent of a biologically related family.
A. Access not located within the I Zone shall be via an arterial or collector
street as designated by the Township's Comprehensive Plan.
B. A buffer yard 25 feet wide must be located on the site in all instances
where the site adjoins a residential use or zone. The buffer yard shall be
naturally landscaped and have no impervious cover and shall not be
used for building, loading, or storage.
C. Any outdoor storage areas shall be enclosed by a wall or fence and
screened from view of adjoining properties. No materials may be stored
so as to create a public health hazard or a public nuisance. The storage
of junked vehicles, boats, machinery, mobile homes, and heavy
equipment vehicles is prohibited.
D. No toxic or hazardous materials may be stored on any property, except
in compliance with applicable local, state, and federal regulations.
A. The primary organization utilizing the facility shall be a nonprofit
organization registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Principal structures shall have minimum side yards of 50 feet each; all
other setbacks and structures shall be sited in compliance with the
regulations of the RC or R-2 Zone.
§ 133-122 JACKSON CODE § 133-124
131:634
C. One single-family residence is permitted as an accessory use when
located upon the same lot as the principal place of worship, subject to
the following conditions:
(1) The total floor area of the residential use shall not exceed 25% of
the floor area of the principal structure.
(2) The residents must be directly involved in the operation of the
place of worship.
(3) All residential structures shall comply with the structure height
and setback requirements of the RC or R-2 Zone.
D. Educational and/or day-care facilities are permitted as accessory uses
when located on the same lot as the principal place of worship and
subject to the following conditions:
(1) If education or day-care is offered below the college level, an
outdoor play area shall be provided, at a rate of 100 square feet per
individual enrolled. Off-street parking lots shall not be used as
outdoor play areas. Outdoor play areas shall not be located within
the front yard and must be set back 25 feet from all property lines.
Outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by a six-foot-high
fence and shall be screened from adjoining residentially zoned
properties. Any vegetative materials located within the outdoor
play areas shall be of a nonharmful type (not poisonous or thorny).
All outdoor play areas must provide a means of shade, such as
shade trees or a pavilion(s).
(2) Enrollment shall be defined as the largest number of students and/
or children under day-care supervision at any one time during a
seven-day period.
(3) Passenger drop-off areas shall be provided and arranged so that
passengers do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the
site.
(4) All structures accommodating education and day-care uses shall be
governed by the location, height, and bulk standards applicable to
principal uses permitted within the RC or R-2 Zone.
(5) Unless the applicant can demonstrate that the off-street parking
associated with the place of worship is sufficient for the proposed
use, one off-street parking space shall be provided for each six
students enrolled below grade 10, and/or one off-street parking
space for each three students in grades 10 and above.
E. The use shall comply with all other applicable regulations of this
chapter and other Township ordinances, including but not limited to the
requirements for landscaping, off-street parking (except as noted
below), and signage.
F. Parking.
§ 133-124 WELLS § 133-124
131:635
§ 133-125. Laundry or dry-cleaning establishments.
Within the C Zone, dry-cleaners, commercial laundries, and laundromats
shall comply with the following requirements:
§ 133-126. No-impact home-based businesses.
Within all zones, the no-impact home-based business must satisfy the
following requirements:
(1) All parking shall be in accordance with § 133-30 of this chapter.
(2) Where the place of worship includes accessory use(s) that will
operate during times when the main use is not in operation, the use
of shared parking shall be encouraged. In such cases, the amount
of off-street parking provided need not be equal to the sum that
would be required of all uses on the site, only the sum of all uses in
operation at any one time.
(3) Off-street parking areas shall be designed and constructed to
prevent traffic from backing onto public streets.
(4) All required parking shall be located on the site of the facility.
(5) Off-street parking areas shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet
from all street right-of-way lines and 30 feet from any adjoining
residential properties.
A. Public sewer and public water shall be used.
B. All activities shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
C. During times of operation, plant cleanup, and maintenance, all windows
and doors along walls that face residences and Residential and Village
Zoning Districts shall be kept closed.
D. Ventilation exhausts shall meet all applicable state and federal air
quality standards. Ventilation outlets must be set back at least 50 feet
from all property lines or be directed skyward; in no case shall any such
exhaust outlet be directed toward adjoining residences or Residential
or Village Zoned property.
E. Off-street parking shall be provided as required by this chapter
A. The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
B. The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
C. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
§ 133-124 JACKSON CODE § 133-126
131:636
§ 133-127. Noncommercial keeping of livestock.
Within the AP and RC Zones, noncommercial keeping of livestock shall
comply with the following requirements:
D. There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including but
not limited to parking, signs, or lights.
E. The business activity may not use any equipment or process that
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception
that is detectable on adjacent properties.
F. The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge in volume or type that is not normally associated with singlefamily
residential use.
G. The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
H. The business may not involve any illegal activity
A. Minimum lot area.
(1) The minimum lot area shall be two acres. Additionally, the following
list specifies additional area requirements by size of animals kept:
(a) Group 1: Animals whose average adult weight is less than 10
pounds shall be permitted at an animal density of 12 per acre,
with a maximum number of 50 animals.
(b) Group 2: Animals whose average adult weight is between 10
and 65 pounds shall be permitted at an animal density of two
per acre, with a maximum number of 20 animals.
(c) Group 3: Animals whose average adult weight is greater than
65 pounds shall be permitted at an animal density of one per
acre.
(2) In no case shall a lot contain more than 50 total animals.
B. The following lists minimum setbacks (from all property lines) imposed
upon the placement of any structure used to house noncommercial
livestock. Should one structure be used to house a combination of
animal types, the most-restrictive setback shall apply.
(1) Group 1 animals: up to 25 animals, a twenty-five-foot setback;
above 25 animals, a fifty-foot setback.
(2) Group 2 animals: up to two animals, a fifty-foot setback; above two
animals, a one hundred-foot setback.
(3) Group 3 animals: 100 feet.
§ 133-126 WELLS § 133-127
131:637
§ 133-127.1. Noncommercial keeping of chickens. [Added 6-7-2016
by Ord. No. 210-16]
C. All structures used to house noncommercial livestock shall be
prohibited from placement in the front yard.
D. All outdoor pasture or recreation areas shall be enclosed with fencing
to prevent the escape of the animals. Such fencing must be set back at
least 10 feet from all property lines.
E. All animal wastes shall be properly stored and disposed of so as not to
be objectionable at the site's property line. All animals, their housing,
and their outdoor pasture or recreation areas shall be properly
maintained so as not to become a nuisance to adjoining properties.
A. Where permitted. The noncommercial keeping of chickens shall be
permitted within any zoning district on any lot where the principal use
is residential and on which is located a single-family dwelling or twofamily
dwelling. A minimum lot size of one acre per dwelling unit is
required, subject to compliance with this § 133-127.1.
B. Number and gender of chickens allowed.
(1) A property owner shall be permitted to keep up to 10 chickens per
acre for noncommercial purposes as provided herein. For each
tenth of an acre over one acre, one additional chicken shall be
permitted.
(2) No roosters are permitted. Only hens are allowed.
C. Noncommercial purposes. Chickens kept under this section may be
kept for personal use and consumption only, and the property owner(s)
or occupant(s) shall not engage in any commercial sales, breeding or
other endeavor with regard to the chickens permitted hereunder;
provided, however, that surplus eggs may be sold if produced by
chickens kept on the lot.
D. Chicken coops or enclosures.
(1) Chickens must be kept in a coop, enclosure or fenced area at all
times.
(2) All chicken coops or enclosures containing the chickens shall be at
least 25 feet from any property line. No chicken coops or
enclosures shall be permitted in the front yard of any lot.
(3) Coops, enclosures and fenced areas shall be kept in a clean, dry,
odor-free at the property lines, neat and sanitary condition at all
times.
(4) Coops and enclosures shall provide adequate ventilation and
adequate sun/shade and must be reasonably impermeable to
§ 133-127 JACKSON CODE § 133-127.1
131:638
rodents, wild birds and predators, including dogs, cats, raccoons,
etc.
E. Control and safety of chickens.
(1) The control and safety of chickens at all times shall be the
responsibility of the property owner, tenant or person occupying
the property.
(2) Chickens shall be provided with access to feed and clean water at
all times. Feed and water shall be unavailable to rodents, wild birds
and predators. In the absence of chickens, uneaten food shall be
removed in a timely manner.
(3) Chicken manure shall be stored in a fully enclosed structure or
watertight container. No more than three cubic feet of chicken
manure may be stored on a lot. However, manure may be used as
fertilizer. Any manure not used as fertilizer or in excess of the
amount permitted to be stored shall be disposed of in a manner
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture. The
coop, enclosure, fenced area and surrounding area shall be kept
free of trash and accumulated feces.
(4) The chicken owner shall take actions necessary to reduce the
attraction of rodents and predators and the potential infestation of
insects and parasites. The owner shall immediately remove or have
treated any chickens found to be infested with parasites or insects
or that is sick/diseased.
(5) Dead chickens shall be removed and disposed of in accordance with
Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture approved disposal
procedures immediately upon discovery.
(6) The owner of such chickens shall not allow the chickens to roam off
of the lot on which their coop, enclosure or fenced area is located.
Any dog, cat or other domesticated animal which kills a chicken off
the permitted tract of land shall not, for that reason alone, be
considered a dangerous or aggressive animal.
F. Violations. The following acts shall be deemed to be violations of this
§ 133-127.1:
(1) The keeping of chickens in violation of any provision of this section.
(2) Permitting any owner, renter, lessee or other occupant of a
property to allow chickens to be kept on a property in violation of
this section.
(3) Keeping chickens inside of any dwelling unit.
(4) The slaughtering of chickens on the property.
§ 133-127.1 WELLS § 133-128
131:639
§ 133-128. Slaughtering, processing, rendering and packaging of
food products and byproducts produced from remains of animals.
Within the AP Zone, slaughtering, processing, rendering, and packaging of
food products and their byproducts produced from the remains of animals
are permitted, subject to the following criteria:
A. Minimum lot area: five acres.
B. The subject site shall have access to a collector or arterial road.
C. All aspects of the slaughtering, processing, rendering, and packaging
operation, excepting the unloading and holding of live animals, shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building.
D. All live animals held outside shall be within secure holding pens or
runways sufficiently large to accommodate all animals without
crowding and not located within the front yard.
E. The applicant shall furnish a working plan for the recovery of escaped
animals that minimizes the potential for animals to enter traffic or cross
property lines and that shall be continuously implemented.
F. All animal wastes shall be cleaned up daily and properly disposed of so
as not to be objectionable at the site's property line.
G. The unloading of live animals from trucks into holding pens and their
movement into the plant shall be continuously supervised by a qualified
operator, whose responsibility it shall also be to immediately identify
and appropriately dispatch any obviously ill or injured animals.
H. The unloading of live animals and their movement into the plant shall
be conducted in an orderly and calm manner so as to minimize noise
levels.
I. The loading and unloading of trucks shall be restricted to the hours
between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
J. No exterior animal holding pens and/or areas devoted to loading or
unloading of animals shall be located within 200 feet of any property
line or 500 feet of any land within the R-1, R-2, R-3, or V Zone.
K. All animal holding pens and/or areas used for the loading or unloading
of animals shall be screened from all adjoining properties and shall
include a minimum fifty-foot-wide landscaped strip.
L. Wastewater shall be kept completely covered at all times to reduce the
potential for release of odors. In no event shall wastewater be disposed
of in a storm sewer, to the ground, or in any other manner inconsistent
with PADEP regulations.
M. All unusable animal byproducts shall be stored indoors in leakproof and
vectorproof containers. In the case of slaughtering or processing
operations that do not do their own rendering, the applicant shall
§ 133-128 JACKSON CODE § 133-128
131:640
§ 133-129. Stable or riding academy.
Within the AP Zone, stables or riding academies shall comply with the
following requirements:
provide evidence of a written contract with a rendering operation for
the daily disposal of such waste products. In no case shall any waste
products remain on the site for more than 24 hours.
N. The applicant must demonstrate written compliance with and continue
to comply with all applicable local, state, and federal standards and
regulations.
O. The use shall provide sufficiently long stacking lanes and on-site
loading/unloading areas so that trucks waiting to be loaded/unloaded
will not back up onto public roads. No parking or loading/unloading
shall be permitted on or along any public road.
P. Vehicular access shall be so arranged as to minimize danger and
congestion along adjoining roads and to avoid the creation of nuisances
to nearby properties. Access drives used by trucks shall only intersect
with major collector or arterial roads.
Q. All access drives shall be designed and located so as to comply with
§ 133-35 of this chapter.
R. All access drives onto the site shall have a paved minimum thirty-fivefoot-
wide cartway for a distance of at least 200 feet from the street
right-of-way. In addition, if portions of on-site access drives are
unpaved, then a fifty-foot-long gravel section of driveway shall be
placed just beyond the preceding two-hundred-foot paved section to
help collect any mud that may have attached to a vehicle's wheels. The
owner and/or operator shall be responsible for removing any mud from
public roads caused by persons traveling to and from the site.
A. Minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.
B. Any structure used for the boarding of horses shall be set back at least
200 feet from any property line.
C. All stables shall be maintained to minimize odors perceptible at the
property line.
D. All outdoor training or show facilities or areas shall be set back 100 feet
from all property lines.
E. All outdoor training, show, riding, boarding, or pasture areas shall be
enclosed by a minimum four-foot-high fence, which will be located at
least 10 feet from all property lines.
F. All parking compounds and unimproved overflow parking areas shall be
set back at least 10 feet from adjoining lot lines. Unimproved overflow
parking areas shall also provide a fence delineating such occasional
§ 133-128 WELLS § 133-129
131:641
parking facilities and preventing the parking environment or movement
of vehicles across neighboring properties.
G. The use shall not operate between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 133-129 JACKSON CODE § 133-129
131:642
ARTICLE VIII
Administration and Enactment
§ 133-130. Permits.
A. Proposed use and building permits. A proposed use permit, which must
be obtained from the Zoning Officer, shall be required for the erection,
enlargement, structural repair, structural alteration, moving or
demolition of any structure. No proposed use permit shall be required
for nonstructural repairs or routine maintenance of structures,
including, but not limited to, the replacement of siding, shutters, fascia,
rain gutters, downspouts, storm doors, awnings projecting under 54
inches, roof shingles or metal, and windows, entrance doors and garage
doors, provided the supporting structure of the opening is not enlarged.
Building permits shall be required for such activities as set forth in the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code,128 as amended, in
accordance with the Township Building Construction Ordinance.129
Work on the proposed construction and/or development shall begin
within six months and shall be completed within 12 months after the
date of issuance of the proposed use permit or building permit,
whichever is issued last, or the permit shall expire. However, the permit
may be extended annually for an aggregate period of not more than
three years, provided that the construction or change pursuant to such
permit has commenced within the initial six-month period. Time
extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the
applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Zoning Officer to approve such a request. The permit application must
be accompanied by a site plan to demonstrate conformity to this
chapter and shall include the following: [Amended 6-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 210-16]
(1) Lot: the location and dimensions of the lot.
(2) Streets: names and widths of abutting streets and highways.
(3) Structures and yards: locations, dimensions, and uses of existing
and proposed structures and yards on the lot and, as practical, of
any existing structures within 100 feet of the proposed structure
but off the lot.
(4) Improvements: proposed off-street parking and loading areas,
access drives, landscaping, lighting, signs, storage areas, fences,
walls, and walks; proposed sewage disposal system.
B. Use and occupancy certificates.
(1) A use and occupancy certificate, certifying compliance with this
chapter, must be obtained from the Zoning Officer for any new
128. Editor’s Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
129. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 47, Building Construction.
§ 133-130 WELLS § 133-130
131:643
§ 133-131. Enforcement; Zoning Officer.
structure or for any change of use of a structure or land as set
forth below before such new structure or use or change of use is
occupied or established:
(a) Use of a structure erected, structurally altered or extended, or
moved after the effective date of this chapter.
(b) Use of vacant land except for agricultural purposes.
(c) Any change in a conforming use of a structure or land.
(d) Any change from a nonconforming use of a structure or land to
a conforming use.
(e) Any change in the use of a structure or land from that
permitted by any variance approved by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
(2) The application for a use certificate must include a statement of the
intended use and any existing use of the structure or land. The
certificate continues in effect as long as the use of the structure or
land for which it is granted conforms with this chapter.
A. Appointment. A Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Board of
Supervisors to administer and enforce this chapter. The Zoning Officer
shall not hold any elective office in the Township. The Zoning Officer
shall meet qualifications established by the Township and be able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township Supervisors a working
knowledge of municipal zoning.
B. Duties and powers. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to
administer this chapter in accordance with its literal terms and to
enforce the provisions of the chapter and the amendments thereto. The
Zoning Officer shall not have the power to permit any construction or
any use or any change of use that does not conform to this chapter. He
or she shall have such duties and powers as are conferred on him or her
by this chapter and as are reasonably implied for that purpose.
C. Forms. The Zoning Officer must provide a form or forms, approved by
the Township Solicitor, for:
(1) Proposed use permits.
(2) Building permits.
(3) Special exceptions.
(4) Use and occupancy certificates.
(5) Appeals.
(6) Variances.
§ 133-130 JACKSON CODE § 133-131
131:644
(7) Registration of nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures.
D. Transmittal of papers. As soon as practical after receipt of an
application for a special exception, variance or a notice of appeal, the
Zoning Officer must transmit to the Solicitor of the Zoning Hearing
Board and to the Township Planning Commission copies of all papers
constituting the application for the special exception, variance, or
appeal.
E. Action on proposed use and building permits. Within 15 business days,
not counting holidays and weekends, after receipt of an application for
a proposed use permit or a building permit, the Zoning Officer must
grant or refuse the permit. If the application conforms to the applicable
requirements of Chapter 47, Article I, Building Permits, and this
chapter, the Zoning Officer must grant a permit. If the permit is not
granted, the Zoning Officer must state, in writing, the grounds for
refusal.
F. Action on use of occupancy certificates. Within 15 business days, not
counting holidays and weekends, after receipt of an application for a
use and occupancy certificate, the Zoning Officer must grant or refuse
the certificate. If the specifications and intended use conform in all
respects with the provisions of this chapter, he must issue a certificate
to that effect. Otherwise, he must state in writing the grounds of his
refusal.
G. Revoking permits/approvals. The Zoning Officer shall revoke a permit
or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in the case of
any false statement or misrepresentation of a fact in an application or
on the plans on which the permit or approval was based. Any permit
issued in error shall in no case be construed as waiving any provision of
this chapter, and such permit may be revoked.
H. Enforcement. Upon determining that a violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter exists, the Zoning Officer must send an enforcement
notice by regular and certified United States mail to the owner of
record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred, by regular
mail to any person who has filed a written request to receive
enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and by regular mail to any
other person the owner of record has requested by writing be notified.
An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Township intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation, with a description of the requirements that
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
§ 133-131 WELLS § 133-131
131:645
§ 133-132. Amendments.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced (within 15 days of issuance of notice) and the date
before which the steps must be completed (within 45 days of
issuance of notice).
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within 15 days of issuance of said notice in
accordance with procedures set forth in Article VII.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation in accordance with § 133-137 of this chapter.
I. Records.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall keep record of the following:
(a) All applications for proposed use and building permits, use and
occupancy certificates, special exceptions and variances, and
all actions taken on them, together with any conditions
imposed by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(b) All complaints of violations of provisions of this chapter and the
action taken on them.
(c) All plans submitted.
(d) Nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures.
(2) All such records and plans shall be available for public inspection
pursuant to the Township's Request for Public Records Policy.
J. Reports. At intervals of not greater than six months, the Zoning Officer
must report to the Board of Supervisors:
(1) The number of building permits and use and occupancy certificates
issued.
(2) The number of complaints of violations received and the action
taken on these complaints.
A. The Board of Supervisors may from time to time amend, supplement, or
repeal any of the regulations and provisions of this chapter.
B. Public hearing(s). Before voting on the enactment of an amendment,
the Board of Supervisors shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant
to public notice. In the case of an amendment other than that prepared
by the Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors shall submit
each such amendment to the Planning Commission at least 30 days
prior to the hearing on such proposed amendment to provide the
Planning Commission an opportunity to submit recommendations. If,
after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
§ 133-131 JACKSON CODE § 133-132
131:646
amendment is changed substantially, or is revised to include land
previously not affected by it, the Board of Supervisors shall hold
another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to
vote on the amendment.
C. County Planning Commission review. At least 30 days prior to the
hearing on any amendment by the Board of Supervisors, the Township
shall submit the proposed amendment to the County Planning
Commission for recommendations.
D. Amendments involving Zoning Map changes.
(1) If the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice
of the required public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the
Township at points deemed sufficient by the Township along the
tract to notify potentially interested citizens. Signs shall be posted
on the affected tract or area at least one week prior to the date of
the hearing. In addition, written notice of the hearing shall be sent
to the property owner and all adjoining property owners.
(2) In addition to the requirement that notice be posted under
§ 133-117D(1), where the proposed amendment involves a Zoning
Map change, notice of the public hearing shall be mailed by the
Township, at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, by firstclass
mail to the addresses to which real estate tax bills are sent for
all real property located within the area being rezoned, as
evidenced by tax records within the possession of the Township.
The notice shall include the location, date, and time of the public
hearing. A good-faith effort and substantial compliance shall satisfy
the requirements of this subsection.
(3) This subsection shall not apply when the rezoning constitutes a
comprehensive rezoning.
E. Enactment of amendments. Proposed amendments shall not be enacted
unless notice of proposed enactment is given in the manner set forth in
this section and shall include the time and place of the meeting at which
passage will be considered and a reference to a place within the
Township where copies of the proposed amendment may be examined
without charge or obtained for a charge not greater than the cost
thereof. The Board of Supervisors shall publish the proposed
amendment once in one newspaper of general circulation in the
Township neither more than 60 days nor less than seven days prior to
passage. Publication of the proposed amendment shall include either
the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary, prepared by the
Township Solicitor and setting forth all the provisions in reasonable
detail. If the full text is not advertised, then the following actions must
take place:
(1) A copy thereof shall be supplied to the newspaper in general
circulation in the Township at the time the public notice is
published; and
§ 133-132 WELLS § 133-132
131:647
§ 133-133. Fees.
The Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution, establish fees for all
applications, permits, or appeals provided for by this chapter to defray the
costs of advertising, mailing notices, processing, inspecting, and copying
applications, permits, and use certificates. The fee schedule shall be
available at the Township offices for inspection.
§ 133-134. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved or affected by a provision of this chapter or decision
of the Zoning Officer, Township Engineer, Zoning Hearing Board or Board
of Supervisors may appeal in the manner set forth in either Article IX or X-A
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, whichever
is applicable.
(2) An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the
York County Law Library or other county offices designated by the
York County Commissioners, who may impose a fee no greater than
that necessary to cover the actual costs of storing the chapter.
(3) In the event substantial amendments are made to the proposed
amendment, before voting upon enactment, the Board of
Supervisors shall, at least 10 days prior to enactment, readvertise
in one newspaper of general circulation in the Township a brief
summary setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail,
together with a summary of the amendments.
(4) Within 30 days after enactment of any amendment to this chapter, a
copy of the amendment shall be forwarded to the York County
Planning Commission.
F. Landowner curative amendments. A landowner who desires to
challenge on substantive grounds the validity of an ordinance or map,
or any provision thereof, which prohibits or restricts the use or
development of land in which he has an interest may submit a curative
amendment to the Board of Supervisors with a written request that his
challenge and proposed amendment be heard and decided as provided
in Sections 609.1 and 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.130
G. Municipal curative amendments. If the Township determines that its
Zoning Ordinance or any portion thereof is substantially invalid, the
Township shall declare, by formal action, its Zoning Ordinance or
portions thereof substantially invalid and propose to prepare a curative
amendment to overcome such invalidity as provided for and in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 609.2 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.131
130. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1.
131. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.2.
§ 133-132 JACKSON CODE § 133-135
131:648
§ 133-135. Repealer.
All Township ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with this chapter or
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the
extent necessary to give this chapter full force and effect.
§ 133-136. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements
to meet the purposes of this chapter. When provisions of this chapter
impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance, or
regulations, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. When provisions of
any statute, other ordinance, or regulation impose greater restrictions than
those of this chapter, the provisions of such statute, ordinance, or regulation
shall prevail.
§ 133-137. Violations.
In case any building, structure, landscaping, or land is, or is proposed to
be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained, or
used in violation of this chapter, the Board of Supervisors or, with approval
of the Board of Supervisors, an officer of the Township, or any aggrieved
owner or tenant of real property who shows that his property or person
will be substantially affected by the alleged violation, may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate such
building, structure, or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any
act, conduct, business, or use constituting a violation. When any such action
is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be served
upon the Board of Supervisors at least 30 days prior to the time the action is
begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the Township. No such action
may be maintained until such notice has been given.
§ 133-138. Penalties.
A. Any person, partnership, or corporation that has violated or permitted
the violation of any provision of this chapter shall, upon being found
liable in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township,
pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied, or payable until
the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor appeals the judgment in a timely manner,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice, determining
that a violation has occurred, further determines that there was a goodfaith
basis for the person, partnership, or corporation violating this
chapter to have believed that there was not such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
§ 133-135 WELLS § 133-138
131:649
§ 133-139. Validity.
If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this chapter shall be held
invalid or unconstitutional by a recognized court of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, such decision shall not affect the legality of the remaining
sections, clauses, provisions, or portions of this chapter.
§ 133-140. When effective; repealer.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon adoption and publication
according to law. This chapter shall revoke and repeal the prior Zoning
Ordinance of Jackson Township adopted March 26, 1996, and all
amendments thereto, effective upon enactment of this chapter.
District Justice, and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
B. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorneys' fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Township.
§ 133-138 JACKSON CODE § 133-140
131:650
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
83-95 12-5-1995 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
84-95 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 179-09
85-96 1-2-1996 Real estate tax Ch. 117, Art. VII
86-96 3-26-1996 Zoning Repealed by Ord.
No. 171-08
87-96 5-7-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
91-96 8-13-1996 Adoption of Code
amendment; amusements
amendment; barking dogs
amendment; curfew
amendment; junkyards
amendment; peddling and
soliciting amendment;
property maintenance
amendment; driveway
construction amendment;
excavations by utilities
amendment; abandoned
vehicles amendment
(violations and penalties)
Ch. 1, Art. I; Ch. 40;
Ch. 44, Art. I; Ch.
56; Ch. 76; Ch. 89;
Ch. 93; Ch. 109, Art.
I; Ch. 109, Art. II;
Ch. 123
92-96 10-8-1996 Curfew amendment Ch. 56
93-96 12-3-1996 Amusement tax repealer Ch. 117, Art. III
97-97 5-6-1997 Bond NCM
98-97 5-6-1997 Violations amendment Ch. 47; Ch. 56; Ch.
89; Ch. 93; Ch. 99
100-97 8-12-1997 Zoning Map amendment NCM
103-98 2-10-1998 Intergovernmental
agreement: traffic control
devices
NCM
104-98 2-10-1998 Fire plug tax amendment Ch. 117, Art. I
§ 133-140 WELLS § DL-1
131:651
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
105-98 4-7-1998 Law Enforcement Services
Agreement amendment
Ch. 28, Art. I
106-98 6-2-1998 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 171-08
107-99 3-2-1999 Manager Ch. 20, Art. I
110-99 6-1-1999 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 171-08
111-99 6-1-1999 Sewer connections Ch. 99, Art. II
114-99 8-3-1999 Street access Ch. 109, Art. I
116-99 9-7-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
117-99 10-5-1999 Cable television Ch. 53
118-00 1-4-2000 Fire plug tax amendment Ch. 117, Art. I
121-00 6-6-2000 Snow and ice removal;
vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. III; Ch.
127
122-00 7-10-2000 Plumbing standards Ch. 91
123-00 9-5-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
124-00 11-1-2000 Capped sewers Ch. 99, Art. III
125-00 11-1-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
126-01 2-1-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
127-01 2-1-2001 Fire plug tax amendment Ch. 117, Art I
128-01 8-7-2001 Zoning Map amendment NCM
129-01 8-7-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
130-02 4-2-2002 Capped sewers amendment Ch. 99, Art. III
131-02 4-2-2002 Collection and disposal of
refuse amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 199-13
132-02 10-10-2002 Zoning Map amendment NCM
133-02 11-6-2002 Taxation: occupational
privilege tax
Superseded by Ord.
No. 170-07
134-02 12-3-2002 Participation in Northern
York County Regional Police
Commission
Ch. 28, Art. III
135-03 12-9-2002 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 JACKSON CODE § DL-1
131:652
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
136-03 2-4-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
137-03 4-1-2003 Transfer of police pension
funds
NCM
138-03 5-6-2003 Nuisances Ch. 84
139-03 5-6-2003 Police pension plan
amendment
NCM
141-03 7-1-2003 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. V
142-03 9-2-2003 Police and nonuniformed
pensions amendment
Ch. 24, Art. I: Ch.
24, Art. II
143-03 9-2-2003 Intergovernmental
cooperation agreement:
creation of comprehensive
plan
NCM
144-03 11-5-2003 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 179-09
145-04 3-2-2004 Adult uses Ch. 36
146-04 5-4-2004 Intergovernmental
cooperation agreement
(Codorus Valley Council of
Governments)
NCM
147-04 6-1-2004 Wells Ch. 131
148-04 7-6-2004 Uniform Construction Code Ch. 47, Art. II
149-04 7-6-2004 Intergovernmental
cooperation agreement (Joint
Board of Appeals)
NCM
150-04 9-7-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
151-04 11-3-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
152-04 12-30-2004 Emergency and municipal
services tax; per capita tax
abolished
Ch. 117, Art. IV; Ch.
117, Art. VIII,
superseded by Ord.
No. 170-07
153-05 1-3-2005 Street vacation: Hidden Lane NCM
154-05 2-1-2005 Real estate tax amendment Ch. 117, Art. VII
155-05 3-1-2005 Parking amendment Ch. 127, Art. II
156-05 4-5-2005 Holding tanks Ch. 99, Art. IV
157-05 4-5-2005 Outdoor chemical toilets Ch. 99, Art. V
§ DL-1 WELLS § DL-1
131:653
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
158-05 4-5-2005 Local economic revitalization
tax assistance
Ch. 117, Art. IX
159-05 6-7-2005 Stormwater management Ch. 107
160-05 6-7-2005 Street vacation: Emig School
Road
NCM
161-05 8-2-2005 Agency for Collection of
Earned Income Tax
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. VI
162-05 8-2-2005 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. V
163-05 9-6-2005 Township Employees 457
Plan
Ch. 24, Art. III
164-05 12-6-2005 On-lot sewage disposal
systems
Ch. 99, Art. VI
165-06 6-6-2006 Streets and sidewalks: street
right-of-way occupancy
Ch. 109, Art. II
166-06 7-11-2006 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 179-09
167-06 9-5-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
168-06 11-8-2006 General provisions: adoption
of Code amendment
Ch. 1, Art. I
169-06 11-8-2006 Realty transfer tax Ch. 117, Art. X
170-07 12-4-2007 Local services tax Ch. 117, Art. VIII
171-08 2-5-2008 Zoning Ch. 133
172-08 4-1-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
173-08 4-1-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
174-08 5-6-2008 Local economic revitalization
tax assistance amendment
Ch. 117, Art. IX
175-08 6-3-2008 Maintenance and clearance
of streets and sidewalks
Ch. 109, Art. IV
176-08 9-2-2008 Curfew amendment Ch. 56
177-08 10-7-2008 Bond guaranty agreement NCM
178-08 11-4-2008 Street vacation NCM
179-09 2-3-2009 Subdivision and land
development
Ch. 113
§ DL-1 JACKSON CODE § DL-1
131:654
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
180-09 4-7-2009 Intermunicipal joint
comprehensive plan
agreement
NCM
181-09 6-2-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
182-09 8-4-2009 Floodplain management Superseded by Ord.
No. 207-15
183-09 10-6-2009 Street vacation and utility
easement
NCM
184-09 12-18-2009 Amending Ord. No. 183-09
to correct legal description
NCM
185-10 2-2-2010 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
186-10 3-2-2010 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
187-10 8-3-2010 Cable television amendment Ch. 53
188-10 12-7-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
189-11 9-6-2011 Pensions: Township
Employees 457 Plan repealer
Ch. 24, Art. III,
reference only
190-11 9-6-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 133
191-11 9-6-2011 Junkyards amendment Ch. 76
192-11 11-1-2011 Open burning; outdoor fires Repealed by Ord.
No. 197-13
193-11 11-1-2011 Earned income tax Ch. 117, Art. V
194-11 10-4-2011 Stormwater management Ch. 107
195-12 7-13-2012 Parks and recreation areas:
rules and regulations
Ch. 87, Art. I
196-12 10-2-2012 Street vacation NCM
197-13 5-7-2013 Open burning; outdoor fires Ch. 50
198-13 7-2-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
199-13 11-5-2013 Municipal waste collection
and recycling
Ch. 105
200-13 12-18-2013 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
201-14 9-2-2014 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
§ DL-1 WELLS § DL-1
131:655
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
202-15 1-5-2015 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
203-15 1-5-2015 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
204-15 2-3-2015 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
205-15 4-7-2015 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
206-15 8-4-2015 Guaranty agreement; sewer
revenue note
NCM
207-15 12-1-2015 Floodplain management Ch. 69
208-16 5-3-2016 Property maintenance
amendment; streets and
sidewalks: snow and ice
removal amendment
Ch. 93; Ch. 109, Art.
III
209-16 5-3-2016 Emergencies and disasters:
emergency service provider
cost reimbursement
Ch. 61, Art. I
210-16 6-7-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 133
§ DL-1 JACKSON CODE § DL-1
131:656