Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Enforcement; General Penalty
[Adopted 8-7-2014 by Ord. No. 564]
§ 1-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Civil/Criminal Enforcement Ordinance
of the Borough of Kenhorst" and shall govern the imposition of fines and
penalties and the enforcement of ordinances within the Borough.
§ 1-2. Civil and criminal evidentiary requirements.
§ 1-3. Civil and criminal fines.
In all cases, all ordinances are amended to permit the highest fine amount
permitted by law in accordance with the Borough Code,1 as amended June
17, 2014, which provides:
A. Several ordinances in the Borough regulate behavior, property
maintenance, public safety, parking, solicitation, curfew, water, air,
noise pollution, zoning and other ordinances which entail enforcement,
while the Borough may not actually be in a position for an observable
offense. To ensure proper ordinance enforcement, the Borough shall be
permitted to file violations and prosecute the same based upon
observable conditions at a property or based upon information provided
by residents regarding violations. Said violation notice shall be valid
based upon observable conditions such as failure to remove snow, the
appearance of snow after plowing, the appearance of grass clippings in
the street, improper disposal of materials, accrual of improper
substances on a property, noise complaints, obtaining evidence of
solicitation and similar evidence.
B. The Borough shall be permitted to prosecute all manner of civil and/or
criminal violations based upon observed facts, learned facts or facts
which logic would dictate that a violation has occurred. The mere
existence of certain facts shall constitute appropriate probable cause to
bring a notice of violation that does not constitute a prison sentence.
C. In the context of the party who shall receive a violation, the violation
may be provided upon a person who is actually observed committing
the violation, companies or corporations who participated in the
violation or authorized the violation, property owners on which
property a violation occurred or any other person permitted by
individual ordinances who may be responsible for such violations.
D. In the event an ordinance provides for specific evidentiary
determinations that are not found in this article, those factors may also
be considered in conjunction with the information and circumstances
set forth in this article.
1. Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
§ 1-4. Code enforcement officials.
The Police Department serving the Borough shall be empowered to enforce
any and all Borough ordinances as it deems proper. Moreover, from time
to time by resolution, the Borough Council may appoint code officers and
assistant code officers to enforce Borough ordinances as appropriate to
achieve compliance with the ordinances of the Borough.
§ 1-5. Enforcement notice.
After a Borough enforcement officer has made an initial determination of an
ordinance violation, he shall promptly serve notice of such violation to the
person(s) and/or entity responsible for the violation and further establish
the fine for such violation. A warning prior to an official enforcement notice
shall not constitute a waiver of any violation, nor shall it require warnings to
other similarly situated offenders. Where a penalty for such violation is not
paid within 30 days of such violation, the Borough enforcement official shall
initiate the appropriate enforcement proceedings. Similarly, if abatement
of the violation does not occur within the time set forth in the notice
of violation, the Code Official may initiate the appropriate enforcement
proceedings regardless of the passage of 30 days.
§ 1-6. Costs of violation.
In addition to any penalties/fines, the enforcement proceedings shall
include a demand for all court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred
by the Borough.
§ 1-7. Failure to appeal.
All notices of violations shall state the manner of appeal. In the event that
a violator fails to appeal as set forth in the enforcement notice, it shall
be determined that the person did waive all defenses and the Magisterial
District Judge shall be limited to a determination of the amount of fines,
penalties and costs.
§ 1-8. Continuing fines.
For any person(s) and/or entity who is not in compliance with any Borough
ordinance, each continuing day of violation or noncompliance shall be a
separate offense for which the enforcement official may seek separate fines
and costs in the same or separate proceeding.
A. A civil penalty may not exceed $600 per violation; and
B. A criminal penalty may not exceed $1,000, and a term of imprisonment
not to exceed 30 days may be prescribed. [Amended 12-1-2016 by
Ord. No. 582]
§ 1-3 KENHORST CODE § 1-9
1:4
§ 1-9. Existing ordinances.
All ordinances which were adopted prior to the effective date of this article
shall be amended to be consistent with the provisions of this article.
§ 1-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:5

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-1-2016 by Ord. No. 582]
§ 1-10. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 3301.5 of the Borough Code (8 Pa.C.S.A. § 3301.5), the
codification of a complete body of legislation for the Borough of Kenhorst,
County of Berks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and
consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General Code, and
consisting of Chapters 1 through 475, together with an Appendix, is hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the
Borough of Kenhorst, which shall be known and is hereby designated as the
"Code of the Borough of Kenhorst," hereinafter referred to as the "Code.''
§ 1-11. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of
the prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued
in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by
the Borough Council of the Borough of Kenhorst, and it is the intention of
said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-12 below, and only
new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-15 below, shall be deemed to
be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in§ 1-24 below.
§ 1-12. Inconsistent legislation repealed.
A. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances. Except as provided in § 1-13,
Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal, below, all
ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-24; provided, however, that such repeal
shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any valid
legislation of the Borough of Kenhorst which is not in conflict with the
provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and
effect.
B. Repeal of specific ordinances. The Borough Council of the Borough of
Kenhorst has determined that the following elements of the 1973 Code
of Ordinances are no longer in effect and hereby specifically repeals the
following:
(1) Chapter 3, Part 1, §§ 12 and 13, Keeping of Pigs.
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-12
1:7
§ 1-13. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by
repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-12 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
(2) Chapter 4, Part 1, Bicycles.
(3) Chapter 6, Part 1, §§ 4 through 9, Public Property.
(4) Chapter 10, Part 1, Garbage and Rubbish Collection.
(5) Chapter 11, Part 2, § 16, Graffiti.
(6) Chapter 12, Part 2, Occupancy Permits.
(7) Chapter 13, Part 1, Circuses, Rodeos and Public Exhibitions.
(8) Chapter 13, Part 2, Transient Retail Businesses.
(9) Chapter 24, Part 1, Shade Tree Commission.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to September 1, 2016.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
§ 1-12 KENHORST CODE § 1-13
1:8
§ 1-14. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § l- 13A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-15. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation;
new provisions.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Borough.
S. Any currently effective ordinance providing for intergovernmental
cooperation or establishing an intermunicipal agreement.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
A. Nonsubstantive changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances
and resolutions of the Borough for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code.2 These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Borough Council, and it is
the intent of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall
be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in
§ 1-24.
C. Nomenclature and statutory changes. Unless otherwise indicated,
throughout the Code, references to the following agencies, officials or
statutes are updated as indicated:
(1) "Building Inspector," "Code Officer" and "Code Official" to "Code
Enforcement Officer."
(2) "Department of Environmental Resources" or "DER" to
"Department of Environmental Protection" or "DEP."
(3) "Department of Community Affairs" or "DCA" to "Department of
Community and Economic Development" or "DCED."
(4) "Justice of the Peace," "District Magistrate" and "District Justice" to
"Magisterial District Judge."
(5) "Soil Conservation Service" or "SCS" to "Natural Resources
Conservation Service" or "NRCS."
(6) In Chapter 44, Article I, "Kenhorst Volunteer Fire Co." to "Kenhorst
Volunteer Fire Company No. 1."
(7) In Chapter 138, "Township" to "Borough."
(8) In Chapter 327, "Director of Parks" and "Director of Parks and
Public Property" to "Parks Committee or designee."
2. Editor’s Note: In accordance with § 1-15B, the chapters, parts and sections that were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: [Amended (added, deleted) 12-1-2016 by Ord. No.
582]. Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Borough offices.
§ 1-15 KENHORST CODE § 1-15
1:10
§ 1-16. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-17. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-18. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with
the Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
or copies shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by
law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of
the Borough Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-19. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
(9) In Chapter 419, references to the Local Tax Enabling Act are
updated to refer to 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:11
§ 1-20. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Borough Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and
all legislation adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt specifically
as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as supplements
to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 1-21. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice
of introduction, the availability of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection
by the public and the filing of an attested copy of this ordinance with the
county, as required by law, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-22. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this section of this ordinance shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
Borough in the enforcement of this chapter. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers
or agents of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief,
including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-23. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
§ 1-20 KENHORST CODE § 1-23
1:12
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-24. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after December 1, 2016.
§ 1-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-24
1:13
Chapter 7
AUDITOR
§ 7-1. Audit by public accountant; office of elected auditor repealed.
The auditing of all accounts, receipts and expenditures, ledgers, and
records of the Borough of Kenhorst shall be done and accomplished by
a competent public accountant in lieu and in place of the election of an
auditor and auditors for the Borough of Kenhorst, and such office of elected
auditor is hereby repealed.
Chapter 12
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
§ 1-24 KENHORST CODE § 7-1
1:14
ARTICLE I
Kenhorst Municipal Authority
[Adopted 6-4-1959 by Ord. No. 145 (Ch. 1, Part 2, of the 1973 Code
of Ordinances)3]
§ 12-1. Intention and desire to organize.
The Council of the Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania, hereby
signifies its intention and desire to organize an Authority under the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,
approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented (the
"Authorities Act"),4 for the purpose of exercising any and all powers
conferred by said Act.
§ 12-2. Articles of Incorporation.
The Mayor, President of Council and the Secretary of the Borough hereby
are authorized and directed to execute, in behalf of the Borough, Articles of
Incorporation for said Authority, in substantially the following form:
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382,
known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as amended and
supplemented,5 and pursuant to an ordinance adopted by the municipal
authorities of the Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania,
expressing the intention and desire of the municipal authorities of said
municipality to organize a municipal authority under said Act, the said
municipality hereby does certify:
1. The name of the Authority is "Borough of Kenhorst Municipal
Authority."
2. The said Authority is formed under the provisions of said Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945.
3. No other Authority has been organized under the said Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945, or under the Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 483, as
amended, and is in existence in or for the incorporating municipality.
4. The name of the incorporating municipality is: Borough of Kenhorst,
Berks County, Pennsylvania.
5. The names and addresses of the municipal authorities of said
incorporating municipality are:. . .6
3. Editor's Note: The Kenhorst Borough Municipal Authority, as adopted 3-10-1960 by Ord.
No. 157 (Ch. 9, Part 1, of the 1973 Code of Ordinances) was rendered inactive by Ord. No.
206. The Borough of Kenhorst may reactivate the Authority by ordinance at the discretion
of Council.
4. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
5. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
6. Editor's Note: Here followed the names and addresses of the principal officers of the
Borough at the time of enactment of this ordinance.
§ 12-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2
1:15
6. The names and addresses and terms of office of the first members of
the Board of said Authority, each of whom is a resident and citizen of
said incorporating municipality are: . . .7
7. Editor's Note: Here followed the names, addresses and terms of office of the first members
of the Board of the Authority.
§ 12-2 KENHORST CODE § 12-2
1:16
Chapter 44
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 235.
§ 12-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2
1:17

ARTICLE I
Designation of Fire Department
[Adopted 11-11-1989 by Ord. No. 405 (Ch. 1, Part 6A, of the 1973
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 44-1. Right to designate.
The Borough of Kenhorst reserves the right to designate, by ordinance, the
official volunteer fire department for the Borough of Kenhorst.
§ 44-2. Designation.
The Borough of Kenhorst hereby designates Kenhorst Volunteer Fire
Company No. 1 as the official municipal fire department for the Borough of
Kenhorst.
§ 44-3. Appointment of Fire Chief.
Immediately after passage of this article, and annually thereafter, during
the month of January, Kenhorst Volunteer Fire Company No. 1 shall
nominate and appoint, with the consent of the Borough Council, a Fire Chief
and a Deputy or Assistant Fire Chief for the fire company so designated,
who shall hold office for the term of one year or until his successor is duly
elected and approved.
§ 44-4. Execution of oath.
Upon being elected, and approved by the Borough Council, the Fire Chief
and Deputy or Assistant Fire Chief shall be sworn and execute an oath of
office as provided by law.
§ 44-5. Liability.
The designation of the official fire department for the Borough of Kenhorst
and the approval of the appointment of the Fire Chief and the Deputy or
Assistant Fire Chief as provided herein shall not in any way be construed
or is to impose any liability, obligation or control over the Kenhorst Fire
Department by the Borough of Kenhorst.
§ 44-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-5
1:19

ARTICLE II
Workers' Compensation Coverage
[Adopted 7-2-1998 by Ord. No. 448 (Ch. 1, Part 6B, of the 1973
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 44-6. Workers compensation coverage.
All persons, when authorized by the Kenhorst Volunteer Fire Company No.
1, who are engaged in activities unrelated to firefighting, including fundraising
activities, for the benefit of the Kenhorst Volunteer Fire Company
No. 1, shall be entitled to the same benefits under the Workers'
Compensation Act as provided for volunteer firefighters, whether or not
said persons are minors.
§ 44-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-6
1:21
Chapter 71
MANAGER
§ 71-1. Office of Borough Manager created.
The office of the Borough Manager, either full-time or part-time, as so
directed by the Borough Council of the Borough of Kenhorst, is hereby
created, subject to the right of the Borough, by ordinance, at any time to
abolish the said office.
§ 71-2. Manager to be appointed by Council.8
While the office of the Borough Manager exists, whether on a full-time or
part-time basis, the Council shall from time to time, whenever there is a
vacancy, elect by vote of a majority of all its members one person to fill such
office; subject, however, to removal by the Council at any time by vote of a
majority, plus one, of all its members.
§ 71-3. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be a male or female citizen of the United States at least
21 years of age.
§ 71-4. Bond required.
Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the Borough Manager
shall give a bond to the Borough, in such sum as the Borough Council
shall prescribe, with a trust company or bonding company as surety to be
approved by the Council. Such bond shall be conditioned for the faithful
performance of his or her duties by the Manager.
§ 71-5. Compensation.
The salary of the Borough Manager shall be fixed from time to time by the
Borough Council.
§ 71-6. Powers and duties assigned by Mayor and Borough Council.
The Borough Manager shall carry on the business of the Borough under
the direction of the Council, and the powers and duties shall relate to
the general management of all Borough business not expressly by statue
imposed or conferred upon other Borough officers. The Mayor, with
approval of Borough Council, is hereby authorized to delegate to the
Borough Manager any of his nonlegislative and nonjudicial powers and
duties.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 44-6 KENHORST CODE § 71-7
1:22
§ 71-7. Powers and duties enumerated.
Subject to recall at any time by ordinance of the Council, the powers and
duties of the Borough Manager shall include the following:
§ 71-8. Reservation of right to amend.
The Borough reserves the right at any time, by ordinance, to amend or
otherwise modify or to repeal this chapter.
A. The Borough Manager, under the direction of the Mayor, shall execute
and enforce the laws of the commonwealth, and the ordinances,
resolutions and by-laws enacted or adopted by the Borough Council.
B. He or she shall attend all meetings of the Council and shall recommend
to the Council such measures as he or she shall deem expedient.
C. He or she shall, at least once a month and at such other times as
Council may direct, report to the Council upon the affairs of the
Borough.
D. He or she shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and
shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same,
except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed upon any other
Borough officer by statute.
E. He or she shall have power to purchase all supplies and equipment for
the use of his or her own and the various departments and offices of the
Borough; provided, however, that no single article so purchased shall
be for more than $500. He or she shall keep an account of all purchases
made by him or her and shall, from time to time, and as directed by the
Council, make a full written report thereof.9
F. He or she shall see that all monies owing the Borough are promptly paid
and that proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of
all the Borough's claims.
G. He or she shall annually present to the Council, not more than 30 days
after the close of the fiscal year, a correct and detailed statement and
report of the preceding year's work of his office, with a detailed
statement of all monies received and expended.
H. He or she shall perform such other duties as may be, from time to time,
conferred upon him or her by ordinance.
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 71-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-8
1:23
Chapter 79
PENSIONS
Chapter 84
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 84-1. Establishment.
A Planning Commission consisting of five members is hereby created and
established for the Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania,
pursuant to the provisions of Article II, Section 201, of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as established by the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L.
805, No. 247, as amended and reenacted (53 P.S. § 10201 et seq.).
§ 84-2. Composition; terms of office.
The Planning Commission shall be comprised of five members who shall be
appointed for terms of office of four years, or until a successor is appointed
and qualified.
§ 84-3. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall have all the powers and duties conferred
and imposed upon it as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, established by the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended
and reenacted (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.).
Chapter 89
POLICE SERVICES
§ 89-1. Provision of police services.
The Borough of Kenhorst will provide police services at Council's discretion.
Chapter 101
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 71-8 KENHORST CODE § 89-1
1:24
ARTICLE I
Tax Collector
[Adopted 4-5-1973 by Ord. No. 298 (Ch. 1, Part 1, § 3, of the 1973
Code of Ordinances); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 101-1. Annual compensation.
This article sets the compensation of the Tax Collector at a fixed salary of
$2,500 per year beginning January 1, 2014, with an annual cost-of-living
increase for each successive year thereafter, to be determined by Borough
Council by resolution from time to time, plus a commission of five percent
of all per capita taxes paid after January 1 for any one year.
§ 101-2. Fees; penalties.
The Borough Tax Collector shall be compensated in addition to the above
salary by charging a fee of $20 for each tax certification issued relating to
Borough taxes paid and a fee of $35 as a penalty for any check returned for
nonpayment by the maker thereof.
§ 101-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-2
1:25

ARTICLE II
Mayor and Council
[Adopted 12-30-1985 by Ord. No. 384 (Ch. 1, Part 1, §§ 1 and 2, of
the 1973 Code of Ordinances); amended in its entirety at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 101-3. Compensation of Mayor and President of Council.
The compensation allowable and payable to the Mayor and the President of
the Council of the Borough of Kenhorst, commencing January 1, 1986, shall
be the sum of $2,500 annually. The annual compensation shall be paid in
quarterly installments.
§ 101-4. Compensation of Councilmen.
The annual compensation for each member of Borough Council, [Kenhorst
Borough,] Berks County, Pennsylvania, is fixed at the maximum allowable
compensation as set forth in the Borough Code, 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 101-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-4
1:27

ARTICLE III
Payment Conditioned Upon Meeting Attendance
[Adopted 1-4-2016 by Ord. No. 574]
§ 101-5. Incorporation of recitals.
The Borough Council incorporates the aforementioned recitals as if more
fully set forth below.10
§ 101-6. Payment of wages quarterly.
The Borough Council shall pay quarterly wages as designated from time to
time by resolution or as otherwise permitted pursuant to the Borough Code
to Borough Council members and/or the Mayor of the Borough.
§ 101-7. Wage apportionment.
Said yearly wage amount shall be apportioned by 24 which shall be equal
to payments for each Borough Council meeting and each Borough Council
workshop meeting. Therefore, on an average year, there shall be 24
meetings per year.
§ 101-8. Attendance at meetings.
In order to achieve 1/24 of wages, Borough Council members shall attend a
designated and scheduled meeting each month. In the event that a meeting
is canceled for reasons including weather, emergency, lack of quorum,
holiday or other reason where the meeting generally is canceled, then all
Borough Council members and Mayor shall receive pay for that meeting.
§ 101-9. Missed meetings.
In the event a Borough Council member or Mayor misses a meeting for
military service, illness supported by doctors excuse or other reason that
Council votes to excuse that Council member's presence, then that member
may receive compensation only by affirmative vote of the other Council
members. In the event that a Council member or Mayor seeks to be excused
from a meeting, unless an emergency occurs, prior notice of at least 24
hours to the Borough Manager must take place.
10.Editor's Note: Said recitals are as follows: "Whereas, the Borough Council of the Borough
of Kenhorst obtains statutory payment each year which is permitted under the Borough
Code for elected officials; and "Whereas, the Borough Council feels that because such
monies are tax monies a certain level of accountability is necessary in order to receive
such payments; and "Whereas, the Borough Council hereby seeks to pay such wages
quarterly based upon monthly meeting attendance and participation in Borough Council
functions."
§ 101-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-9
1:29
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 138
ALARM DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 235.
§ 138-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:
ALARM — A communication indicating or warning that a crime, fire or other
emergency situation warranting immediate action by the Borough Police or
local fire companies has occurred or is occurring.
ALARM DEVICE — A privately owned and operated or a leased electronic,
electrical, mechanical or similar device designed to transmit an alarm by
wire, telephone, radio, audible signal (bell, siren or buzzer) or other means
to the Borough Police, local fire companies, any person or firm who or which
is instructed to notify the Borough Police or local fire companies, or any
person who is within the sound-transmitting distance limits of such audible
signal.
FALSE ALARM — An alarm to which the Borough Police or local fire
companies respond, resulting from the activation of an alarm device, when
it appears that a crime, fire or other emergency warranting immediate
action by the Borough Police or local fire companies has not occurred at the
premises where the alarm was transmitted.
INTENTIONAL FALSE ALARM — An alarm resulting from the intentional
activation of an alarm device by an individual under circumstances where
the individual had no reasonable basis to believe that a crime, fire or other
emergency warranting immediate action by the Borough Police or local fire
companies has occurred or was occurring.
NEW INSTALLATION — A business or residence at which an alarm device
has been installed where an alarm device previously did not exist, or a
business or residence which has made a major change to the existing
alarm device in respect to sensory devices, control panels, audible signals,
transmission devices or any combination of the aforementioned system
components are changed.
PERMIT HOLDER — A person to whom the Borough Police have issued an
alarm device permit.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, incorporated
association or other legal entity.
§ 138-2. Permits.
§ 101-9 KENHORST CODE § 138-2
1:30
A. It shall be unlawful for a property owner, lessee of property, or a person
otherwise occupying a premises in the Borough to put an alarm device
into operation on his or its premises or to allow an alarm device to be
put into operation on his or its premises without first obtaining an alarm
device permit from the Borough.
B. In order to apply for an alarm device permit a person shall submit an
application to the Borough stating the following:
(1) His or its name.
(2) His or its home address and/or principal business address and the
telephone number of each.
(3) The location at which the alarm device will be installed and
operated.
(4) If the alarm device is at a business, the names, addresses and
telephone numbers of at least two individuals who have keys to the
premises at which the alarm device is located and who are
authorized to enter the premises at any time; or in lieu thereof, the
name, address and telephone number of a security service
company which provides alarm services at the premises and which
has on file with it the names of such authorized key holders,
provided that such security service company can be contacted 24
hours a day each and every day of the year.
(5) If the alarm device is at a residence, the name, address and
telephone number of at least one individual who has keys to the
premises and is authorized to enter the premises at any time shall
be listed along with that individual's place of employment and its
telephone number.
(6) A complete description of the alarm device including information
indicating if the device is coordinated with any other type of
antipersonnel, smoke, fire or personal safety device.
(7) If the alarm device is to be leased or rented from, or is to be
serviced pursuant to a service agreement by a person other than
the person making application for an alarm device permit, the
name, address and telephone number of that person.
C. The Borough Police shall furnish forms upon which any person wishing
to apply for an alarm device permit may submit his application.
D. A person applying for an alarm device permit shall submit a fee in an
amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council,
along with his application, to cover the costs of issuing the permit.11
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 138-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-2
1:31
§ 138-3. Operational standards.
E. The Borough shall, upon receipt of an application for an alarm device
permit, either grant an alarm device permit to the applicant or notify
the applicant in writing that his or its application has been denied and
the reason or reasons why it has been denied.
F. Upon application for an alarm device permit, the applicant shall furnish
proof that the alarm device meets the operational standards set forth in
§ 138-3 of this chapter by submitting a form, furnished with the
application, completed by the security service company or the applicant
which verifies the operation standards of this chapter have been met.
Such form shall be signed by the applicant if he completed the form or
by the security service company representative if they completed the
form.
G. An application for an alarm device permit may only be denied for the
following reasons:
(1) The application submitted does not conform with Subsection B or D
of this section.
(2) The applicant's alarm device does not conform with the operational
standards set forth in § 138-3 of this chapter.
H. Notwithstanding the language contained in Subsection A of this
section, it shall not be unlawful for a person to continue to operate an
alarm device on his premises without an alarm device permit, after the
effective date of this chapter, provided that said alarm device was in
operation on the effective date of this chapter, until such time as the
Borough Police or local fire companies respond to an alarm resulting
from the activation of such alarm device, whereafter such person shall
have 30 days within which to apply for the alarm device permit required
by this chapter.
A. If an alarm device is designed to transmit a recorded message, the
contents of said message shall be intelligible.
B. If an alarm device is designed to cause an exterior bell, siren or other
sound-making device to be active on or near the premises on which the
alarm device is installed at the time it gives an alarm, said alarm device
shall be designed to deactivate the bell, siren or other sound-making
device after a maximum of 20 minutes of operation.
C. The sensory mechanisms used in connection with an alarm device must
be installed and adjusted to suppress false indications of fire, smoke or
intrusion.
D. The alarm device must be maintained by the permit holder in good
repair to assure reliability of operation.
§ 138-2 KENHORST CODE § 138-4
1:32
§ 138-4. Intentional false alarm.12
It shall be unlawful to cause an intentional false alarm. Violators shall be
punishable pursuant to 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4905.
§ 138-5. False alarm charges.
§ 138-6. Violations and penalties.14
Any person who has violated the terms of this chapter, upon conviction
thereof before a Magisterial District Judge or the Court of Common Pleas of
Berks County, after hearing held, shall be subject to the penalties provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Enforcement; General Penalty.
A. In the case of new installations, a thirty-day testing period shall apply to
allow the security service company and the applicant to adjust the
system as necessary to prevent false alarm indications. During this
thirty-day period, false alarm charges shall not be assessed.
B. A permit holder shall pay to the Borough for each false alarm
emanating from his alarm device during any calendar year as follows:13
(1) Thirty-day testing period: no charge.
(2) First through third false alarm: no charge.
(3) Fourth and subsequent false alarms: a fine of not more than $300
for each occurrence.
C. When a false alarm occurs, Borough shall notify the permit holder of the
alarm device from which the false alarm emanated that a false alarm
charge is due and the amount thereof, if any. Such notice shall be in
writing and mailed to the permit holder at his last known address by
certified mail, postage prepaid.
D. A false alarm charge shall be due and payable at the office of the
Borough no later than 30 days from the date of notice of the false alarm
charge.
E. Failure of a permit holder to pay a false alarm charge on or before the
due date shall subject such a permit holder to the penalties provided for
in § 138-6 of this chapter.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 138-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-6
1:33
Chapter 142
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 303.
§ 138-6 KENHORST CODE § 138-6
1:34
ARTICLE I
Animals in Parks and Recreation Areas
[Adopted 7-11-1974 by Ord. No. 313 (Ch. 15, Part 1, of the 1973
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 142-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Any and all types of animals both domesticated and wild, male
and female, singular and plural.
PARK AND RECREATION AREA — All those areas of property which the
Borough of Kenhorst has created and maintains for the recreational use of
its citizens, including but not limited to boulevard dividers and triangular
plots of grass maintained by the Borough of Kenhorst.
§ 142-2. Animals not to be permitted in parks and recreation areas.
No person owning or having in his custody any animals shall permit the
same to enter the parks and recreation areas of the Borough of Kenhorst.
Such action is declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the public health
and safety.15
§ 142-3. Return to owner.
If the officer knows or with reasonable dispatch can gain knowledge of the
identity of the owner or custodian of the animal or fowl, he will return it
to the residence address. If there is no one at the address, he will leave a
notice indicating where the owner or custodian may reclaim the property.
He will then proceed to the nearest animal hospital or shelter which will
accept the animal or fowl and leave it. He will then secure or cause to
be secured and serve or have served a warrant of arrest on the owner or
custodian for permitting the animal or fowl to go at large.
§ 142-4. Disposition if owner not found.
Any officer or designated person picking up an animal or fowl and after
reasonable diligence is unable to find who owns or has custody of it will take
it to the nearest animal hospital or shelter and leave it.
§ 142-5. Owner to pay board for animal.
The owner or custodian who redeems an animal or fowl from an animal
hospital or shelter will pay a board bill on a per diem basis in an amount
previously agreed to between the Borough and the owner of the hospital or
shelter but in no event shall such payment be less than $5 per day.
15.Editor's Note: Original Section 3, Officer may impound, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 142-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-6
1:35
§ 142-6. Disposition of unredeemed animals.
Any animal or fowl not redeemed within 24 hours will be disposed of in such
manner as previously agreed upon between the Borough and owner of the
animal hospital or shelter. The owner of the hospital or shelter is made an
agent of the Borough for this purpose, and his actions in this regard are
declared to be for a governmental purpose.
§ 142-7. Leashing of dogs and cats.16
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to permit the running of dogs
and cats at large. All dogs and cats shall be restrained at all times on
adequate leashes not more than five feet in length.17
§ 142-8. Violations and penalties.18
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
17.Editor's Note: Original Section 9, Administrative officer to make necessary agreements,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II).
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 142-6 KENHORST CODE § 142-8
1:36
ARTICLE II
Control of Animals
[Adopted 2-2-1984 by Ord. No. 374 (Ch. 3, Part 1, §§ 1 through 11,
of the 1973 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 142-9. Persons responsible for property maintenance.
Every person owning or occupying any property shall be responsible for
the sanitary maintenance of the premises on which any animals or pets are
housed, maintained or kenneled.
§ 142-10. Limitation on number of animals per structure.
The number of animals or pets housed or maintained within a structure, or
upon any premises, shall be limited only to those animals or pets that can
be adequately maintained in a clean and sanitary condition as determined
by the appropriate Health Officer or employee of the Borough so designated
for such purpose.
§ 142-11. Animal shelters must be approved.
Animal shelters, or areas in which animals are maintained shall be
permitted only as approved by the same Health Officer and/or official or
employee of the Borough. Animal shelters shall be constructed in such
manner so as not to create a health hazard or nuisance to the adjoining
property owners.
§ 142-12. Removal of animal excreta from residence.
All animal excreta shall be removed and disposed of at least one time each
day.
§ 142-13. Removal of excess food.
Excess animal food shall not be allowed to accumulate in such manner so as
to create a food source for bacteria, insects or rodents.
§ 142-14. Animals prohibited in food/drinking establishments.19
No person shall maintain, transport or carry any animal or pet in any eating,
or drinking establishment, food manufacturing or food service facility,
except trained service animals.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 142-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-15
1:37
§ 142-15. Dogs and cats prohibited from running at large.20
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dog or cat owned by him,
or under his supervision or control, to run at large either upon the public
streets, sidewalks, alleys, or property of the Borough, or upon the property
of persons other than the owner of such dogs or cats.
§ 142-16. Immediate removal of animal fecal matter.
Owners of leashed or unleashed animals shall be responsible immediately
for the removal and disposal of fecal matter deposited by their animals
anywhere in the Borough of Kenhorst.
§ 142-17. Animal noise disturbance.21
Animal noise disturbances are prohibited as provided in § 303-4F of this
Code.
§ 142-18. Violations and penalties.22
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 142-15 KENHORST CODE § 142-18
1:38
Chapter 157
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 190.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 235.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 341.
§ 157-1. All buildings to be numbered correctly.
All buildings abutting on public streets in the Borough of Kenhorst,
Pennsylvania shall be plainly marked with numbers designated by the Street
Committee.23
§ 157-2. Numbers to be marked on official registry maps.
After such numbers have been determined upon by the Street Committee,
they shall be marked in ink on the official registry maps of the Borough of
Kenhorst, which shall be a record of the official numbers in the Borough of
Kenhorst.
§ 157-3. Address identification.24
Address identification shall be added to and visible from the rear boundary
of the property, as well as visible from the front of the property at the
street, according to most recent adopted Uniform Construction Code and/
or International Property Maintenance Code regulations.25
§ 157-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-29-1975 by Ord. No.
317; 4-29-1975 by Ord. No. 33926]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.
23.Editor's Note: Original Section 22, Street Committee authorized to assign building
numbers, which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
25.Editor's Note: Original Section 25, Duty of property owners to affix numbers after notice,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II).
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 142-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-4
1:39
Chapter 163
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 235. Waste management and recycling — See Ch.
384, Art. II.
§ 163-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as set
forth below, unless a different meaning is plainly required by the context.
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION (AHJ) — Fire Code Official, Police
Officer or Code Enforcement Officer.
BRUSH — Bushes, shrubs, thickets, tree trimmings, hedge clippings and
small trees.
FIRE PIT — A constructed pit dug into the ground or made from stones,
masonry, etc., for keeping a fire used for cooking or warmth.
NONORGANIC MATERIAL — Material derived or formed from inanimate
objects, other than vegetable, such as tin cans, glass crockery, metals,
plastic and similar materials.
OPEN BURNING — Burning any material in the open atmosphere, including
burning in fifty-five-gallon drums, outdoor fireplaces or other containers.
ORGANIC MATERIAL — Material derived from living organisms such as
wood, paper and yard scraps.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association or
corporation
RECYCLABLE — Any material that is required to be recycled in Kenhorst
Borough under the Pennsylvania Act 101,27 including scrap lumber (nontreated/
painted) and brush.
§ 163-2. Open fires and outdoor fires.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to open burn any material, including
the following, at any time in any zone within Kenhorst Borough:
(1) Household trash, books, magazines, newspapers, cardboard and/or
any items that are required to be recycled in Kenhorst Borough
under Pennsylvania Act 10128 and consistent with Chapter 384,
Article II, Waste Management and Recycling, of the Code of the
Borough of Kenhorst, including brush and scrap lumber or any
27.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
28.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 157-4 KENHORST CODE § 163-2
1:40
§ 163-3. Outdoor stoves and grills.
Outdoor stoves and grills shall be allowed upon private property within
Kenhorst Borough solely for the purpose of cooking foods. The following
regulations shall apply:
vegetation, plywood, drywall plastic products, insulation material,
upholstered furniture, garbage, dead animals, human and animal
excrement, human and animal hair, rubber products including
tires, hydrocarbon products or flammable liquids, asphalt or tar
shingles or roofing materials, bedding, foam rubber, nylon, rayon,
cotton, wool, polyester or other synthetic material, insulation from
copper or other wiring, solid waste and/or construction waste as
defined by the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act29 and 25
Pa. Code § 271.1.
(2) Except where fire or burning operations result from:
(a) Any fire set for the purpose of training and instructing
authorized personnel in fire fighting, and training of persons in
the use of portable fire extinguishers. (permit required)
(b) Any campfire or bonfire solely for organized recreational or
ceremonial purposes. (permit required)
(c) Any fire set for the prevention and/or control of disease of
pests, rats, snakes, bees, etc. (permit required)
B. The AHJ may suspend the above regulations at any time when the
following conditions exist:
(1) When smoke and/or ash emission are or may be objectionable,
offensive or deleterious to human or animal health or permeate or
crosses neighboring properties, and/or falls on buildings, vehicles
or vegetation.
(2) When extreme dry conditions or drought warrant a ban on all
burning.
A. No person shall use such stoves or grills for burning of materials as
outlined in § 163-2A of this chapter.
B. Outdoor stoves or grills shall not be used for such purposes other than
cooking food.
C. Outdoor stoves or grills shall not be used indoors or in any enclosed
areas that are not properly ventilated, i.e., garages, etc.
29.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 163-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-4
1:41
§ 163-4. Fire pits, chimineas, and factory-built metal novelty stoves.
Fire pits, chimineas, or factory-built metal novelty stoves shall require a
permit for outdoor use on residential private property within all zoning
districts of Kenhorst Borough, provided that the following regulations apply:
§ 163-5. Indoor fireplaces, wood-burning, coal stoves or solid-fuel
heaters.
Fireplaces, wood-burning and coal stoves shall be permitted inside
residential private property within all zones of Kenhorst Borough solely for
the purpose of heating the dwelling unit. The following regulations shall
apply:
§ 163-6. Handling of ashes and combustible rubbish.
Ashes, smoldering coals, wood and embers or other material liable to
spontaneously ignite shall not be deposited or allowed to remain within 10
feet of any combustible materials, but shall be deposited in noncombustible
containers. Rubbish of any kind shall not be allowed to accumulate.
§ 163-7. Permits.
All permits required under any provisions of this chapter shall be issued
in accordance with Section 105, Permits, of the 2009 International Fire
A. No persons shall use such fire pits, chimineas or factory-built novelty
stoves, for the burning of any material outlined in § 163-2A of this
chapter.
B. If smoke, ash, or smell emitting from such fire pits, chimineas or
factory-built novelty stoves, become objectionable or offensive to
neighboring properties, the AHJ may suspend the operation of same.
A. Only seasoned firewood, coal or solid fuels recommended by the
manufacturer may be burned in such fireplaces, wood-burning, coal
stoves or solid-fuel heaters.
B. No person may use such fireplaces, wood-burning, coal stoves or solidfuel
heaters for the burning of any material as outlined in § 163-2A of
this chapter.
C. Such fireplaces, wood-burning, coal stoves or solid-fuel heaters shall
not be used for such purpose when, in the judgment of AHJ, a fire
hazard is created by such use and operation and/or any danger is posed
to the occupants therein or the neighboring buildings and/or occupants.
D. If the smoke, ashes and/or smell emitting to the outside atmosphere
from the chimney, stove pipe or flue are objectionable or offensive to the
general public, the operation of such fireplace, wood-burning, coal
stove or solid-fuel heater shall be suspended by the AHJ.
§ 163-4 KENHORST CODE § 163-7
1:42
Code or versions as amended from time to time and adopted by Kenhorst
Borough, with the following provisions:
§ 163-8. Violations and penalties.30
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or neglecting to
comply with any order or notice issued pursuant hereto for violation of any
section hereto, shall upon conviction before any Magisterial District Judge,
be subject to the penalty provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
I, Enforcement; General Penalty. Each day's continuance of any violation of
this chapter shall constitute a separate offense, punishable by a like fine and
imprisonment in default of payment thereof.
Chapter 172
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 172-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Cable Television
Ordinance of 1965."
A. A fire prevention "special" permit as outlined in § 163-2A shall be
obtained from the Borough Office a minimum of 48 hours prior to
burning. The applicant shall provide name, address, phone number, the
purpose for the permit and attach a drawing of the proposed burning
site.
B. An annual permit is required for fire pits, chimineas or factory-built
novelty stoves. Permits must be renewed annually and expire on
December 31 of the permit year.
C. Before the permit is issued, an inspection may be made by the AHJ to
assure that the use of the permit complies with the provisions of this
chapter and the International Fire Code.
D. Any permit issued may be revoked for the protection of life or property
or to prevent or abate the nuisances caused by such burning. (A
nuisance would be defined as ash fallout or smoke accumulation in the
area of residential occupancies.)
E. If a person starts a fire without a permit or if a permit holder fails to
comply with any term or condition of the permit, and as a result of that
failure, the fire department is required to suppress a fire, the person or
permit holder is liable for the cost of fire suppression and subject to
fines in District Court.
F. Permit fees will be set from time to time by a duly adopted resolution of
the Kenhorst Borough Council.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 163-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-2
1:43
§ 172-2. Grant of authority.
The Borough of Kenhorst is hereby authorized to grant the right and
privilege to any person, persons, firms, corporations or other business
entities qualifying hereunder to construct, erect, operate and maintain,
in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, public
ways, public places, now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof or
additions thereto in said Borough or such portion thereof as the Borough
Council shall determine, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the
maintenance and operation in the Borough of a cable television system. Said
grant of the aforesaid right and privilege shall be subject, nevertheless, to
the following regulations and conditions hereinafter imposed in this chapter
and such other regulations and conditions as may be imposed from time to
time by the Borough of Kenhorst by appropriate action:
§ 172-3. Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
Any franchisee shall at all times during the term of any franchise granted
hereunder be subject to all of the laws of the United States of America,
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and any and all of the ordinances and
A. Nonexclusive grant. The right to use and occupy said streets, alleys,
public ways and public places for the purpose herein set forth shall not
be exclusive, and the Borough shall have the right to grant such
nonexclusive franchises to any other person, persons, firms,
corporations or other business entities qualifying hereunder at any
time.
B. Grant subject to Borough Code.31 Any grant by the Borough hereunder
is subject to all provisions of the Borough Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania presently in force and as the same may hereafter be
amended, supplemented or modified.
C. State Highway Department permits. Before any conduits, pipes or other
structures be erected upon, under, or in any portion of any street or
road within the Borough under the control of, or subject to the
provisions of, the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department
of Highways, the franchisee, at his, her, its, or their expense shall obtain
all requisite permits from the Pennsylvania Department of Highways
and shall comply with all the applicable rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Highways.
D. Easements and rights-of-way. Any permit issued hereunder by the
Borough shall be subject to the franchisee obtaining any and all
necessary easements, rights-of-way and other grants from any and all
property owners whose property may be affected or encroached upon
by the construction, operation and maintenance of the aforesaid cable
television system of the franchisee.
31.Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 172-2 KENHORST CODE § 172-3
1:44
regulations of the Borough of Kenhorst, now in effect, and such as may be
adopted or enacted from time to time hereafter, and particularly be subject
to the following conditions and regulations:
§ 172-4. Conditions on street occupancy.
A. Interference. Any system erected, operated and maintained by any
franchisee hereunder shall be so constructed of such materials that it
will absolutely prevent any interference on any television set, radio,
electrical appliance, and any other electronic device of any resident or
occupier of premises within the franchised area and, in the event that
there is any such interference, the franchisee shall immediately, at its
sole cost and expense, eliminate such interference. If such interference
cannot be eliminated within 48 hours, the Borough shall have the power
to suspend operation of any cable television system franchisee within
the Borough until such interference is eliminated.
B. Intentional interference. Any franchisee hereunder shall not
intentionally cause the emanation of any electrical interference which
has the property or ability of interfering with any television set, radio,
electrical appliance or other electronic device, and in the event that any
franchisee hereunder shall intentionally cause said emanations, the
franchise granted to said franchisee shall be immediately revoked and
terminated.
A. Use. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by the company within the Borough shall be so located as to
cause minimum interference with the reasonable use of the streets,
alleys and other public ways and places, and cause minimum
interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property
owners who adjoin any of said streets, alleys or other public ways and
places.
B. Restoration. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk,
driveway, or other surfacing, the franchisee shall at its sole cost and
expense and in manner approved by the Borough Engineer, replace and
restore all paving, sidewalk, driveways or surface of any street or alley
disturbed in the same condition as before said work was commenced.
C. Relocation. In the event that at any time during the period of any
franchise granted hereunder the Borough shall lawfully elect to alter or
change the grade of any street, alley, or other public way, the company,
upon reasonable notice by the Borough, shall at its sole cost and
expense, remove, relay, and relocate its poles, wires, cables,
underground conduits, manholes and other television fixtures.
D. Placement of fixtures. Any franchisee hereunder shall, insofar as it is
reasonably possible, locate its wires, cables, conduits and other
conductors and fixtures on existing utility poles. Any franchisee shall
not place any poles or other fixtures where same will interfere with any
utility, and all such poles or other fixtures placed in said street shall be
§ 172-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-4
1:45
§ 172-5. Assignability.
Any franchise granted hereunder shall not be assignable except upon the
express authority of the Borough, duly noted upon the minutes of the
Borough Council by a resolution permitting said assignment and finding
that the assignee is qualified under the terms of this chapter.
§ 172-6. Rights of Borough.
§ 172-7. Franchise fees.
§ 172-8. Records and reports.
Franchisee shall at all times maintain proper and adequate records of the
gross receipts together with records pertaining to its financial structure and
a list of all its subscribers at an office within Berks County which shall be
available at all reasonable times to inspection by the Borough or its duly
designated agent.
placed in such location as shall have been previously determined by the
Borough Engineer.
A. Borough rules. The right is hereby reserved to the Borough to adopt
from time to time, in addition to the provisions herein contained and
such existing applicable ordinances, such additional rules and
regulations as the Borough shall deem necessary.
B. Use of system by Borough. Borough shall have the right during the term
of any franchise to use, free of charge, where construction exists within
the Borough limits, the facilities of any franchisee for police and fire
alarm system.
C. Use of system by school district or districts whose areas are included
within the Borough boundaries. The school district or districts whose
areas are included within the Borough boundaries shall have the right
during the term of any franchise to use, free of charge, where
construction exists within the Borough limits, the facilities of any
franchisee for educational purposes.
A. The franchisee shall pay to the Borough for the privilege of obtaining a
franchise permit and operating of any franchise hereunder as shall be
negotiated from time to time.32
B. Any franchisee shall make payments to the Borough of such fees on or
before the 31st day of January of each year, beginning with January 31,
1965, except as otherwise provided herein, and at time of payment the
franchisee shall accompany said payment with an audited statement of
its business operation for the year by a certified public accountant
certifying to the Borough that the gross receipts are as stated therein.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 172-4 KENHORST CODE § 172-9
1:46
§ 172-9. Term of franchise.
Any franchise granted hereunder shall be for the term of one year;
conditioned, however, that said franchise permit is automatically renewable
each year upon the payment of the fees provided hereunder and compliance
with the terms and conditions herein imposed and that the financial
condition of the franchisee shall remain satisfactory to the Borough. The
term "financial condition" shall be interpreted to mean that the franchisee's
condition is such as it will permit the franchise to perform all of its services
to its subscribers.
§ 172-10. Qualifications and procedure for obtaining franchise
permit.
Franchise permits may be obtained hereunder by any person or persons or
corporation of good repute and of good and sufficient financial condition
upon presentment to the Borough of the following:
§ 172-11. Rates.
A. Name of the applicant;
B. Address of the applicant;
C. Evidence of financial condition of the applicant and in the event of a
corporation, names of principal stockholders and a financial statement
of the corporation duly certified by a certified public accountant;
D. Description of the area to be covered by the franchise;
E. Schedule of proposed rates to be charged by the applicant for all
services to be rendered to subscriber, including but not limited to
installation charge, monthly fees, etc.;
F. Application shall be made upon forms supplied by the Borough and all
information requested therein shall be submitted as requested.
A. All fees charged by franchisee shall be fair, just, reasonable and uniform
and in accordance with the rate schedule submitted by the applicant at
time of application for franchise permit.
B. Change in rates by any franchisee may be made only in accordance with
the following procedure:
§ 172-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-11
1:47
§ 172-12. Violations and penalties.
§ 172-13. Indemnification.33
Any franchisee hereunder shall immediately upon being granted a franchise
permit submit to the Borough evidence that the franchisee is insured
against liability to the public for injuries to person and property with any
reputable and financially sound insurance company in an amount not less
than $500,000 for any one person and $1,000,000 for any one accident and
property damage; and that the Borough shall also be designated as insured
under said policy, insuring the Borough against any liability which may arise
by reason of the issuance of any franchise permit to any franchisee, or as
Franchisee shall notify the Borough in writing by registered mail of
the proposed rate change and submit therewith the proposed rate
change and submit therewith the proposed amended rate schedule.
Within 21 days of receipt of the registered mail by the Borough, the
Borough shall arrange a meeting between franchisee and the Borough
officials to discuss the proposed rate change. If Borough Council does
not agree with changes requested by franchisee within 15 days after
the meeting, then a board of arbitrators shall be selected. The board of
arbitrators shall be composed of two members, two to be selected by
the Borough, two to be selected by the franchisee, and the fifth to be
selected by the four aforementioned representatives on the board of
arbitrators. Said board of arbitrators are to render a decision (majority
rules) for or against the rate change after 15 days from the date of
their appointment to said board. Any decision made by such board of
arbitrators shall be in writing and a copy thereof, duly authenticated,
shall be delivered on the day said decision is rendered to each, the
franchisee and the Borough, and shall be binding upon all parties
concerned.
A. Any franchisee violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter
or any rules or regulations duly adopted by the Borough shall be cause
for the forfeiture of any franchise permit.
B. The distribution system of any franchisee to be hereafter installed shall
not be abandoned either in whole or in part without consent of the
Borough. In the event of the failure of the franchisee to commence
installation of the system within 60 days after the issuance of a
franchise permit, and the securing of the pole franchise with the utility
companies, or in the event of the failure of the franchisee to render
community television service to the Borough and the inhabitants
thereof, contemplated and provided for this chapter, within a period of
six months from the date of issuance of the franchise permit, the
Borough shall have the right, on reasonable notice to the franchisee, to
declare the franchise granted hereunder as forfeited.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 172-11 KENHORST CODE § 172-13
1:48
negotiated from time to time. Such policy of insurance shall be in full force
and effect during the entire term of the franchise permit.
Chapter 178
CEMETERIES
§ 178-1. Establishment of cemetery prohibited.
The establishment of any cemetery or burial grounds within the corporate
limits of the Borough of Kenhorst is hereby prohibited.
§ 178-2. Extension of cemetery prohibited.
Any extension of, or addition to, any existing cemetery or burial grounds is
hereby prohibited within the corporate limits of the Borough of Kenhorst.
§ 178-3. Violations and penalties.34
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.
Chapter 190
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 157.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 235.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 241.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 341.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 398.
§ 190-1. Adoption of Uniform Construction Code.
A. The Borough of Kenhorst hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999,
35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 to 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
B. The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401 to 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of this
Borough.
34.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 172-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-2
1:49
§ 190-2. Administration and enforcement. [Amended 6-5-2008 by
Ord. No. 522]
A. Administration and enforcement of the Code within this Borough shall
be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the
Council of this Borough from time to time by resolution:
(1) By the designation of an employee of the Borough to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of the Borough.
(2) By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Borough.
(3) By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an
intermunicipal agreement.
(4) By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of this
Borough.
(5) By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department
of Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement
of structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and
utility and miscellaneous use structures.
B. In addition to all types of construction, placement of structures, repairs,
and alterations for which the Uniform Construction Code requires a
permit, the Borough, pursuant to the authorization of Act 92 of 2004,
shall require persons to obtain permits under the Borough of Kenhorst
construction code for all of the following:
(1) The construction, erection, or placement of any accessory
structure, which is equal to or greater than 400 square feet,
whether or not such accessory structure is connected to any utility.
(2) The construction, erection, or placement of any accessory
structure, which is less than 400 square feet if such accessory
structure is provided with any utility service. The applicant shall
obtain a permit only for the purpose of inspection for the utility or
utilities being installed or provided to the accessory structure.
(3) All alterations or repairs to residential buildings which are exempt
from the UCC by Act 92 of 2004; provided, however, that the
following types of alterations and repairs shall continue to be
exempt and no permit will be required:
(a) Replacement of windows and doors when there is no change in
size of the existing opening.
(b) Re-roofing of less than 25% of the total existing roof square
footage; however, when more than 25% of the roof must be
replaced, a permit is required and all existing roofing materials
§ 190-2 KENHORST CODE § 190-2
1:50
§ 190-3. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Council of the
Borough of Kenhorst in conformity with the requirements of the relevant
provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the purpose
set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is
undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of
Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
§ 190-4. Effect on other regulations.
must be removed to the sheeting, which must also be replaced
if any defects are evident. Sheeting replacement shall be
minimum one-half-inch industrial plywood. Other sheeting
materials shall be replaced, in kind, to form finish surface for
replacement.
(c) Replacement of hot-water heater, boiler, or furnace, or the
replacement of any part of a hot-water heater, boiler, or
furnace with the same efficiency rating, electrical, and
plumbing requirements.
(d) Addition or replacement of siding on the exterior of the
residential structure.
(e) Repair or replacement of any nonstructural portion of a deck
or porch stoop.
(f) Replacement of an appliance switch or receptacle with a
switch or receptacle, which is the same or has a like rating.
(g) The addition of one application switch or receptacle.
(h) The repair or replacement of any nonstructural member.
(i) The repair or replacement of any sink, toilet, tub, shower, or
similar plumbing fixture without relocation of any drain or
venting device.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by this Borough on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal or
exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in full force and
effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less that the minimum requirements of the code are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of this Borough not
governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 190-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-5
1:51
§ 190-5. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Borough for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the code shall be established by
the Council of the Borough of Kenhorst by resolution from time to time.
Chapter 196
CURFEW
§ 196-1. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Borough of Kenhorst or a
designated representative.
CURFEW HOURS — Ten o'clock p.m. on any day of the week until 6:00 a.m.
of the following day.
DIRECT ROUTE — The shortest path of travel through a public place to
reach a final destination without any detour or stop along the way.
EMERGENCY — Includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an
automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent
serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place
of amusement or entertainment.
HOLDING LOCATION — A place designated by the Chief of Police to which
a minor taken into custody for a violation of this chapter will be delivered to
await pickup by a parent or juvenile authorities.
MINOR — Any person under 18 years of age.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes
the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of
a corporation.
PARENT — A person who is:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, playground, park,
plaza, building or any place used by or open to the public.
REMAIN — To:
A. A natural or adoptive parent of another person.
B. A court-appointed guardian of another person.
At least 21 years of age and authorized by a parent or court-appointed
guardian to have the care and custody of another person.
C.
A. Linger or stay unnecessarily.
§ 190-5 KENHORST CODE § 196-1
1:52
§ 196-2. Offenses.
§ 196-3. Defenses.
§ 196-4. Enforcement.
Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the
owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.
B.
A. A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the Borough during curfew hours.
B. A parent of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits or, by
insufficient control, allows the minor to remain in any public place or on
the premises of any establishment within the Borough during curfew
hours.
C. The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of
the establishment during curfew hours.
A. It is a defense to prosecution under § 196-2A of this chapter that the
minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent.
(2) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel.
(3) Engaged in an employment activity including, but not limited to,
newspaper delivery, and was using a direct route.
(4) Involved in an emergency.
(5) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain
to the police officer about the minor's presence.
(6) Attending an official school or religious activity or returning home
by a direct route from an official school or religious activity.
(7) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of assembly.
(8) Married.
B. It is a defense to prosecution under § 196-2C of this chapter that the
owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
Police Department that a minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
A. A police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of § 196-2A of this
chapter, shall:
§ 196-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-4
1:53
§ 196-5. Violations and penalties.35
Any minor who violates § 196-2A of this chapter; a parent of a minor who
violates § 196-2B of this chapter two or more times in a twelve-month
period; or the owner, operator or employee of an establishment who violates
§ 196-2C of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
Article I, Enforcement; General Penalty, of this Code.
Chapter 205
(1) Ascertain the name and address of the minor.
(2) Issue a citation to the minor that the minor is in violation of
§ 196-2A of this chapter.
(3) Order the minor to go promptly home by a direct route.
B. Notwithstanding § 196-4A of this chapter, a police officer, upon finding
a minor in violation of § 196-2A of this chapter, may take the minor into
custody and deliver the minor to a holding location if:
(1) Reasonable grounds exist to believe the minor has engaged in
delinquent conduct or conduct indicating a need for supervision or
is on probation by order of the Berks County Juvenile Court.
C. When a minor is taken into custody under § 196-4B of this chapter, the
Police Department shall immediately notify a parent to pick up the
minor at the holding location. After a parent arrives at a holding
location and provides the information required by the Chief of Police to
file an incident report, the minor shall be released into the custody of
the parent. If a parent cannot be located or fails to take charge of the
minor, the minor shall be released to the juvenile authorities.
D. If a minor is not taken into custody for a violation of § 196-2A of this
chapter, the Police Department may, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, notify a parent of the minor that the minor has violated
§ 196-2A of this chapter and include a warning that any subsequent
violation may result in prosecution of the minor and the parent under
this chapter. If the minor was found in violation of § 196-2A of this
chapter at an establishment, the police department shall, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, notify the owner, operator or employee
of the establishment of the violation and include a warning that any
subsequent violation may result in prosecution of the owner, operator
and employee under this chapter.
E. A police officer shall, within 24 hours after finding a minor in violation
of § 196-2A of this chapter, file a written report on the incident or assist
to the extent possible in the preparation and filing of the report by a
supervisor.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 196-4 KENHORST CODE § 196-5
1:54
DUMPSTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 475.
§ 205-1. Permit required.
No individual corporation or other legal entity or association shall place
upon public or private property within the Borough of Kenhorst any
dumpster or other similar container, whether permanent or temporary,
without first procuring a permit from the Borough of Kenhorst.
§ 205-2. Exemption.
Section 205-1 shall not be applicable to any business or entity which, in its
normal business affairs, uses a dumpster for the disposition of commercial
waste accumulated with its business.
§ 205-3. Permit fees.36
The fee to obtain a permit for the use of a dumpster shall be in such amount
as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 205-4. Location and safety requirements.
The location of any dumpster or other similar container within the Borough
of Kenhorst must be approved by an authorized representative of Borough
Council, with due consideration for both vehicle and pedestrian traffic as
well as the safety of persons and property, including any property adjacent
to the location on which the dumpster or other similar container is to be
located. All dumpsters must have reflective, fluorescent signs posted, and
blinking warning lights on the dumpsters, which shall be visible at night,
if container is parked on a public street, right-of-way or resident sidewalk
area.
§ 205-5. Sanitary requirements.
All dumpsters must be in a good state of repair and shall be clean and free
of offensive odors. The dumpster shall be emptied each seven-day period
regardless of the load capacity. This is to prevent the accumulation of odors,
vermin or other repulsive diseases.
§ 205-6. Indemnification.
Prior to issuance by the Borough of a permit to place a dumpster upon
a public street, alley, private property, and/or right-of-way, the dumpster
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 196-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-6
1:55
owner or lessor shall execute a hold-harmless agreement in such form
as the Borough shall provide, guaranteeing to defend, protect, and
compensate the Borough as a result of any cause of action which may be
brought against the Borough of Kenhorst.
§ 205-7. Violations and penalties.37
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.
Chapter 214
EMERGENCY SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire department — See Ch. 44. Police services — See Ch. 89.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 205-6 KENHORST CODE § 205-7
1:56
ARTICLE I
Reimbursement for Cleanup Costs
[Adopted 10-4-1990 by Ord. No. 414 (Ch. 11, Part 5, of the 1973
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 214-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — The owner, common carrier or other transporter,
including a pipeline owner, of petroleum, hazardous material and/or
chemicals being used, displayed, stored or transported in the Borough of
Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
§ 214-2. Costs.
§ 214-3. Delinquent payment.
All bills for the above-described costs shall be forwarded by the Borough to
the responsible party. If payment is not made, in full, within 30 days from
the date of mailing of said bill the Borough is hereby authorized to collect
same through any civil proceeding at law or equity.
A. The responsible party shall be liable to the Borough of Kenhorst and its
agents for all costs incurred to control, extinguish and/or clean up
petroleum-type, chemical-type and hazardous material spills and/or
fires involving said chemicals, petroleum or hazardous material in the
Borough of Kenhorst.
B. The responsible party shall also be liable for the cost of any temporary
storage of chemical, petroleum materials, hazardous materials, and/or
the cost of disposing of same.
§ 214-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-3
1:57

ARTICLE II
Fire Department Service Fees
[Adopted 9-1-2005 by Ord. No. 493 (Ch. 8, Part 6, of the 1973 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 214-4. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Kenhorst
Fire Department Service Fee Ordinance."
§ 214-5. Purpose.
Due to the increase in maintenance and/or replacement cost for equipment,
along with personnel costs associated with emergency responses, it has
become necessary to provide a means for recovering certain costs
associated with Fire Department emergency responses to save or protect
insured property from a loss.
§ 214-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the terms listed below shall have the following
meanings:
FIRE DEPARTMENT EMERGENCY RESPONSE — The deployment by the
Kenhorst Fire Department of any fire equipment and/or personnel from
a central or remote location to a specific location within the Borough of
Kenhorst, where the equipment and/or personnel provide fire protection or
other emergency response services.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCIDENT — An incident involving hazardous
materials as defined in the International Fire Code and the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Emergency Response Guidebook, as they
may be amended from time to time.
STRUCTURE FIRE — Any fire in, on or about a commercial structure or
residential structure, which threatens to or actually damages or destroys
the structure.
VEHICLE FIRE — Any fire in, on or about a motor vehicle which threatens
to or actually damages or destroys the motor vehicle.
WATER EVACUATION — The removal or pumping of water from the
basements of structures.
§ 214-7. Fire prevention services fee.
In the event that there is a Fire Department emergency response for:
a structure fire; a vehicle fire; a water evacuation; and/or a hazardous
materials incident, and the owner of the affected property or other insured
party has insurance coverage for the payment of such fees under an
insurance policy, said owner or other party shall pay to the Borough of
Kenhorst a fee not to exceed the insurance policy limits for such fees.
§ 214-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-7
1:59
Chapter 223
FIREARMS
§ 223-1. Prohibited acts; exceptions.
Except in necessary defense of person or property, it shall be unlawful,
within the Borough of Kenhorst, for any person to use, fire or discharge
any gun or other firearm, including but not limited to rifles, pistols, airguns,
zip guns and spring-loaded guns; provided: this shall not apply where the
firearm is lawfully used in hunting as provided for by the Pennsylvania
Game Law38 and by the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Game
Commission.
§ 223-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-29-1975 by Ord. No.
33939]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.
Chapter 229
FIRE LANES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 190. Fire prevention — See Ch. 235.
§ 229-1. Authority.40
The Fire Marshal or Fire Chief of the Borough shall have the authority to
designate and make such fire lanes as may be reasonable and necessary
on private property devoted to public use. The Borough of Kenhorst shall
adopt a resolution approving these areas so designated by the Fire Marshal
or Fire Chief as "fire lanes" within said Borough. Such fire lanes shall be
those areas immediately adjacent to a building or buildings for a distance
of 24 feet from said building or buildings or 24 feet from the curb adjacent
to said building or buildings on property such as shopping centers, bowling
alleys, theaters, hospitals, churches and similar locations as may be deemed
necessary by the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief to insure proper ingress and
egress of Fire Department and emergency vehicles for the protection of
persons and property herein described, in accordance with the Uniform
38.Editor's Note: See 34 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq, the Game and Wildlife Code.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 214-7 KENHORST CODE § 229-1
1:60
Construction Code.41 Parking in such fires lanes shall be prohibited and
such fire lane shall be posted "No Parking Fire Lanes."
§ 229-2. Signs.
Whenever the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief of Borough shall determine that
parking of motor vehicles upon any public or private street, lane, alley or
private parking lot is liable to interfere with the operations of the Fire
or Police Departments or hamper egress of occupants from buildings in
case of fire or emergency, parking in such areas shall be prohibited and
said areas shall be posted "No Parking Fire Lanes." All signs shall conform
to the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
regulations.
§ 229-3. Unobstructed lanes.
On private property which is devoted to public use, there shall be
maintained one or more unobstructed lanes to provide for the ingress or
egress of Fire Department vehicles, equipment and personnel, said lanes
to be a minimum of 12 feet in width each and laid out for convenient
access from the public thoroughfares and water supplied to the building or
buildings. The marking of said lanes shall be performed and maintained by
and at the expense of the property owner or occupier.
§ 229-4. Regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to barricade, stop or
park a vehicle, park or otherwise block any of the passage, entrance or exit
ways to, in, about or out of any public building or any place occupied for
public use or accommodation, whether upon public or private property, so
as to interfere with or obstruct the free and unimpeded passage of persons
and fire equipment around said building, nor shall any person stop or park
a motor vehicle or trailer in disregard of any sign erected pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter. The definitions as set forth in the Pennsylvania
Motor Vehicle Code are hereby adopted and incorporated herein.
§ 229-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following term shall have the meaning
indicated:
BUILDING — The exterior surface of the vertical wall of the structure,
excluding any marquee, portico, mansard roof or similar appendages.
§ 229-6. Notice of violation.
Notice of violation of this chapter shall be effectuated by the placing of
a parking ticket upon the vehicle parked or stopped in the fire lane in
question.
41.Editor's Note: See 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 to 405.
§ 229-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-7
1:61
§ 229-7. Violations and penalties.42
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.
§ 229-8. Purpose.
It is declared that enactment of this chapter is necessary for the protection,
benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants
of the Borough and the general public.
Chapter 235
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire department — See Ch. 44.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 190.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 341.
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 229-7 KENHORST CODE § 229-8
1:62
ARTICLE I
Key Boxes
[Adopted 4-5-1990 by Ord. No. 411 (Ch. 8, Part 2, of the 1973 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 235-1. Required.
When access to or within a structure or an area is unduly difficult because of
secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life saving or
firefighting purposes, the Fire Chief of the Borough of Kenhorst may require
a key box to be installed in an accessible location on the structure. The key
box shall be a type approved by the Fire Chief and shall contain keys to gain
necessary access as required by the Fire Chief.
§ 235-2. Contents.
The key box hereinbefore referred shall contain:
§ 235-3. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to any residential units.
§ 235-4. Violations and penalties.43
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.
A. Keys to locked points of ingress whether on the interior or exterior of
such building.
B. Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms.
C. Keys to locked electrical rooms.
D. Keys to elevator controls.
E. Keys to other areas as directed by the Fire Chief.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 235-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-4
1:63

ARTICLE II
Fire Alarm and Fire Suppression Systems
[Adopted 7-18-1996 by Ord. No. 437 (Ch. 8, Part 4, of the 1973 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 235-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — Any audible or visible signal or intelligence
indicating existence of a supposed fire or emergency requiring both
response and emergency action on the part of the firefighting service; and
additionally, the alarm or devices by which fire and emergency signals are
received.
FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM — An engineered system utilizing carbon
dioxide, foam, wet or dry chemical, a halogenated extinguishing agent or
an automatic sprinkler system to detect automatically and suppress a fire
through fixed piping and nozzles.
NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE — Any structure which is utilized for
purposes other than a single-family dwelling.
§ 235-6. Installation required; unique physical characteristics.
Where the unique physical characteristics and/or use(s) of a nonresidential
structure located within the Borough of Kenhorst create a greater degree
of danger from fire and explosion than would otherwise exist absent the
unique physical characteristics and/or use(s), the Fire Chief and/or Fire
Marshal of the Borough of Kenhorst may require the installation of fire
suppression system(s) and/or fire alarm system(s).
§ 235-7. Installation required; health and safety. [Amended
12-1-2005 by Ord. No. 495]
§ 235-8. Application.
This article shall only apply to nonresidential structures located within the
Borough of Kenhorst.
A. The Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal of the Borough of Kenhorst shall
require the installation of said fire suppression system(s) and/or fire
alarm system(s) where said installation is necessary to protect the
health and safety of the residents and property located within the
Borough of Kenhorst against the dangers from fire and explosion.
B. The owner or owners of a structure subject to the provisions of this
section shall, on an annual basis, on or before March 1, file with the
Borough a certificate by a qualified inspector that the fire suppression
and/or alarm system are operable for the purpose for which it was
installed.
§ 235-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-9
1:65
§ 235-9. Violations and penalties.44
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 235-9 KENHORST CODE § 235-9
1:66
Chapter 241
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 190.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 235.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 341.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 398.
Zoning — See Ch. 475.
§ 235-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-9
1:67

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization; General Provisions
§ 241-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,45 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Borough Council of the Borough of Kenhorst does
hereby order as follows.
§ 241-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 241-3. Applicability.
§ 241-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in
effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other chapter provisions
shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are
more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this
chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 241-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Borough of Kenhorst unless a permit
has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
45.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 241-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-5
1:69
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Kenhorst or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 241-5 KENHORST CODE § 241-5
1:70
ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 241-6. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
§ 241-7. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Borough of Kenhorst.
§ 241-8. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby appointed to administer and
enforce this chapter and is referred to herein as the Floodplain
Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator may:
(1) Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations;
(2) Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations
to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and
other employees; or
(3) Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another
agency or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of
these regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations
by another entity shall not relieve the community of its
responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of
Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Kenhorst Chief Executive
Officer.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended)46; the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended)47; the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended)48; and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
46.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
47.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
48.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 241-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-8
1:71
§ 241-9. Application procedures and requirements.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any construction
concerns can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Borough Council for
whatever action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated with
the requirements of this chapter including, but not limited to, finished
construction elevation data, permitting, inspection and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to the FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
I. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Borough of
Kenhorst. Such application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
§ 241-8 KENHORST CODE § 241-9
1:72
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
§ 241-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-9
1:73
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood.
(b) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an AE Area/District without floodway [see
§ 241-17A(2)], when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point within the
community.
(d) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(e) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 241-23F, Storage, and § 241-24, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 241-23F and 241-24 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
§ 241-9 KENHORST CODE § 241-9
1:74
§ 241-10. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 241-11. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 241-12. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 241-13. Start of construction.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 241-24
during a base flood.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within 12
months after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall
expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The actual start of construction means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
§ 241-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-13
1:75
§ 241-14. Enforcement.
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/
or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of
the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
B. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for
the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement;
General Penalty, of this Code. In addition to the above penalties, all
other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the
proper enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty
for any violation of or noncompliance with this chapter shall not excuse
the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such
§ 241-13 KENHORST CODE § 241-14
1:76
§ 241-15. Appeals.
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the
Borough Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.49
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Borough Council. Such appeal must be filed,
in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or action of
the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal the Borough Council shall set a time and
place, within not less than 10 or not more than 30 days, for the purpose
of considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place at which the
appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Borough Council may seek
relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this State
including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.50
D. Prior to processing any appeal, the applicant must submit the
appropriate appeal information as well as the necessary fee required by
Borough resolution to commence such appeal process.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
50.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 241-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-15
1:77

ARTICLE III
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 241-16. Identification.
§ 241-17. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of Borough of Kenhorst, classified as Special Flood
Hazard Areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated July 3,
2012, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital
data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments are hereby adopted by Borough of Kenhorst and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific
areas:
(1) The Floodway Area/District identified as floodway in the FIS which
represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by
more than one foot at any point. This term shall also include
floodway areas which have been identified in other available
studies or sources of information for those special flood hazard
areas where no floodway has been identified in the FIS.
(a) Within any floodway area, encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development
shall not be permitted unless it has been demonstrated
through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in
flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(b) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
(2) The AE Area/District without floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
by FEMA and for which base flood elevations have been provided in
the FIS but no floodway has been delineated.
§ 241-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-17
1:79
§ 241-18. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Borough
Council where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or
person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such
change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from
FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months
after the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify
FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting
technical or scientific data.
§ 241-19. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Borough of Kenhorst Planning
Commission and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination
may appeal to the Borough Council. The burden of proof shall be on the
appellant.
§ 241-20. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
(a) No permit shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway
unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development would not, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
(3) The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no
one-percent-annual-chance flood elevations have been provided.
For these areas, elevation and floodway information from other
federal, state, or other acceptable sources shall be used when
available. Where other acceptable information is not available, the
base flood elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a
point on the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is
nearest the construction site.
B. In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only
by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the municipality.
§ 241-17 KENHORST CODE § 241-20
1:80
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 241-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-20
1:81

ARTICLE IV
Technical Provisions
§ 241-21. General.
§ 241-22. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. Technical or scientific data shall be submitted by the applicant to FEMA
for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) as soon as practicable but within
six months of any new construction, development, or other activity
resulting in changes in the BFE. The situations when a LOMR or a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) are required are:
(1) Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway;
(2) Any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone AE without a
designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than one foot
in the base flood elevation; or
(3) Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to
installing culverts and bridges).
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
D. Within any identified floodplain area (see § 241-17), no new
construction or development shall be located within the area measured
50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
A. Residential structures.
§ 241-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-22
1:83
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 241-17A(3) of this chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to
405, as amended) shall be utilized.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy:
(2) In A Zones, where there no base flood elevations are specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 241-17A(3) of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the above
referenced standards.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
§ 241-22 KENHORST CODE § 241-22
1:84
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to
405, as amended) shall be utilized.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement,
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry
and exit of flood waters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. See the definition of "Uniform Construction Code
(UCC)" in § 241-34 for requirements for the substantial improvement of
any historic structures.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of flood waters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc. are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
§ 241-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-22
1:85
§ 241-23. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of flood waters.
A. Fill.
(1) If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to,
and approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
§ 241-22 KENHORST CODE § 241-23
1:86
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into flood waters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
#348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages" and
"The International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 241-24, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or floodproofed
to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
§ 241-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-23
1:87
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges
from the system into flood waters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that flood water
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The Standards and
Specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to 405), as
amended and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Secs. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: Secs. R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix AE101,
Appendix E and Appendix J.
§ 241-23 KENHORST CODE § 241-24
1:88
§ 241-24. Development which may endanger human life.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,51
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which: will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or, will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or, will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances; shall be
subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other
applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Sodium
Sulphur and sulphur products
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides)
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise
regulated
B. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited.
C. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved residential structure of the kind described in
§ 241-24A, above, shall be elevated to remain completely dry up to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
51.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 241-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-24
1:89
§ 241-25. Special requirements for subdivisions.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 241-26. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
§ 241-27. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited.
D. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind described in
§ 241-24A, above, shall be:
(1) Elevated, or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood.
E. Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations (U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, June 1972 as amended March 1992), or with some
other equivalent watertight standard.
§ 241-24 KENHORST CODE § 241-27
1:90
ARTICLE V
Prohibited Activities
§ 241-28. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,52 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
52.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 241-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-28
1:91

ARTICLE VI
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 241-29. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 241-30 shall apply.
§ 241-30. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any increase in
BFE.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within AE Area/District without floodway that would, together with all
other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
E. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
§ 241-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-30
1:93

ARTICLE VII
Variances
§ 241-31. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Borough of Kenhorst may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 241-32. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Borough of Kenhorst
in accordance with the procedures contained in § 241-15 and the
following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any Floodway Area/District that would cause
any increase in the BFE.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway that
would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
(3) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated by special permit (or Article V, Prohibited Activities), or
to § 241-24, Development which may endanger human life.
(4) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(5) In granting any variance, the Borough of Kenhorst shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare,
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(6) Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough of Kenhorst shall
notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(7) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough of Kenhorst
shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
§ 241-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-32
1:95
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
[2] Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(8) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Borough of Kenhorst. In addition, a report of
all variances granted during the year shall be included in the
annual report to the FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-chance annual chance flood.
§ 241-32 KENHORST CODE § 241-32
1:96
ARTICLE VIII
Terminology
§ 241-33. Word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 241-34. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
one-percent-annual-chance flood).
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
§ 241-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-34
1:97
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The Official Map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
D.
§ 241-34 KENHORST CODE § 241-34
1:98
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after July 3, 2012 and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after February
15, 1978, and before July 3, 2012, is subject to the ordinance in effect at the
time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was within
180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
§ 241-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-34
1:99
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — Is a structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated February
15, 1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated February 15,
1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and subdivisions
and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such
development is located in all, or a designated portion of a floodplain.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck,
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 241-34 KENHORST CODE § 241-34
1:100
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development. Provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, of which the costs equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement.
This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions.
A.
Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement as defined in this chapter, must
comply with all chapter requirements that do not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause
removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Inventory of Historic places must be obtained from the
Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any
exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
B.
§ 241-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-34
1:101
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 241-34 KENHORST CODE § 241-34
1:102
Chapter 249
GARAGE AND YARD SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor sales — See Ch. 368.
§ 249-1. Definitions.
§ 249-2. License required.
Except as hereinafter described, it shall be unlawful for any person to hold a
garage sale or lawn/yard sale without first obtaining a license in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 249-3. Application.
At a time not less than seven days prior to the sale, applicants for a license
under this chapter must file with the Borough Secretary an application in
writing on a form to be furnished by the Borough, which shall give the
following information:
§ 249-4. Fees.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meaning provided:
GARAGE SALE — A public sale of goods conducted in a residentially
associated garage.
LAWN/YARD SALE — An outdoor public sale of goods on residential
property.
PERSON — Any person, association, partnership, firm or corporation.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. Name and address of applicant.
B. Type of sale.
C. Items to be sold.
D. Dates of sale.
E. A statement affirming that the goods to be sold belong to the applicant
or his household, and that said goods have not been purchased or
obtained solely for this sale, with the exception of charities and service
organizations as exempted by this chapter.
§ 241-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-4
1:103
§ 249-5. Issuance of license.
Upon payment of fees as listed in § 249-4, and upon determination by the
Borough Secretary that the application meets all the requirements for a
license, the Borough Secretary shall issue a license.
§ 249-6. Duration of license.
A license for a garage or lawn/yard sale shall be valid for two consecutive
days only.
§ 249-7. Display of license.
The license must be conspicuously displayed at all times during sales.
§ 249-8. Limitations on licenses.
§ 249-9. Hours.
Garage sales and lawn/yard sales shall be held only between 8:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m.
§ 249-10. Encroachment on right-of-way.
A license granted under this chapter does not permit encroachment on the
right-of-way (sidewalk or street).
§ 249-11. Signs.
Only one two-foot-by-three-foot sign shall be permitted advertising the
garage sales and lawn/yard sales. Such sign shall be located upon the
premises where the sale occurs and shall be removed promptly upon the
completion of the sale.
A. The license for any sale governed by this chapter sponsored by a
charitable or service organization located within the Borough limits
shall be on a no-fee basis.
B. The fee for garage sales or lawn/yard sales shall be as set from time to
time by resolution of the Borough Council.53
A. Garage sales and lawn/yard sales shall be limited to two licenses per
calendar year per residence.
B. Items to be sold at garage sales and lawn/yard sales must belong solely
to the household where the sale is held. It shall be unlawful to bring in
and sell goods belonging to others or to purchase items specifically to
sell in a garage sale or lawn/yard sale, with the exception of such sales
conducted on behalf of a charitable or service organization.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 249-4 KENHORST CODE § 249-12
1:104
§ 249-12. Violations and penalties.54
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.
Chapter 272
INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency services — See Ch. 214.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 249-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-12
1:105

ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 12-5-2013 by Ord. No. 559]
§ 272-1. Intent.
The Borough seeks to continue with the implementation of its blight
reduction program to include an ordinance for the payment of insurance
proceeds to the Borough for loss control and other purposes as set forth in
this article.
§ 272-2. Designated officer.
The Borough Manager or such other duly authorized representatives of the
Borough as the Borough Council may designate is hereby appointed as the
designated officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and
duties stated herein.
§ 272-3. Use of fire insurance proceeds.55
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter, the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within
Kenhorst Borough where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the
structure under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the insuring agent is
furnished by the Borough Treasurer with a municipal certificate pursuant
to Section 508(b) of Act 98 [40 P.S. § 638(b)] and unless there is compliance
with the procedures set forth in Section 508(c) and (d) of Act 98 [40 P.S.
§ 638(c) and (d)] and the provisions of this article. Any request to the
Borough Treasurer for a municipal certificate shall be in writing.
§ 272-4. Municipal claims.
A. Upon the written request of the named insured specifying the tax
description of the property, the name and address of the insuring agent
and the date of receipt by the insuring agent of a loss report of the
claim, the Borough Manager or other duly authorized representative of
the Borough shall furnish, in writing, within 14 business days after the
request of the named insured, either:
(1) A statement that there are no unpaid municipal claims or municipal
expenses against the property; or
(2) A statement specifying the nature and amount of such claims or
expenses for payment, accompanied by a bill for such amount.
B. For the purpose of this article, a tax, assessment, penalty or other user
charge becomes delinquent at the time and on the date the lien could
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-4
1:107
§ 272-5. Escrow of funds.
otherwise have been filed against the property by the Borough under
applicable law.
C. If the Borough issues a certificate in accordance with § 272-4A(2) of this
chapter, then the insuring agent shall transfer to the Borough Treasurer
an amount from the insurance proceeds sufficient to pay all delinquent
taxes, assessments, penalties and user charges against the property
and all expenses the Borough has incurred for costs of removal, repair
or securing of a building or other structure on the property prior to
making payment to the named insured, subject to the provisions of
§ 272-6 hereof.
D. If the Borough issues a certificate indicating that there are no
delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against the
property, then, upon receipt of the Municipal Certificate, the insuring
agent shall pay the claim of the named insured; provided, however, that
if the loss agreed upon by the named insured and the insuring agent
equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire
policies covering the building or other structure, compliance with the
following procedures shall be required:
(1) The insuring agent shall transfer to the Borough Manager from the
insurance proceeds in the aggregate $2,000 for each $15,000 of a
claim, and for each fraction of that amount of the claim, this section
to be applied such that if the claim is $15,000 or less, the amount
transferred to the Borough shall be $2,000; or
(2) If at the time of the loss report of the claim, as agreed to between
the named insured and the insuring agent, the named insured has
submitted a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or other structure, the insuring
agent shall transfer to the Borough from the insurance proceeds
the amount specified in the estimate.
(3) Within 60 days of the transfer of the proceeds to the Borough, the
named insured may submit to the Borough a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure and, provided the Borough has not
commenced to remove, repair or secure the building or other
structure, the Borough Manager shall return to the named insured
the amount of the funds transferred to the Borough in excess of the
estimate.
E. The transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all companies,
associations or exchanges insuring the building or other structures.
Policy proceeds remaining after the transfer to the Borough shall be
disbursed in accordance with the policy terms.
§ 272-4 KENHORST CODE § 272-5
1:108
A. Upon the receipt of fire loss proceeds under § 272-4D and E above, the
Borough shall acknowledge in writing that the following procedure
shall be followed and proceed by:
(1) The Borough Manager shall place the proceeds in a separate fund
to be used solely as security against the total costs incurred by the
Borough for removing, repairing, or securing the building or
structure. Such costs include, without limitation, any engineering,
legal, professional fees or administrative costs incurred by the
Borough in connection with such removal, repair or securing of the
building or any proceedings related thereto;
(2) It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide to the Borough the name and address of the
named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the name
and address of the named insured, the Borough Manager shall
contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have been
received by the Borough and notify the named insured that the
procedures set forth in this section shall be followed;
(3) When the repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable
ordinances, codes, regulations and legal requirements of the
Borough and the required proof of such completion in form and
substance satisfactory to the Borough has been received by the
Borough Manager, and if the Borough has not incurred any costs
for repairs, removal or securing, the fund shall be returned to the
named insured. If the Borough has incurred costs for repairs,
removal or securing of the building or other structure, such costs
shall be paid from the fund and, if excess funds remain, the
Borough shall transfer the remaining funds to the named insured;
and
(4) To the extent that interest is earned on the proceeds held by the
Borough pursuant to this article, and not returned to the named
insured, such interest shall belong to the Borough. To the extent
that proceeds are returned to the named insured, interest earned
on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named insured at the
time the proceeds are returned.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Borough to recover any deficiency in the amount of municipal claims or
municipal expenses recovered pursuant to this article, or to insurance
proceeds, by an action at law or in equity to enforce the Borough's
ordinances. Furthermore, nothing in this article shall be construed to
prohibit the Borough and the named insured from entering into an
agreement that permits the transfer of funds to the named insured if
some other reasonable disposition if the damaged property, as
determined by the parties, has been negotiated.
§ 272-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-6
1:109
§ 272-6. Insurance company rights reserved.
An insurance company, association or exchange making payments of policy
proceeds under this article for delinquent taxes or structural removal of
liens or removal expenses insured by the Borough of Kenhorst shall have
full benefit of such payment, including all rights of subrogation and of
assignment.
§ 272-7. Reasonable Borough fees.
The Borough Council may, by resolution adopt procedures and regulations
to implement Act 98,56 as amended, and this article and may by resolution
fix reasonable fees to be charged for activities or services provided by the
Borough pursuant to Act 98 and this article, including, but not limited to,
issuance of certificates and bills, performance of inspections and opening
separate fund accounts.
§ 272-8. Limits on liability.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to make an insurance company,
association or exchange liable for any amount in excess of proceeds payable
under its insurance policy or for any other act performed pursuant to
this article or to make the Borough or any public official of the Borough
an insured under a policy of insurance or to create an obligation to pay
delinquent property taxes or unpaid removal of liens or expenses other than
provided by this article.
§ 272-9. Violations and penalties.57
Any owner of a property, any named insured or any insuring agent who
violates this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1,
Article I, Enforcement; General Penalty, of this Code.
§ 272-10. Construction.
The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its
purpose to deter the commission of arson and related crimes, to discourage
the abandonment of property and to prevent urban blight and deterioration
and to assure the payment of municipal expenses.
§ 272-11. Notification to Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development.
The Borough Manager of Kenhorst Borough shall transmit a certified copy
of this article and the information required by 40 P.S. § 638(i) promptly to
the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development.
56.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-6 KENHORST CODE § 272-12
1:110
§ 272-12. Failure to enforce not a waiver.
The failure of the Borough to enforce any provision of this article shall
not constitute a waiver by the Borough of its rights of future enforcement
hereunder.
§ 272-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-12
1:111
Chapter 303
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 142. Nuisances — See Ch. 309.
§ 303-1. Purpose.
For the purpose of this chapter, Council finds that excessive levels of sound
are detrimental to the physical, mental, and social well-being of the people
as well as to their comfort, living conditions, general welfare and safety, and
being therefore a public health and welfare hazard, hereby declares it to be
necessary to provide for the greater control and more effective regulations
of excessive sound and the sources of excessive sound within the Borough
of Kenhorst.
§ 303-2. Definitions.
Terms are defined as follows. The following words, terms and phrases when
used in this part shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CONSTRUCTION OPERATION — The erection, repair, renovation,
demolition or removal of any building or structure; and the excavation,
filling, grading, and regulation of lots in connection therewith.
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work performed for the purpose of preventing
or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused
by an emergency.
MUFFLER or SOUND-DISSIPATIVE DEVICE — A device designed or used
for decreasing or abating the level of sound escaping from an engine or
machinery system.
NOISE — Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or
tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound which:
A. Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals.
B. Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities.
C. Endangers or injures a personal or real property.
Is audible on a public street for a distance of 50 feet from the place or
origin of such sound or noise.
D.
§ 272-12 KENHORST CODE § 303-2
1:112
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership or corporation, and
includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a
state or any political subdivision of a state. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, "person" includes the individual
members, partners, officers and managers, or any of them, of partnerships
and associations, and as to corporations, the officers and managers thereof
or any of them.
POWERED MODEL VEHICLE — Any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or
land-borne plane, vessel or vehicle, which is not designed to carry persons
including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk, alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon which are owned
or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY — All land, whether publicly or privately owned, whether
improved or not improved, with or without structures, exclusive of any
areas devoted to public right-of-way.
SOUND — An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that
causes compression and rarefaction of that medium, or the superposition
of such propagated oscillation which evokes an auditory sensation. The
description of sound may include any characteristics of such sound,
including duration, intensity and frequency.
§ 303-3. Noise disturbance prohibited.
No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any
noise disturbance, nor shall any person suffer, allow or permit any noise
disturbance to be made or continued from or at any property, whether real
or personal, that is subject to such person's right to control.
§ 303-4. Prohibited acts.
The following acts, and the causing thereof, are declared to be noise
disturbances and therefore in violation of this chapter:
A. Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices.
Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio,
television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier,
automobile radio, automobile stereo or high-fidelity equipment, disc or
tape player, loudspeaker or other similar device, not in connection with
the lawful operation of any emergency vehicle such as an ambulance,
police or fire vehicle, nor in connection with a lawfully permitted
parade, public assembly, or other activity for which a permit is issued
by the duly constituted legal authority, or similar device which
produces, reproduces or amplifies sound:
§ 303-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-4
1:113
(1) At any time in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across
a property line (boundary), or between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. so as to be plainly audible across a property line
(boundary); or which is audible on a public street for a distance of
50 feet from the place or origin of such sound or noise.
(2) In such a manner as to create noise disturbance across a property
line (boundary) or at 50 feet from such device, whichever is less,
when the device is operated in or on a motor vehicle, or hand
carried, on a public right-of-way or public space.
(3) In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance to any person
other than the operator of the device, when operated by a
passenger on a common carrier.
B. Yelling or shouting. Engaging in loud or raucous yelling, shouting,
hooting, whistling or singing:
(1) On the public streets between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
(2) At any time or place in such a manner as to create a noise
disturbance.
C. Construction tools or equipment. Operating or permitting the operation
of any tools or equipment used in construction operations, drilling or
demolition work:
(1) Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day on
weekdays and Saturdays or at any time on Sundays or legal
holidays, such that the sound therefore creates a noise disturbance
across a residential real property line (boundary), except for
emergency work.
(2) This Subsection C shall not apply to the use of domestic power tools
as hereinafter provided in Subsection D hereof.
D. Domestic power tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any
mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool,
snow blower or similar device used outdoors in residential areas
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. so as to cause a noise
disturbance across a residential property line (boundary) except in an
emergency.
E. Loading and unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other
handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans,
or similar objects between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
following day in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a
residential property line (boundary). This Subsection E shall not apply
to municipal or utility services in or about the public right-of-way.
F. Animals and bird. Owning, possessing, harboring or controlling any
animal or bird which howls, barks, meows, squawks, or makes other
§ 303-4 KENHORST CODE § 303-4
1:114
§ 303-5. Motor vehicle prohibitions.
sounds continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 10 minutes or
makes such noise intermittently for 1/2 hour or more to the disturbance
of any person at any time of the day or night, regardless of whether
the animal or bird is situated in or upon private property; provided,
however, that at the time the animal or bird is making such noise, no
person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property
in or upon which the animal or bird is situated or for any other
legitimate cause which teased or provoked the animal or bird.
G. Powered model vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of
powered model vehicles so as to create a noise disturbance across a
residential property line (boundary) between the house of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
H. Street sales. Offering for sale or selling by shouting or outcry or by any
other amplified or unamplified sound within any residential or
commercial area of the Borough.
I. Tampering. The following acts or the causing thereof are prohibited:
(1) The removal or rendering inoperative by any person, other than for
the purposes of maintenance, repair or replacement, of any muffler
or sound-dissipative device or element of design or noise label of
any product.
(2) The use of a product which has had a muffler or sound-dissipative
device or element of design or noise labeled removed or rendered
inoperative, with knowledge that such action has occurred.
J. Vehicle, motorboat or aircraft repairs and testing. Repairing,
rebuilding, or testing any motor vehicle, motorcycle, or aircraft in such
a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real
property line (boundary).
A. Motor vehicle and motorcycles on public right-of-way. No person shall
operate or cause to be operated a public or private motor vehicle or
motorcycle, or any equipment attached to such a vehicle, on a public
right-of-way at any time in such a manner that the sound level emitted
by the motor vehicle or motorcycle, or any equipment attached to such
a vehicle exceeds the level set forth in Pennsylvania Code, Title 67,
Chapter 157, Established Sound Levels.
B. Standing motor vehicles. No person shall operate or permit the
operation of any motor vehicle or any auxiliary equipment attached to
such a vehicle for a period longer than 15 minutes in any hour while the
vehicle is stationary, for reasons other than traffic congestion,
anywhere within 150 feet of any residence in such a manner as to cause
a noise disturbance across a residential property line (boundary).
§ 303-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-5
1:115
§ 303-6. Evidence of noise disturbance.59
Prima facie evidence of a noise disturbance shall exist when:
§ 303-7. Exemptions.
The following sounds are exempted from the provisions of this chapter:
C. Unnecessary horn blowing. No person shall at any time sound the horn
or other warning device of a vehicle except when absolutely necessary
as a warning while actually driving such vehicle.58
D. Sound trucks. No person shall operate sound-amplifying equipment
mounted on or attached to any motor vehicle at any time in such a
manner as to exceed the maximum permissible motor vehicle noise
emissions as set forth in Subsection A hereof. The sensory mechanism
used in connection with an automatic motor vehicle protection device
shall be adjusted to suppress false indications of burglary or intrusion
so that the device will not be activated by impulse or vibration caused
by any force not related to the alarms. All components comprising such
a device shall be maintained by the owner or lessee in good repair to
assure maximum reliability of operation.
A. The noise disturbs two or more residents who are in general agreement
as to the times and durations of the noise and who reside in separate
residences, including apartments and condominiums located within the
same building, located across a property line (boundary) from the
property on which the source of the noise is generated.
B. The noise disturbs one resident located across a property line
(boundary) from the property on which the source of the noise is
generated, and corroborated by a police officer.
C. The noise is solely witnessed/observed by a police officer when citing
any section hereunder.
A. Amplified announcements: stationary electronically amplified
announcements at athletic events, political events and civic events.
B. Blasting: blasting, under proper permit. Such blasting may occur only
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
unless specifically authorized by permit.
C. Concerts, etc.: band concerts, block parties, church carnivals or other
performances or similar activities publicly or privately sponsored and
presented in any public or private space outdoors, provided that such
activities do not occur between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 303-5 KENHORST CODE § 303-7
1:116
§ 303-8. Violations and penalties.60
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof
shall, upon conviction thereof before a Magisterial District Judge, be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.. Each day or portion thereof during which such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such.
Chapter 309
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 303. Property maintenance — See Ch. 341.
and all necessary permits as defined by Borough ordinances have been
procured.
D. Emergency work: sounds caused by the performance of emergency
work, or by the ordinary and accepted use of emergency apparatus and
equipment.
E. Municipal and utility services: sounds resulting from the repair or
replacement of any municipal or utility installation in or about the
public right-of-way.
F. School and public activities: sounds not electronically amplified,
created by organized school-related programs, activities, athletic and
entertainment events, or other public programs, activities or events,
other than motor vehicle racing events.
G. Warning devices: sounds made by warning devices operating
continuously for three minutes or less except in the event of an actual
emergency the time limitation shall not apply.
H. Special permits. The Chief of the Department of Police, or his designee,
may, upon application grant special permits for infrequent events or
activities.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 303-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-8
1:117

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 4-5-1973 by Ord. No. 304 (Ch. 11, Part 2, §§ 11 through
15, of the 1973 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 309-1. Definitions.
§ 309-2. Unlawful to create nuisance.
It shall be unlawful for any person to create or maintain any nuisance
anywhere within the limits of the Borough of Kenhorst.
§ 309-3. Abatement of nuisance; authority for Borough to cause
removal.61
Any person who shall create or maintain any nuisance anywhere within the
Borough of Kenhorst, shall, within 10 days after notice from the Borough to
do so, remove or abate such nuisance. If such person shall fail, neglect or
refuse to remove or abate such nuisance within such time limit, the Borough
shall have authority, in person or by his agents and/or employees, to cause
the removal or abatement of such nuisance, and, in so doing, shall have
authority to enter upon the property of such person in default. Thereupon,
the Borough shall collect the cost and expense of such abatement or
removal, from the person who created and/or maintained such nuisance,
such person having failed, neglected or refused to remove or abate such
nuisance, in the manner provided for the collection of municipal claims or
by an action of assumpsit without the filing of a claim. Provided: such cost
and expense may be in addition to any penalty imposed under § 309-4 of this
article.
A. The following words, as used in this article, shall have the meanings
hereby respectively ascribed thereto:
NUISANCE — Any use of property within the Borough of Kenhorst
or any condition upon any property within said Borough that, other
than infrequently or occasionally, shall cause or result in annoyance
or disturbance to persons beyond the boundaries of such property;
interference to the health and/or safety of persons beyond the
boundaries of such property; and/or disturbance to or interference with
the peaceful use of the property of others in the Borough, in any case
taking into consideration the location of the use or condition, and the
nature and condition of the surrounding neighborhood.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 309-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-4
1:119
§ 309-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-29-1975 by Ord. No.
325; 4-29-1975 by Ord. No. 33962]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code. Provided: each day's continuance of the maintenance
of any nuisance, after the expiration of 10 days following the issuance of
the notice referred to in § 309-3 of this article, shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 309-5. Availability of other remedies.
This article shall not be construed to be the sole means for abatement of
nuisances within the Borough of Kenhorst, and nothing shall preclude any
person from proceeding, individually or with other injured persons, to effect
the abatement of a private nuisance. Furthermore, in the exercise of the
powers herein conferred, the Borough may institute proceedings in courts
of equity.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 309-4 KENHORST CODE § 309-5
1:120
ARTICLE II
Neighborhood Blight
[Adopted 10-3-2013 by Ord. No. 556]
§ 309-6. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Blight and Reclamation Program
Ordinance" and shall supplement such other ordinances such as property
maintenance codes and other conduct and building codes, zoning codes and
rental ordinances in the Borough.
§ 309-7. Purpose.
The Borough Council finds it to be the best interest of the residents of
the Borough to provide for certain protections and safeguards in order to
address deteriorated properties, public nuisances and properties in serious
violation of state law and/or municipal codes. Such protections and
safeguards include denial of permits, and actions at law and in equity to
address deteriorated properties, which impact upon crime, quality of life of
Borough residents and require expenditure of public fund to correct and/or
abate nuisances, violations and delinquent service accounts.
§ 309-8. Definitions.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
BOARD — Refers to the zoning hearing board or other body granted
jurisdiction to render decisions in accordance with the Municipalities
Planning Code,63 the State Borough Code,64 the ordinances of the
Borough of Kenhorst, or any Board authorized to act in a similar
manner by law.
BOROUGH — Refers to the Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County,
Pennsylvania.
BUILDING — Refers to a residential, commercial or industrial building
or structure and the land appurtenant to it.
CODE — Refers to a building, housing, property maintenance, fire,
health or other public safety ordinance enacted by the Borough. The
term does not include a subdivision and land development ordinance or
a zoning ordinance enacted by a municipality.
COURT — Refers to the appropriate court of common pleas or
magisterial district court.
MANAGING AGENT — A person designated by property owner to
control or manage, care of control upkeep of a property or a person/
63.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
64.Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 309-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-8
1:121
entity on behalf of a third party, such as a foreclosing mortgaging
lender, who is charged with the care and upkeep of a property.
MORTGAGE LENDER — Refers to a business association defined as a
"banking institution" or "mortgage lender" under 7 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter
61 (relating to mortgage loan industry licensing and consumer
protection) that is in possession of or holds title to real property
pursuant to, in enforcement of or to protect rights arising under a
mortgage, mortgage note, deed of trust or other transaction that
created a security interest in the real property.
MUNICIPALITY — Refers to a city, borough, incorporated town,
township or home rule, optional plan or optional charter municipality
or municipal authority in this commonwealth and any entity formed
pursuant to Subchapter A of Chapter 23 (relating to intergovernmental
cooperation).65
MUNICIPAL PERMITS — Refers to privileges relating to real property
granted by a municipality, including, but not limited to, building
permits, exceptions to zoning ordinances and occupancy permits. The
term includes approvals pursuant to land use ordinances other than
decisions on the substantive validity of a zoning ordinance or map or
the acceptance of a curative amendment.
MUNICIPAL SERVICES — Refers to services provided at a cost by the
Borough or other municipal entity, including water service, sanitary
sewer service, refuse collection and parking allotments/facilities, which
benefit individual properties and also serve to benefit the overall
welfare, safety and health of all residents of the Borough.
OWNER — Refers to a holder of title to residential, commercial or
industrial real estate, other than a mortgage lender, who possesses and
controls the real estate. The term includes, but is not limited to, heirs,
assigns, beneficiaries and lessees, provided this ownership interest is a
matter of public record.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Refers to property which, because of its physical
condition or use, is regarded as a public nuisance at common law
or has been declared by the appropriate official a public nuisance in
accordance with a municipal code.
SERIOUS VIOLATION — Refers to a violation of a state law or code or
ordinance that poses an imminent threat to the health and safety of a
dwelling occupant(s) in surrounding structures or passersby.
STATE LAW — Refers to a statute of the commonwealth or a regulation
of an agency charged with the administration and enforcement of
commonwealth law.
SUBSTANTIAL STEP — Refers to an affirmative action as determined
by a property code official or officer of the court on the part of a
property owner or managing agent to remedy a serious violation of
65.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 309-8 KENHORST CODE § 309-8
1:122
§ 309-9. Actions.
In addition to any other remedy available at law or in equity, the Borough
may institute the following actions against the owner of any real property
that is in serious violation of a code/ordinance or for failure to correct a
condition which causes the property to be regarded as a public nuisance:
§ 309-10. Out-of-state owners; service of process upon association
and trusts.
a state law or municipal code/ordinance, including but not limited to,
physical improvements or repairs to the property, which affirmative
action is subject to appeal in accordance with applicable law.
TAX DELINQUENT PROPERTY — Refers to a tax delinquent real
property as defined under the Act of July 7, 1947 (P.L. 1368, No. 542),
known as the "Real Estate Tax Sale Law";66 the Act of May 16, 1923
(P.L. 207, No. 153), referred to as the "Municipal Claims and Tax Liens
Law";67 or the Act of October 11, 1984 (P.L. 876, No. 171), known as
the "Second Class City Treasurer's Sale and Collection Act,"68 located
in any municipality in this commonwealth.
A. An in personam action may be initiated for a continuing violation for
which the owner takes no substantial step to correct within six months
following receipt of an order to correct the violation, unless the order is
subject to a pending appeal before the administrative agency or court.
Notwithstanding any law limiting the form of action for the recovery of
penalties by a municipality for the violation of a code/ordinance, the
Borough may recover, in a single action under this section, an amount
equal to any penalties imposed against the owner and any costs of
remediation lawfully incurred by or on behalf of the Borough to remedy
any code/ordinance violation.
B. A proceeding in equity.
C. A lien may be placed against the assets of an owner of real property that
is in serious violation of a code/ordinance or is regarded as a public
nuisance after a judgment, decree or order is entered by a court of
competent jurisdiction against the owner of the property for an
adjudication under 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 6111 (relating to actions). Nothing in
this section shall be construed to authorize, in the case of an owner that
is an association or trust, a lien on the individual assets of the general
partner or trustee, except as otherwise allowed by law, limited partner,
shareholder, member of beneficiary or the association or trust.
A. A person who lives or has a principal place of residence outside this
commonwealth, who owns property in this commonwealth against
66.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5860.101 et seq.
67.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
68.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 27101 et seq.
§ 309-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-10
1:123
§ 309-11. Municipal permit denials.
which code/ordinance violations have been cited and the person is
charged under 18 Pa.C.S.A. (relating to crimes and offenses), and who
has been properly notified of the violations may be extradited to this
commonwealth to face criminal prosecution to the full extent allowed
and in the manner authorized by 42 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 91 (relating to
detainers and extradition).
B. Where, after reasonable efforts, service of process for a notice or
citation for any code violation for any real property owned by an
association or trust cannot be accomplished by handing a copy of the
notice or citation to an executive officer, partner or trustee of the
association or trust or to the manager, trustee or clerk in partner or
charge of the property, the delivery of the notice of citation may occur
by registered, certified or United States express mail, accompanied by
a delivery confirmation to the registered office of the association or
citation trust. Where the association or trust does not have a registered
office, notice may occur by registered, certified or United States
express mail, to the mailing address used for real estate tax collection
purposes, if accompanied by the posting of a conspicuous notice to the
property and handing a copy of the notice or citation to the person in
charge of the property at that time.
A. The Borough or a Board may deny issuing an applicant a municipal
permit if the applicant owns real property in any municipality for which
there exists on the real property:
(1) Tax and/or municipal service delinquencies on account of the
actions of the owner; or
(2) A serious violation and the owner has taken no substantial step to
correct the serious violation within six months following
notification of the violation and for which fines or other penalties or
a judgment to abate or correct were imposed by a magisterial
district judgment or municipal court, or a judgment at law or in
equity was imposed by a court of common pleas. However, no
denial shall be permitted on the basis of a property for which the
judgment, order or decree is subject to a stay or supersedeas by an
order of a court of competent jurisdiction or automatically allowed
by statute or rule of court until the stay or supersedeas is lifted by
the court or a higher court or the stay or supersedeas expires as
otherwise provided by law. Where a stay or supersedeas is in effect,
the property owner shall so advise the Borough or Board seeking to
deny a municipal permit. The Borough or Board shall not deny a
municipal permit to an applicant of the municipal permit is
necessary to correct a violation of state law or a code.
B. The municipal permit denial shall not apply to an applicant's
delinquency on taxes, water, sewer or refuse collection charges that are
§ 309-10 KENHORST CODE § 309-11
1:124
under appeal or otherwise contested through a court or administrative
process.
C. In issuing a denial of a municipal permit based upon an applicant's
delinquency in real property taxes or municipal charges or for failure to
abate a serious violation of state law or a code/ordinance involving real
property that the applicant owns in this commonwealth, the Borough or
Board shall indicate the street address, municipal corporation and
counting which the property is located and the court and docket
number for each parcel cited as a basis for the denial. The denial shall
also state that the applicant may request a letter of compliance from the
appropriate state agency, municipality or school district in the form
specified by such entity as provided in this section.
D. All municipal permits denied in accordance with this subsection may be
withheld until an applicant obtains a letter from the appropriate state
agency, municipality or school district indicating the following:
(1) The property in question has no final and unappealable tax, water,
sewer or refuse delinquencies;
(2) The property in question is now in state law and code/ordinance
compliance; or
(3) The owner of the property has presented and the appropriate state
agency or municipality has accepted a plan to begin remediation of
a serious violation of state law or a code/ordinance. Acceptance of
the plan may be contingent on:
(a) Beginning the remediation pan within no fewer than 30 days
following acceptance of the plan or sooner, if mutually
agreeable to both the property owner and the municipality.
(b) Completing the remediation plan with no fewer than 90 days
following commencement of the plan or sooner, if mutually
agreeable to both the property owner and the municipality.
E. In the event that the appropriate state agency, municipality or school
district fails to issue a letter indicating tax, water, sewer, refuse, state
law or code/ordinance compliance or noncompliance, as the case may
be, within 45 days of the request, the property in question shall be
deemed to be in compliance for the purpose of this section. The
appropriate state agency, municipality or school district shall specify
the form in which the request for compliance letter shall be made.
Letters required under this section shall be verified by the appropriate
municipal officials before issuing to the applicant a municipal permit.
F. Boards, including but not limited to the Borough Zoning Hearing Board,
may deny approval of municipal permits, which includes special
exception approval and variance relief, if warranted as set forth above
to the extent that approval of such a municipal permit is within the
jurisdiction of the Board.
§ 309-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-11
1:125
§ 309-12. Conflict with other law.
In the event of a conflict between the requirements of this article and
federal requirements applicable to demolition, disposition or redevelopment
of buildings, structures or land owned by or held in trust for the
Government of the United States and regulated pursuant to the United
States Housing Act of 1937 (50 Stat. 888, 42 U.S.C. § 1437 et seq.) and the
regulations promulgated thereunder, the federal requirements shall prevail.
§ 309-13. Relief for inherited property.
Where property is inherited by will or intestacy, the devisee or heir shall
be given the opportunity to make payments on reasonable terms to correct
code violations or to enter into a remediation agreement under 53 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 6131(b)(1)(iii) (relating to municipal permit denial) with a municipality to
avoid subjecting the devisee's or heir's other properties to asset attachment
or denial of permits and approvals on other properties owned by the devisee
or heir, unless the Borough can demonstrate or has knowledge that the
inheriting owner contributed to the property's state of disrepair or
delinquencies.
§ 309-14. Construction.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abridge or alter the remedies
now existing at common law or by statute, but the provisions of this chapter
are in addition to such remedies.
§ 309-15. Authorization to act.
The Borough Manager, Code Enforcement Officer(s) and Borough Solicitor,
and all others employed by or appointed by the Borough, are authorized to
G. In any proceeding before a board other than the governing body of the
Borough, the Borough may appear to present evidence that the
applicant is subject to a denial by the board in accordance with this
section.
H. For purposes of this subsection, a municipal permit may only be denied
to an applicant other than an owner, if the applicant is acting under the
direction or with the permission of an owner, and the owner owns real
property that is subject to denial as set forth above.
I. A denial of a municipal permit shall be subject to the provisions of 2
Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 5, Subchapter B (relating to practice and procedure
of local agencies),69 and Chapter 7, Subchapter B (relating to judicial
review of local agency action),70 or the Municipalities Planning Code,71
for denials subject to the Act.
69.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq.
70.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 751 et seq.
71.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 309-11 KENHORST CODE § 309-15
1:126
take all action necessary to ensure implementation of and effect the purpose
hereof.
§ 309-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-15
1:127
Chapter 327
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
§ 327-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Kenhorst Borough
Park Code."
§ 327-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to create an atmosphere conducive to the
enjoyment of and to protect the substantial public investment in Kenhorst
Borough.
§ 327-3. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, all words used in the present tense include
the future tense. All words in the singular number include the plural
number, unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise.
The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
§ 327-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kenhorst.72
PARK — Any park, reserve, playground, recreation center, swimming pool,
watershed, or other place whatsoever owned, operated, or used by the
Borough of Kenhorst and devoted to active or passive use whether within
the corporate limits of the Borough of Kenhorst.
PERMIT — The written authorization, issued by the Parks Committee or
designee, to conduct activities governed by this chapter.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, or association or
any agent, assistant, employee or representative thereof.
§ 327-5. Prohibited activities. [Amended 4-2-1981 by Ord. No. 365]
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the acts hereinafter
described within the limits of any park of the Borough of Kenhorst.
A. General uses and activities.
(1) To break, cut, deface, disturb, injure, move, or remove any flowers,
fruit, plant, tree, shrub, bench, apparatus, public sign, notice, or
property.
72.Editor's Note: The original definition of "Director of Parks," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II).
§ 309-15 KENHORST CODE § 327-5
1:128
(2) To gather, move, or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand,
or gravel.
(3) To hunt for, shoot at, chase, catch, or kill, or to attempt to shoot at,
chase, catch, or kill, with or without dogs, any bird or animal.
(4) To throw stones or missiles.
(5) To throw or discard tin cans, bottles, glass, paper, rubbish, waste
materials or litter of any description except in the containers
provided by the Borough of Kenhorst for the deposit of such items.
(6) To dump or discard any refuse, junk, dead animal or offensive
matter of any kind.
(7) To post or erect any bills, notices, or advertising matter of any kind.
(8) To sell or offer for sale any merchandise, food, article or thing
whatsoever without a permit.
(9) To violate any posted rules for, or to misuse, any park, picnic court,
camp area, playfield, or other recreational area.73
(10) To engage in camping, archery, golfing, horseback riding, or any
game, sport, or race except upon such grounds and areas, and at
such times, as are specifically designated for such activities.
(11) To have any ceremony or any musical, theatrical, or other
entertainment event without a permit.
B. Gaming. To engage in any unlawful gaming.
C. Use of alcoholic beverages. To consume, drink, or have possession or
custody of any malt or brewed beverages or vinous or spirituous
liquors.74
D. Use of firearms and fireworks.
(1) To carry, have or discharge firearms, air or spring rifles or slings,
except as specified otherwise in this chapter.
(2) To carry, have, or use any fireworks.75
E. Use of vehicles or motor vehicles, bicycles, skateboards.
(1) Except upon areas and at times specifically designated for such
purposes, to operate a licensed or unlicensed motor vehicle of any
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 327-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 327-5
1:129
§ 327-6. Official use.
type, to operate a bicycle, pedicycle or cart, or to roller skate or
use a skateboard.
(2) To stand or park any vehicle, except at those places designated
therefor.
F. Control of pets: to permit any dog or other animal to be in any park.76
G. Use of fire.
(1) To make a fire of any kind.77
(2) To smoke in any areas of park or recreation area in the Borough.78
(3) To use or operate in the Borough of Kenhorst any device that uses
combustible fuel, including lanterns, stoves, heaters, or the like.
H. Use of bodies of water. Fishing, boating, swimming, wading, floating,
ice skating:
(1) To swim, bathe, or wade, or float at any place except in a public
swimming or wading pool.
(2) To ice skate or ice fish in or upon any lake, pond, stream, creek or
any body of water owned or controlled by the Borough of Kenhorst,
unless officially posted for such purposes.
I. Use of bikeways.
(1) To operate any licensed or unlicensed motor vehicle including
motor bikes, mopeds and motorcycles.
(2) For the operator of a pedicycle not to yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians.
(3) To horseback ride.
(4) To use skateboards, roller skates, wagons, carts, or other similar
recreational devices, unless posted otherwise.
J. Time of use. To be present thereon for any purpose whatever between
sunset and sunrise, prevailing time, except with a valid permit. This
prohibition shall not apply to municipal personnel engaged in the
performance of their duties.79
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 327-5 KENHORST CODE § 327-6
1:130
§ 327-7. Permits.
§ 327-8. Violations and penalties.81
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.
Chapter 332
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 332-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Peddling and Soliciting Ordinance."
A. None of the above regulations shall preclude the Borough of Kenhorst,
or its agents or employees, from operating motor vehicles or motorized
boats, entering bodies of water, engaging in controlled burning, posting
signs and notices, bearing arms or conducting any other activities in
pursuance of its duties.
B. From time to time, the Parks Committee or designee may waive the
regulations of the Borough of Kenhorst Code and designate temporary
uses or activities as they relate to special and scheduled ceremonies or
recreational activities.
A. All permits issued by the Parks Committee or designee shall be subject
to park rules and regulations, and a person to whom such permits may
be granted shall be bound by said rules and regulations as fully as
though the same where inserted in said permits.
B. Any person to whom such permits may be granted shall be liable for any
loss, damage or injury sustained by reason of negligence of said person.
C. As a condition of issuing a permit, the Borough may require a permit
applicant to secure liability insurance, to post bond, or to make any
other guarantees the Borough considers reasonable.
D. It shall be unlawful to conduct any activities for which a permit is
required without first securing a valid permit to conduct such activities.
E. It shall be unlawful to make any alternation to a permit.
F. A permit is required for Borough residents/groups to use the
community center and/or playing fields. The fee for said permit shall be
as set by Council by resolution and amended from time to time.80
80.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 327-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-2
1:131
§ 332-2. Definitions and word usage.
§ 332-3. Permit requirement.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLING — To sell, to offer for sale, to solicit or to take orders, either
by sample or otherwise, for any goods, wares, services or merchandise,
upon any of the streets in the Borough of Kenhorst; provided, the word
"peddling" shall not apply to:
SOLICITING — Engaging in the soliciting of any money or gift of any
goods, wares, merchandise, services or other articles of value, upon
any of the streets in the Borough of Kenhorst, or from door to door
within the Borough of Kenhorst, whether or not accompanied by the
dissemination of information.
PEDDLER — Any person who shall engage in peddling, as defined
above.
SOLICITOR — Any person who shall engage in soliciting, as defined
above.
PERSON — Any individual, joint venture, association, partnership,
trust, corporation or other legal entity.
STREET — Any street, road, highway or alley and shall include the
sidewalk within the lines of or alongside of the same.
(1) Farmers selling their own produce;
The sale of goods, wares and merchandise, donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds whereof shall be applied to any charitable
or philanthropic purpose (but in no event to an organization which
seeks to affect legislation); or
(2)
Any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products or milk and milk products.
(3)
B. The terms "permit" and "license" and "permittee" and "licensee" can be
used interchangeably.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. On or after the effective date of this chapter, no person shall engage in
peddling or in soliciting in the Borough of Kenhorst without first having
obtained a permit to so peddle or solicit, respectively, as more fully set
forth in this chapter.
B. On or after the effective date of this chapter, the Borough of Kenhorst
and Kenhorst Volunteer Fire Company #1 are required to obtain a
§ 332-2 KENHORST CODE § 332-3
1:132
§ 332-4. Application for permit.
Every person desiring a permit to engage in peddling or in soliciting within
the Borough of Kenhorst shall make separate application therefor to the
Borough Secretary. If such person shall also be required to obtain a license
or permit from any county officer, he shall, when making such application,
exhibit a valid county license to the Borough Secretary. Further, if any
such person shall be required to register with the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in connection with soliciting for any charitable organization,
he shall, when making such application, exhibit evidence of such
commonwealth registration. Upon such application, such person shall give
his name; address; his criminal record, if any; the name of the person
for whom he works; the nature of the goods, wares, services and/or
merchandise that he intends to peddle or the use to which funds solicited
shall be put; the period of time he intends to peddle or solicit; the type
of vehicle that he uses, if any, and the license number thereof; the place
where he was engaged in peddling or soliciting immediately prior to his
making such application, if any; and the place where he intends to go after
the completion of his peddling or soliciting in the Borough of Kenhorst.
Notwithstanding anything herein stated to the contrary, each individual
intending to peddle or solicit for or on behalf of any other legal entity
shall make personal application for such license, which individual license
shall be required for each individual to engage in peddling or soliciting
in the Borough of Kenhorst. No license issued under this chapter shall be
transferable from one person to another person.
§ 332-5. Investigation of applicant.
Before issuing a peddler's license or a solicitor's license, the Borough
Secretary, or his/her duly authorized agent, in the sole discretion of said
Secretary or agent, may require an investigation of the applicant to obtain
sufficient proof that the applicant is of good business and/or moral
character and/or to confirm the accuracy of representation made in each
such application. By submitting an application for a peddler's license or
a solicitor's license, the applicant agrees to await a reasonable amount of
time for such investigation, which investigation may take no more than
10 days from the date of application. If, as a result of such investigation,
the applicant's business or moral character is found to be unsatisfactory
or any representation is found to be false or misleading, the Borough
Secretary, or his/her duly authorized agent, shall notify the applicant that
such application has been disapproved and that no license shall be issued.
§ 332-6. Nondiscrimination.
The Borough of Kenhorst shall not discriminate in the granting of licenses,
as long as the applicant abides by all regulations and requirements set forth
in this chapter, on the basis of sex, national origin, race or religion.
permit to peddle or solicit, but are exempt from all other provisions of
this chapter.
§ 332-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-7
1:133
§ 332-7. Permit fee.
No permit shall be issued under this chapter until the fee therefor, which
shall be for the use of the Borough of Kenhorst, shall have been paid to the
Borough Secretary by the applicant for such license.
§ 332-8. Issuance and revocation of permits.
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for a period of one
day/24 hours from the date thereof. It shall be a privilege of the licensed
person to conduct such business or activity as permitted by the license, and
no such license shall confer any property right up on the licensed person.
Any license issued hereunder may be suspended at any time, upon written
charge presented to the Borough Secretary, alleging that the licensee has
committed any violation of this chapter; has given any false or misleading
information in connection with any application for such license; or has
committed any violation of any other law, order, statute, regulation or rule in
connection with licensed business or activity. Any license may appeal from
such act of revocation to the Borough Council of the Borough of Kenhorst at
the next regular meeting thereof. No license fee or portion thereof shall be
refunded in the case of revocation.
§ 332-9. Limitation on license.
In addition to any other regulation in connection with a peddler's license or
a solicitor's license contained herein or otherwise, the following restrictions
shall apply:
A. The fee for such commercial/for-profit license shall be $100 for each
person who will be soliciting/peddling within the Borough, regardless of
whether more than one person represents a company/entity. Said fee is
established by the Borough of Kenhorst and may be amended from time
to time for commercial/for-profit entities.
B. The fee for such charitable/nonprofit license shall be $25 for each
person who will be soliciting/peddling within the Borough, regardless of
whether more than one person represents a company/entity or as set by
the Borough of Kenhorst from time to time for nonprofit/charitable
entities.
C. The permit fees may be waived at the sole discretion of Borough
Council.
A. Peddlers. No peddler having received a peddler's license under this
chapter shall peddle in the Borough of Kenhorst at any time on Sunday
or at any time on Monday through Saturday between the hours of 4:00
p.m. and 9:00 a.m., prevailing time. No peddler, having received a
peddler's license under this chapter, shall peddle at any premises
within the Borough of Kenhorst if, at any primary entrance to such
premises, there is posted at the time such peddler enters upon the
premises, a notice which states "NO PEDDLERS OR SOLICITORS
§ 332-7 KENHORST CODE § 332-9
1:134
§ 332-10. Notices.
Any person owning or occupying any building or portion thereof within the
Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania, who desires to secure
the protection under the notice regulations contained in this chapter shall
comply with the following requirements:
§ 332-11. Violations and penalties.
INVITED." If such notice is posted, the peddler, whether licensed
hereunder or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises. Any peddler, whether licensed hereunder or not, who was
gained entrance to any premises, whether invited or not, shall
immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested
to do so by the occupant thereof. No peddler shall occupy any fixed
location upon any of the streets or public places in the Borough of
Kenhorst for the purpose of peddling.
B. Solicitors. No solicitor, having received a solicitor's license hereunder,
shall solicit in any premises within the Borough of Kenhorst in the
Borough of Kenhorst at any time on Sunday or at any time on Monday
through Saturday between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.,
prevailing time. No solicitor, having received a solicitor's license
hereunder, shall solicit in any premises within the Borough of Kenhorst
in the Borough of Kenhorst if, at any primary entrance to such
premises, there is posted at the time such solicitor enters upon such
premises a notice which states "NO PEDDLERS OR SOLICITORS
INVITED." If such notice is posted, the solicitor, whether licensed
hereunder or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises. Any solicitor, whether licensed hereunder or not, who has
gained entrance to any premises, whether invited or not, shall
immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested
to do so from the occupant there.
A. Such individual shall post at a primary entrance to such premises a
notice which states "NO PEDDLERS OR SOLICITORS INVITED."
B. Such notices shall be in block letters at least one inch in height and
shall be provided by the Borough of Kenhorst to persons requesting
them, at the cost thereof.
C. Such notice so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any peddler
or solicitor, whether registered under this chapter or not, of the
determination by the occupant or owner of such premises of the
information contained on such notice.
A. Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code. Each such day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. All fines shall be paid to the Borough of
Kenhorst for its general use.82
§ 332-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-11
1:135
Chapter 341
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 190.
Nuisances — See Ch. 309.
Storage containers — See Ch. 393.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 404.
Trees — See Ch. 429.
B. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, any suit for financial
penalty brought by or on behalf of the Borough of Kenhorst against a
person under this chapter shall in no way constitute an election of
remedies, and the Borough of Kenhorst, and any other person having a
cause of action against such person, shall be entitled to pursue any such
remedies against such person as provided by law or in equity.
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 332-11 KENHORST CODE § 332-11
1:136
ARTICLE I
Unkempt Properties
[Adopted 11-3-2016 by Ord. No. 58083]
§ 341-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Kenhorst Borough
Unkempt Properties Ordinance."
§ 341-2. Unkempt properties and nuisance.
All properties not kept from excessive weeds, brush, grass and other
vegetation as provided for in this article are hereby declared to be a
nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety and comfort of the citizens of
this Borough.
§ 341-3. Definition.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any natural person, trust, partnership, association, firm,
corporation or other entity.
§ 341-4. Standards for weeds, brush, grass and other vegetation.
A. No owner, occupant or lessee of real estate in the Borough shall permit
or allow to grow in height in excess of eight inches, any weeds, brush,
grass or other vegetation which is not edible or planted for some useful
purpose upon the land owned, occupied or leased by such person.
B. All such weeds, brush, grass or other vegetation which is not edible or
planted for some useful purpose in excess of eight inches in height shall
be cut and removed by the owner, occupant or lessee of such real
estate.
C. It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or lessee of the real estate
as set forth about, not to cut or remove any weeds, brush, grass or other
vegetation which is not edible or planted for some useful or ornamental
purpose, which exceeds eight inches in height.
D. The owner of any premises shall remove, trim or cut grass, weeds or
other vegetation growing or remaining upon such premises, including
grass, weeds or other vegetation growing in and/or along sidewalks,
curbs, gutters and driveways and shall provide for the proper disposal
of said grass, weeds or other vegetation in such a manner as will not
create a nuisance to the residents of the Borough. In no event shall said
grass, weeds or other vegetation be discharged upon the public streets,
alleys, cartway or pedestrian thoroughfare.
83.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Unkempt Properties, adopted
4-5-1973 by Ord. No. 306 (Ch. 11, Part 3, of the 1973 Code of Ordinances), as amended.
§ 341-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-5
1:137
§ 341-5. Enforcement procedures.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer or the Manager of Kenhorst Borough
may give written notice to any owner, occupant or lessee of or other
person having an interest in real estate which has weeds, brush, grass
or other vegetation which exceeds eight inches in height which is not
edible or planted for some useful purpose, to cut and/or remove said
weeds, brush, grass or other vegetation in compliance with this article.
The Code Enforcement Officer or the Manager of Kenhorst Borough
may give written notice to any owner, occupant or lessee of or other
person having an interest in real estate which discharges said grass,
weeds or other vegetation upon the public streets, alleys, cartway or
pedestrian thoroughfare.
B. The written notice may be personally delivered to the owner, occupant
or lessee of or other person having an interest in the real estate or sent
by certified mail and first class mail to the last known address of such
person. Notification by hand delivery shall include affixing a written
notice of violation to the front door (or main entry door) of the
residence or office of any owner, occupant, or other responsible person
charged with violating the provisions of this article. The non-return of
first class mail shall be considered proper service. The date of mailing
or posting shall be considered "date of notice" issuance. Said notice
shall:
(1) Direct and require the removal of the condition, or the trimming or
cutting of such grass, weeds, brush, or other vegetation, so as to
conform to the requirements of this article, within 10 days after the
issuance of such notice and payment of the appropriate citation as
defined by the nature of the offense set forth below and as
established by resolution of the Council.
(a) First offense. Notify such owner, occupant, or lessee that he/
she is in violation of the provisions of this article and that if he/
she shall pay a first offense penalty in the amount determined
by resolution of Borough Council at the Kenhorst Borough Hall,
339 S. Kenhorst Boulevard, Kenhorst, PA, within 10 business
days of the date of issuance of the notice of violation, such
penalty shall be deemed as and shall constitute the full penalty
for that violation.
(b) Second offense. Any person charged with a violation of the
provisions of this article for a second time during a single
growing season shall pay a second offense penalty determined
by resolution of the Borough Council for a second violation.
(c) Third and subsequent offense(s). Any person charged with a
third or subsequent violation of this article during a single
growing season shall pay a penalty determined by resolution of
the Borough Council for violation for the third and each
subsequent violation. For the purposes of this article, a
§ 341-5 KENHORST CODE § 341-5
1:138
growing season shall be deemed to be that period each year
between April 1 and October 31.
(2) Any person notified of a violation of this article who fails to trim or
cut his/her grass, weeds, shrubs or other vegetation so as to
conform with the requirements of this article, who fails to remove
this cited condition, or who fails to make payment in full of the
penalty imposed for violation within 10 business days of the date of
issuance of the notice of violation shall be issued a citation for a
summary offense and upon summary conviction before a
Magisterial District Judge, be subject to a fine not exceeding $600,
plus costs. Each day's violation shall be a separate offense under
this article.
(3) If the owner, occupant, lessee of, or other person having an interest
in the real estate fails or refuses to comply with the notice to
remove a condition or to trim or cut his/her grass, weeds, shrubs,
or other vegetation within the period of time stated in the notice
described above, the Borough may, or may hire someone to, remove
the condition, or trim or cut such grass, weeds, shrubs or other
vegetation. In that event, the cost thereof, together with an
additional penalty of 10% shall be collected by the Borough from
the person who is the record owner of the property, in the manner
provided by law.
§ 341-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-5
1:139

ARTICLE II
Pools of Stagnant Water
[Adopted 7-3-2003 by Ord. No. 483 (Ch. 11, Part 7, of the 1973 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 341-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, certain terms are defined as follows:
BOROUGH — Borough of Kenhorst.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structures thereon.
STAGNANT WATER POOL — Stagnant water in pools in which mosquitoes,
flies or other insects may multiply including, but not limited to, open
containers, sewage lagoons, ditches, roof gutters, wheelbarrows, bird
baths, ornamental pools, swimming pools, vegetation, weeds and grass
in excess of 10 inches in height (except as may be otherwise provided
in wetlands and environmental ordinances and statutes).[Amended
12-1-2016 by Ord. No. 582]
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
TITLED OWNER — Any person, firm, partnership or corporation having
legal title or equitable interest in a structure and/or premises as recorded
in the official records of the state, county or municipality; or guardian of the
estate of any such person, or the executor or administrator of the estate of
such person if in possession of real property as a fiduciary or heir.
§ 341-7. Stagnant water pool declared to be public nuisance.
Any stagnant water pool:
§ 341-8. Unlawful to permit or maintain stagnant water pool.
It shall be unlawful for any titled owner to permit or maintain stagnant
water pool upon any premises or structure as defined herein in the Borough
and upon conviction for a violation thereof shall be subject to the penalties
provided under this article.
§ 341-9. Enforcement.
The Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce this article.
§ 341-10. Compliance notice; appeal.
A. Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public.
B. Creates a public health risk/hazard in light of the West Nile virus
problem.
C. Shall be deemed a public nuisance constituting a violation of this
article.
§ 341-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-10
1:141
§ 341-11. Work by Borough, cost to be filed as a lien.
Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any titled owner so notified to comply
with any and all applicable sections of this article, the Enforcement Official
is authorized to prepare appropriate work orders for performance of work
by authorized Borough employees or contracted workers to effect
compliance and abatement of any nuisance on the subject premises,
including entry onto private property. After said compliance work is
completed, statements for work performed shall be prepared by the
Borough Secretary. Said statements shall indicate the description of the
premises, titled owner, the cost of work performed, administrative charge,
disposal costs and all other costs, if any, and shall be filed as a lien against
the premises affected, and such lien shall continue in force until the full
amount thereof, together with interest at the rate of 6% per annum, is paid
in full.
§ 341-12. Violations and penalties.84
In addition to the lien provided for herein, whoever violates or fails to
comply with the provisions of this article shall be, upon conviction thereof,
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code, plus liable costs and restitution as determined for
work performed and charges assessed and/or paid by the Borough of
Kenhorst. All fines, restitution and Borough charges imposed and collected
under the provisions of this article shall be paid to the Borough. Each
day that an offense/violation continues shall constitute a separate offense/
violation.
A. Whenever a violation of this article is found or believed to exist, the
enforcement official shall give written notice to the titled owner
personally, or by mail addressed to him/her at his/her last known
address, or by posting said written notice thereof upon the premises
involved.
B. Required notice shall identify the premises, specifically state the reason
why notice is being issued with relevant section(s) of this article,
include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to achieve
compliance with this article and set forth that any appeal must be in
writing to the Borough Secretary, 339 South Kenhorst Boulevard,
Kenhorst, Pennsylvania 19607, within the time set forth for compliance.
Failure to timely request an appeal in writing will be deemed a waiver
of the appeal.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 341-10 KENHORST CODE § 341-12
1:142
ARTICLE III
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 2-2-2012 by Ord. No. 541]
§ 341-13. International Property Maintenance Code adopted by
reference.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Borough of Kenhorst, being marked and designated as
the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, as published
by the International Code Council, and versions of such codes as amended
from time to time, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance
Code of the Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County, in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance
of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for
supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation
and use; and the condemnation of such existing structures as herein
provided, and the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the Borough of
Kenhorst are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in § 341-13 herein.
§ 341-14. Modifications and amendments.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. In Section 101.1, insert "Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County,
Pennsylvania."
B. In Section 103.5, Fees, insert "Fees shall be as established from time to
time by resolution of Borough Council."85
C. Section 106.1 is amended to read as follows:
106.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or
corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any provision of this
code.
D. Section 106.3 is amended to read as follows:
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 341-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-14
1:143
§ 341-15. Construal of provisions.87
Nothing in this article or in the International Property Maintenance Code
hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending
in any court or any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause or
causes of action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby
repealed, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this article.
106.3 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a
notice of violation or order served in accordance with Section 107 shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or civil infraction as determined
by the local municipality, and the violation shall be deemed a strict
liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall institute the appropriate proceedings
at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violations, or to
require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the
structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or
direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority
having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real
estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such
real estate.
E. Section 106.4 is amended to read as follows:86
106.4 Violation penalties. Any person or persons violating any of the
provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter
1, Article I, Enforcement; General Penalty, of this Code. Each day or
portion thereof during which such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
F. Section 106.5 is amended to read as follows:
106.5 Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed neither shall not preclude the legal officer of the
jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct
or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building,
structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or
utilization of the building, structure or premises.
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 341-14 KENHORST CODE § 341-15
1:144
ARTICLE IV
Maintenance of Structures, Premises and Exterior Property Areas
[Adopted 12-5-2013 by Ord. No. 560]
§ 341-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kenhorst.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The official who is charged with the
administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized
representative. The Code Enforcement Officer, or any duly authorized
representative, shall have all authority necessary to enforce the provisions
of this act, including instituting summary citation proceedings.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS — The open space on the premises and
on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such
premises.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation cooking and consumption of food.
INFESTATION — The presence within or contiguous to a structure or
premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
MOTOR VEHICLE NUISANCE — A motor vehicle nuisance shall include any
motor vehicle which is unable to move under its own power and has any of
the following physical defects:
A. Broken windshields, mirrors or other glass with sharp edges.
One or more flat or open tires or tubes which could permit vermin
harborage.
B.
Missing doors, windows, hoods, trunks, or other body parts which could
permit animal harborage.
C.
D. Any body parts with sharp edges, including holes resulting from rust.
E. Missing tires resulting in unsafe suspension of the motor vehicle.
Upholstery which is torn or open which could permit animal and/or
vermin harborage.
F.
G. Broken headlamps or tail lamps with sharp edges.
Disassembled chassis parts apart from the motor vehicle stored in a
disorderly fashion or loose in or on the vehicle.
H.
I. Protruding sharp objects from the chassis.
Broken vehicle frames suspended from the ground in an unstable
manner.
J.
§ 341-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-16
1:145
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of
the county as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of
the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person and
the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take
possession of real property by a court.
PERSON — An individual corporation, partnership, or any other group
acting as a unit.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or
structures thereon.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Includes the following:
Leaking or damaged oil pan or gas tank which could cause fire or
explosion.
K.
L. Exposed battery containing acid.
M. Inoperable locking mechanism for doors or trunks.
N. Open or damaged floor boards, including trunk and fire wall.
O. Damaged bumpers pulled away from the perimeter of vehicle.
P. Broken grille with protruding edges.
Loose or damaged metal trim and clips, broken communications
equipment and antenna.
Q.
R. Suspended on unstable supports.
Such other defects which could threaten the health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the Borough.
S.
The physical condition or use of any premises regarded as a public
nuisance at common law.
A.
Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including
but not limited to abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations and
unsafe fences or structures.
B.
C. Any premises which has unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities.
D. Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation or use.
Any premises which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard or are
manifestly unsafe or unsecure as to endanger life, limb or property.
E.
Any premises from which the plumbing, heating and/or facilities
required by this code have been removed or from which utilities have
F.
§ 341-16 KENHORST CODE § 341-16
1:146
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials except
garbage, and the term shall include the residue from burning of wood, coal,
coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed, including, without
limitation because of enumeration, buildings for any occupancy or use
whatsoever, fences, signs, billboards, fire escapes, chute escapes, railings,
water tanks, towers, open-grade steps, sidewalks or stairways, tents or
anything erected and framed of component parts which is fastened,
anchored or rests on a permanent foundation or on the ground.
§ 341-17. Maintenance of exterior property areas.
been disconnected, destroyed or rendered ineffective or from which
utilities have been disconnected, destroyed or rendered ineffective or
the required precautions against trespassers have not been provided.
Any premises which is unsanitary or which is littered with rubbish or
garbage or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds.
G.
Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration
or decay, faulty construction, overcrowded, open, vacant or abandoned,
damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide shelter, in danger of
collapse or failure and dangerous to anyone on or near the premises.
H.
A. Sanitation. All exterior property areas and premises shall be
maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition, free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
B. Containers. The operator of every establishment producing garbage, a
vegetable waste or other putrescible material shall provide, and at all
times cause to be used, leakproof approved containers provided with
close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials until removed from
the premises for disposal.
C. Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained so
as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or with any
structure located thereon. Stagnant water shall be determined as any
accumulation that has not disbursed within seven days of the last
recorded local rainfall. Exception: water retention areas and/or
reservoirs approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
D. Insect and rat control. An owner of a structure or property shall be
responsible for the extermination of insects, rats, vermin or other pests
in all exterior areas of the premises, except that the occupant shall be
responsible for such extermination in the exterior areas of the premises
of a single-family dwelling. Whenever infestation exists in the premises
of other than a single-family dwelling, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
§ 341-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-17
1:147
§ 341-18. Duties and powers of Code Enforcement Officer.
E. Weeds. All lots shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in
excess of 10 inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall
be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation other than trees
or shrubs; provided, however, that this term shall not include cultivated
flowers and gardens.
F. Public nuisance. All exterior property areas and premises shall be
maintained in such a manner so as not to constitute a public nuisance.
G. Motor vehicles in residential areas. Not more than one currently
unregistered and/or uninspected motor vehicle shall be parked on any
property in a residential district, and said vehicle shall not at any time
be in a state of disassembly, disrepair, nor shall it be in the process of
being stripped or dismantled. A vehicle of any type shall not at any time
undergo major overhaul, including body work, in a residential district
unless said work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed
area designed and approved for such purposes. In addition, not more
than one currently unregistered and/or uninspected motor vehicle shall
be parked on any property in a residential district if such motor vehicle
constitutes a motor vehicle nuisance.
A. General. The Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce all provisions of
this article.
B. Notices and orders. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue all
necessary notices and orders to abate illegal or unsafe conditions to
ensure compliance with this article's requirements for the safety, health
and general welfare of the public.
C. Inspections. In order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the
public, the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to enter any
structure, premises or exterior property area at any reasonable time for
the purpose of making inspections and performing duties under this
article.
D. Right of entry. If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of a
structure, premises or exterior property area subject to the provision of
this code refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts or
obstructs entry and free access to any part of the structure or premises
where an inspection authorized by this article is sought, the
administrative authority shall be permitted to seek, in a court of
competent jurisdiction, an order that such owner, occupant or other
person in charge shall cease and desist with such interference.
E. Access by owner or operator. Every occupant of a structure, premises
or exterior property area shall give the owner or operator thereof, or
agent or employee, access to any part of such structure, premises or
exterior property area, at reasonable times for the purpose of making
§ 341-17 KENHORST CODE § 341-18
1:148
§ 341-19. Unlawful acts.
§ 341-20. Violations and penalties.
such inspection maintenance, repairs or alterations as are necessary to
comply with the provision of this article.
F. Notice to owner or to person or persons responsible. Whenever the
Code Enforcement Officer determines that there has been a violation of
this article or has reasonable grounds to believe that a violation has
occurred, notice shall be given to the owner or the person or persons
responsible therefor in the manner described below.
G. Manner of notice. The notice provided by the Code Enforcement Officer
shall be in writing, include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification, include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is
being issued, include a correction order allowing a reasonable time for
the repairs and improvements required to bring the structure, premises
or exterior property area into compliance with the provisions of this
article.
A. Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, use or occupy
any structure, premises or exterior property area, or cause the same to
be done, contrary to or in conflict with or in violation of any of the
provisions of this article.88
B. Borough permitted to perform work. If the tenant, occupant or owner of
the exterior property area permits or causes said property to be
maintained in violation of this article, the Borough may, after providing
said tenant, owner or occupant 20 days' prior written notice, correct
the matter giving rise to the violation at Borough expense and may
thereafter collect all costs and expenses, plus 10% incurred in
connection with correcting the violation by filing a municipal claim or
by an action in assumpsit.
A. Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code. Each such day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. All fines shall be paid to the Borough of
Kenhorst for its general use.89
B. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, any suit for financial
penalty brought by or on behalf of the Borough of Kenhorst against a
person under this article shall in no way constitute an election of
remedies, and the Borough of Kenhorst, and any other person having a
88.Editor's Note: Original Subsection B, Penalty, which immediately followed this subsection,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 341-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-20
1:149
cause of action against such person, shall be entitled to pursue any such
remedies against such person as provided by law or in equity.
§ 341-20 KENHORST CODE § 341-20
1:150
Chapter 358
REAL ESTATE REGISTRY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rental property — See Ch. 362.
§ 358-1. Purpose.90
The aforementioned recitals are incorporated herein. The Borough Council
has determined that an official real estate registry is necessary within
the Borough as provided by the Pennsylvania Borough Code, as amended,
8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1202(61). Such registry shall also include the necessary
information as required to implement Chapter 362, Rental Property, as
amended from time to time, to implement any trash or other services
dependent on household population and to regulate and track permits
within the Borough. Such a comprehensive registration is intended to
streamline data collection and avoid inconvenience to Borough residents.
§ 358-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
DWELLING — Any building or structure (except temporary housing) which
is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by
human occupants.
LET, LETTING, LEASE, RENT, RENTING, RENTAL or words of similar
meaning — The act of permitting a unit or property to be used to provide a
living arrangement for one or more persons not the owner of record thereof,
whether or not for compensation, when such person owns any less than a
50% interest in the property.
OCCUPANT — Any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking or
eating in a unit.
OWNER/PROPERTY OWNERS — Any person who, individually, jointly or
severally with others, shall have legal or equitable title to or have any other
legal or beneficial interest in any unit, whether or not such person occupies
the unit or any part thereof. The definition of "owner" as set forth in this
chapter shall incorporate the definition of "owner" in Chapter 362, Rental
Property, of the Code of the Borough of Kenhorst.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, corporation, company,
association, partnership, trust, agent or other entity. When referring to
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 341-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-2
1:151
occupancy or maximum dwelling unit occupancy pursuant to this chapter,
"person" shall refer only to an individual.
PROPERTY — Any lot, tract or parcel of real property in the Borough of
Kenhorst, including the land and all buildings and appurtenant structures
or appurtenant elements, on which one or more regulated units are located.
§ 358-3. Annual registration form.
The Borough shall mail to all property owners as noted in public records,
a yearly resident registration form, which shall include all data and
information to be supplied to the Borough for each and every property
owner within the Borough. Such form shall be mailed in January of each
year and shall be due on February 1 and whenever a property transfer or
change in rental status occurs during the year. For the purpose of the year
2014, the registration form shall be circulated upon adoption of this chapter
and shall be due on the date established by Council at the time of ordinance
adoption.
§ 358-4. Required information.
Data shall be collected by the property owner and certified by said owner
by signature. The owner shall then mail or deliver the registration form to
the Borough by the date established. The data collected for each property
shall include the following:
A. Address for each use and/or dwelling unit.
B. The name and address of the property owner based upon the recorded
deed in and for Berks County.
C. Contact information for the property owner.
D. The property owner's state and municipality, if different than Kenhorst
Borough.
E. The number of dwelling units or commercial units in the property and
for each:
(1) The names of all residents in the property and/or dwelling unit or
separate use.
(2) Notation as to relationship between residents and/or tenants and/
or tenants and owners.
(3) Age and gender of each resident in the unit.
(4) Employment and/or school information for each inhabitant, if
applicable.
(5) The status of the resident such as a renter, a lessee, a tenant or
other status if not the owner of the property by deed or instrument
of conveyance.
§ 358-2 KENHORST CODE § 358-4
1:152
§ 358-5. Additional reports and information.
The Borough shall maintain additional reports and information for each
property as it sees fit, including any statement of zoning classification,
a statement concerning the conformity or nonconformity of each use,
statements concerning permits issued or denied to date related to any
affected unit and the listing of any housing code violations, liens, penalties
or other data that the Borough deems important as related to real estate.
§ 358-6. Vacant properties.
In the event a property is vacant, the owners shall inform the Borough on
the date when the property is vacated so that records could be updated.
Property owners shall be required to complete all information within
registration forms and confirm vacant status of the property. The Borough
has enacted a substantial blight program and tracking of vacant properties
assists in maintaining the public's safety and avoiding blight within the
Borough. In the event persons move into a vacant property, all registration
forms shall be updated in accordance with this chapter.
§ 358-7. Form of registration.
(6) In the case of multiple dwelling units, the designated unit of
residency for each person listed in the aforementioned subsection
of this section.
F. Any designation of race or nationality shall be optional and the
registration form shall be deemed complete regardless of whether any
property owner and/or tenant seeks to complete any provisions with
regard to race or ethnicity.
A. Each year, or as necessary, the Borough Council shall adopt a form, by
resolution, to be utilized to collect the data required by this chapter.
Such form need not be readopted each year if only the dates for
collection are revised. Such form shall be the official document that
shall be submitted to the Custodian of Records. The submission of data
on a form other than that provided by the Borough shall be deemed
invalid and such information shall not be deemed compliant with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. The data and information collected shall be maintained by the Borough
and shall not be provided to third parties unless under the Pennsylvania
Right-to-Know Law91 or in any court proceedings for which the purpose
of this chapter is affected or involves some type of legal obligation on
behalf of the Borough due to the information provided.
91.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
§ 358-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-8
1:153
§ 358-8. Custodian of records.
In keeping with the Borough Code,92 the Borough Council hereby appoints
the Borough Manager as the custodian of records collected pursuant to this
chapter. Such custodian of records shall cause to be made and carefully
preserve all necessary books, maps and plans as may show the location
and ownership of every lot, piece of real estate and subdivision thereof. For
purposes of establishing or maintaining the registry, the person in charge of
the registry shall have access to public records without charge.
§ 358-9. Effect on other regulations.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the Borough from requiring owners to
provide information relevant to the enforcement of any Borough ordinance
in accordance with law.
§ 358-10. Prohibited acts.
The failure to supply registration information within the time provided in
this chapter shall be considered a violation of the same. The providing of
false or incorrect information to the Borough shall also be considered a
violation of this chapter. The Borough's decision to provide any reminders
of the requirements of this chapter shall not be considered a waiver of any
requirement under this chapter.
§ 358-11. Violations and penalties.93
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.
§ 358-12. Notices.
A. All notices for any purpose as to requirements and/or compliance with
registration provisions of this chapter shall be to the majority owner as
designated by official instrument at the Recorder of Deeds in and for
Berks County. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any notice
required to be given to the owner under this chapter shall have been
received by the owner if the notice was given by first class, prepaid
mail.
B. In the case of notice of enforcement of violations of this chapter, notice
shall be provided by first class mail and registered mail. The failure to
claim or the notation of "unclaimed" or "refused" on any registered mail
shall not negate notice pursuant to this chapter. At all times, personal
service of notices of enforcement shall be considered appropriate
notice if an agent of the Borough attests such service.
92.Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 358-8 KENHORST CODE § 358-12
1:154
§ 358-13. Owners severally responsible.
If any property is owned by more than one person, in any form of joint
tenancy, such as a partnership or otherwise, each person shall be jointly and
severally responsible, and/or liable, for the duties imposed under the terms
of this chapter, and shall be severally subject to prosecution for the violation
of this chapter.
Chapter 362
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 190.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 341.
Real estate registry — See Ch. 358.
Zoning — See Ch. 475.
C. The claimed lack of knowledge by the owner of any violation herein
under cited shall be no defense to a violation of this chapter.
§ 358-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-13
1:155

ARTICLE I
Rental Conduct
[Adopted 8-7-2016 by Ord. No. 577]
§ 362-1. Short title and authority.
§ 362-2. Definitions.
A. Short title. This article shall be cited as the "Rental Conduct Standards"
of the Borough of Kenhorst.
B. Authority. This article is enacted in accordance with the authority
contained in the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including,
but not limited to, Borough Code Sections 1202(6), 1202(21), 1202(24)
and 1202(74).94
A. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this article:
AGENT — A person acting on behalf of an owner.
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit occupied by one family and containing
at least one bathroom and separate eating and cooking facilities with
bath.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A one-family dwelling occupied by the owner
thereof (and his family, if applicable), portions of which building the
owner lets room for lodging.
CLOSED DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT — A closed DCR shall be a
DCR as to which the owner or agent:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any person specifically designated
as such by the Council of the Borough of Kenhorst to enforce this
With respect to a DCR, responds by complying with the procedures
set forth in § 362-7E(3) of this article within 10 business days of
receipt of a written notice of a Level 1 DCR; and
(1)
Within 10 business days of approval of a remedial plan, the Code
Enforcement Officer has made a determination that the remedial
plan proposed by the owner or agent pursuant to § 362-7E(4) has
been performed by the owner or agent in all material respects. The
owner or agent may request the Code Enforcement Officer to make
such determination at the time of approval of the remedial plan
or at any time thereafter. An owner or agent shall not be deemed
to have failed to substantially perform a remedial plan as a result
of the refusal of any judicial authority to order the eviction of any
occupant, so long as the owner or agent has diligently pursued
any eviction proposed in the owner or agent's remedial plan by
appropriate legal proceedings to the Court of Common Pleas.
(2)
94.Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1202.
§ 362-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-2
1:157
article, and shall include the duly authorized representatives of said
Code Enforcement Officer.
COMMON AREA — Any open area within a structure shared by
occupants or that the occupants have the right to share, including,
but not limited to, kitchens, bathrooms, living rooms, dining rooms,
attics, basements and any room used for parties, social events or the
congregation of people, excepting bedrooms.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT — Any form of conduct, action, incident or
behavior perpetrated, caused or permitted by any occupant or visitor
of a regulated unit that is so loud, untimely (as to hour of the day),
offensive, riotous or that otherwise disturbs other persons of
reasonable sensibility in their peaceful enjoyment of their premises
such that a report is made to police and/or to the Code Enforcement
Officer complaining of such conduct, action, incident or behavior. It
is not necessary that such conduct, action, incident or behavior
constitutes a criminal offense, nor that criminal charges be filed against
any person in order for a person to have perpetrated, caused or
permitted the commission of disruptive conduct, as defined herein;
provided, however, that no disruptive conduct shall be deemed to have
occurred unless the Code Enforcement Officer or police shall
investigate and make a determination that such did occur, and keep
written records, including a disruptive conduct report, of such
occurrence.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT (DCR) — A written report of
disruptive conduct on a form to be prescribed in this article, to be
completed by the Code Enforcement Officer or police officer, as the
case may be, who actually investigates an alleged incident of disruptive
conduct and which shall be maintained by the Code Enforcement
Officer. Disruptive Conduct Reports shall be separate from any other
action taken by the police and shall be considered public documents.
A DCR may be issued and deemed appropriate under this article
regardless of whether a criminal citation or prosecution is issued in
response to the disruptive conduct and other legal action in the judicial
system is not pursued by the Borough Police Department or Code
Enforcement Officer. Upon the issuance of a DCR, the occupants and/or
owner shall accrue penalties as provided by this article.
DWELLING — Any building or structure (except temporary housing)
which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or
sleeping by human occupants.
DWELLING UNIT — Any group of rooms located within a dwelling
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living or sleeping.
FAMILY — As used in this article, the term "family" shall be defined as:
One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or other
decree of legal custody living together as a single housekeeping
unit and using cooking facilities and certain rooms in common;
(1)
§ 362-2 KENHORST CODE § 362-2
1:158
GUEST — A person on the premises with actual or implied consent of
an occupant, who is not an occupant.
HOUSING APPEALS BOARD — The Housing Appeals Board shall be
established pursuant to this article and will be comprised of the
Kenhorst Borough Council Safety Committee and the Mayor.
LET, LETTING, LEASE, RENT, RENTING, RENTAL or words of similar
meaning — The act of permitting a unit to be used to provide a living
arrangement for one or more persons not the owner-of-record thereof,
whether or not for compensation.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units.
NONRENEWAL — The nonrenewal described in § 362-10C(1) of this
article.
OCCUPANT — Any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking
or eating in a unit.
OPEN DCR or OPEN DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT — A DCR which
has been issued and has not become a closed DCR.
OWNER — Any person who, individually, jointly or severally with
others, shall have:
Not more than three persons unrelated, as set forth in Subsection
(1) above, living together as a single housekeeping unit and using
cooking facilities and certain rooms in common; provided, however,
that no related dependent of such unrelated persons shall be
counted in determining the number of unrelated persons living
together; or
(2)
More than three unrelated handicapped persons living
permanently together as a single housekeeping unit and using
cooking facilities and certain rooms in common; provided, however,
that such persons shall be under the supervision of a nonhandicapped
resident of the dwelling and provided, further, that
the dwelling is owned and operated by a Pennsylvania nonprofit
corporation.
(3)
Legal or equitable title to or have any other legal or beneficial
interest in any unit, with or without accompanying actual
possession thereof, including corporations;
(1)
Charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling units as owner
or agent of owner, or as executor, administrator, trustee or
guardian of an estate of the owner; or
(2)
Any person who, individually or as a corporation, who is the ownerof-
record by either deed or other instrument filed in the Recorder
of Deeds in and for Berks County, of a majority interest in a
property. For purposes of this article, "majority" shall mean at least
(3)
§ 362-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-2
1:159
PERFORMANCE CODES — All codes of the Borough of Kenhorst, and
specifically Chapter 341, Property Maintenance, Article III, Adoption of
Standards, as such ordinance is amended from time to time; Chapter
475, Zoning, as amended from time to time; and any solid waste and
fire prevention ordinances that may be adopted and amended from time
to time.
PERMIT YEAR — August 1 of any year through July 31 of the
succeeding year.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, corporation, company,
association, partnership, trust, agent or other entity. When referring
to occupancy or maximum dwelling unit occupancy pursuant to this
article, "person" shall refer only to an individual.
POLICE — The Police Department of the City of Reading, or any
properly authorized member or officer thereof or any other law
enforcement agency having jurisdiction within the Borough of
Kenhorst.
PREMISES — Any lot, tract or parcel of real property in the Borough
of Kenhorst, including the land and all buildings and appurtenant
structures or appurtenant elements, on which one or more regulated
units are located.
REASONABLE NOTICE — In the case of nonemergency notice, five
business days' advance notice by United States first class mail.
Reasonable notice in emergency situations shall be determined in
accordance with § 362-9.
REGULATED UNIT — Any unit subject to regulation under this article.
REMEDIAL PLAN — The plan required to be filed by the owner or agent
pursuant to § 362-7E(4)
RENTAL PERMIT — The permit issued to the owner or agent of
regulated units under this article, which is required for the lawful
letting and occupancy of regulated units.
RENTED ROOM — A room which is let and which is occupied by
persons who share certain facilities in common with the owner and/or
with other occupants of the dwelling, boardinghouse, rooming house or
multiple dwelling in which the let rental is located.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any parent of, legal guardian of or other adult
legally responsible for any minor individual (under 18 years of age) who
would be considered an occupant for purposes of this article. All minor
occupants shall provide the name of the responsible party to the owner
or agent of the regulated unit at the time of the entry into a particular
lease or rental agreement, and the owner or agent shall provide this
information to the Borough.
51%. For purposes of this article, equitable ownership shall not be
construed to be actual ownership.
§ 362-2 KENHORST CODE § 362-2
1:160
§ 362-3. Rental permit.
REVOCATION — The revocation described in § 362-10C(3) of this
article.
ROOMING HOUSE — A building, other than a fraternity house, sorority
house, hotel or a motel, in which building the owner provides rooms for
lodging of individuals.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
rooming house forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be
used for living or sleeping purposes.
STUDENT — An individual who is enrolled at a university, college or
trade school and whose primary occupation is as a student or who is
on a semester or summer break from studies at a college, university or
trade school or any combination of such persons. The term "student"
shall not apply to students who have completed a bachelor or
equivalent degree or persons enrolled in a single course at a time.
The residents of a student home may or may not live as a single
housekeeping unit.
STUDENT HOME — A living arrangement for at least two students, up
to a maximum of three students (as defined in this article) and who are
unrelated to each other by blood, marriage or legal adoption. The term
"student home" shall not include dormitories owned or operated by
an institution of higher education, fraternity house, or sorority house.
The term "student home" shall be used interchangeably with the term
"student rental." This term shall not include one or more students living
in the same dwelling as their parent(s). This term shall not be used
to regulate any residential uses owned or operated by a college or
university or be considered an "institutional use."
SUSPENSION — The suspension described in § 362-10C(2) of this
article.
UNIT — Any apartment, rented room, rooming unit, boardinghouse,
rooming house, multiple dwelling or other dwelling unit or dwelling, or
any room or portion thereof that is offered for let.
B. Word usage.
(1) Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "multiple
dwelling," "boardinghouse," "rented room," "rooming house,"
"rooming unit," "apartment," "regulated unit," "unit," and
"premises" are used in this article, they shall be construed as
though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof."
(2) Tense, gender and number. Words used in the present tense include
the future; words used in the masculine gender include the
feminine and the neuter; the singular number includes the plural,
and the plural, the singular.
A. Application.
§ 362-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-3
1:161
§ 362-4. Student home regulations.
(1) No person shall operate or let to another for occupancy any unit,
unless such person shall first apply for and obtain annually a rental
permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer which includes
inspections for safety as prescribed by separate ordinance.
(2) No rental permit shall be issued or renewed unless such applicant
designates in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer the name of
said owner's agent for the receipt of service of notice of violation of
the provisions of this article and scheduling of inspections pursuant
to separate ordinance and for service of process pursuant to the
provisions of this article and accurately and truthfully provides all
of the information required by the rules and regulations referenced
in § 362-4A and § 362-7, Responsibilities of owner and agents, of
this article.
(3) Exceptions. There shall not be any acceptable exceptions to the
behavioral standards of this article. Rental ordinance provisions
shall apply to any and all occupants who are not the owner of the
property by at least 51% ownership regardless of family status.
B. Rental permits shall be issued for the period of one permit year. Upon
expiration of any rental permit, a new rental permit shall be required
for a further period of one permit year.
C. Rental permits for less than the full permit year will not be issued at the
beginning of the permit year but at the time of permit issuance. All
rental permits shall have as their termination date the 31st day of
December next occurring.
D. Every rental permit issued under this article shall be maintained in the
regulated unit and shall be posted in a conspicuous location in the
entryway of every permitted regulated unit in such a way as to minimize
tampering and removal and in such a way that it may be seen at all
times. In addition, the Borough shall maintain a copy of the rental
permit in the property file located at Borough Hall.
E. Rental permit applications for student homes must include evidence of
compliance with § 362-4 of this article.
F. Rental permits shall not be transferable in the event of a change in
ownership of the regulated unit.
G. Rental permits or permits previously issued and applications previously
filed under the previous enactment of the rental unit regulations within
the Borough shall be treated as being issued under this article.
A. In addition to zoning regulations concerning student homes, the
following provisions shall apply to those units housing persons defined
as students within this article. The provisions of this article shall apply
in all zoning districts. Further, in all districts, the occupancy of
§ 362-3 KENHORST CODE § 362-4
1:162
§ 362-5. Rules, regulations and inspections.
Article II, Inspection; Registration; Rental Occupancy Permits, shall govern
inspections and any previous ordinance is repealed in its entirety, except to
the extent that there are any open DCR's or any penalties were provided
under the previous ordinances.
§ 362-6. Fees.
dwellings shall be regulated according to the definition of "family."
Therefore, no more than three unrelated persons may occupy a
dwelling unit, whether for rental use or general occupancy.
B. A student home shall meet the same regulations that apply to all rental
units, in addition to the specific regulations set forth in this section.
C. The owner of any student home shall register its location with the Code
Enforcement Officer upon application for a rental permit.
D. Student homes must have one off-street parking space for each
occupant. Adequate parking in compliance with this article must be
demonstrated at the time of application for a rental permit commencing
December 31, 2012.
E. In the event that the owner of student home fails to maintain a current
rental permit, said dwelling unit shall be considered in violation of this
article and the Code Enforcement Officer and/or Zoning Administrator
may initiate condemnation proceedings pursuant to the terms of the
Borough's Property Maintenance Code.95
A. The Borough Council may, by resolution, adopt from time to time fees
and charges applicable to this article. Such fees and charges may
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) The amount of the annual fee for the permit year shall be $100 to
be paid at the time of filing an application for a rental permit.
Annual fee shall cover review and initial inspection and one followup
inspection, if required as well as the permit issuance.
(2) Any owner or agent who fails to renew an expired rental permit
within 10 days after the expiration date of the rental permit shall,
in addition to the fines provided for in § 362-10A of this article, be
subject to a fee of $50 or as established by Borough resolution from
time to time for each and every additional ten-day period or part
thereof during which the expired rental permit is not renewed and
the regulated unit continues to be used for purposes subject to
regulation under this article.
(3) Fees to be imposed for failure to permit an inspection at a time
agreed upon in advance by the owner or agent and the Code
95.Editor's Note: See Ch. 341, Property Maintenance.
§ 362-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-6
1:163
§ 362-7. Responsibilities of owner and agents.
Enforcement Officer and confirmed in writing by the Code
Enforcement Officer. Fee shall be $50 or as established by Borough
resolution from time to time for failure to schedule or for each
missed appointment, unless owner/agent notifies the Borough at
least 24 hours in advance.
B. No fee shall be required in connection with the issuance of a rental
permit in the following circumstances:
(1) When the owner or agent is the United States government, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Borough of Kenhorst or any
agency thereof.
(2) When the owner or agent is a non-individual person organized and
operated exclusively for religious or charitable purposes, and
provided further, that no part of the net earnings or profits of any
such non-individual person shall inure to the benefit of any officer,
director shareholder, partner, trustee, beneficiary or principal
thereof or to any other person, other than solely for charitable
purposes.
C. The rental permit fee exemptions contained in Subsection B shall,
nevertheless, not exempt such owner or agents from compliance with
this article and the performance codes and all other applicable rules
and regulations issued in connection with it, unless specifically
otherwise exempted herein.
A. Whosoever, as owner or agent, lets or holds out to let any unit subject to
the provisions of this article, shall supply the Code Enforcement Officer
with the following information:
(1) The street address and mailing address (if different from the street
address) of each such unit.
(2) The number of units for let in any dwelling, rooming house or
boardinghouse, which number shall in no event exceed the number
of such units provided for on the rental permit issued to the owner
or agent on behalf of the owner.
(3) The name of each person occupying each such unit.
(4) The period of time for which the unit is let.
B. Such information shall be supplied to the Code Enforcement Officer
annually in writing, in such form as may be prescribed in accordance
with § 362-6 of this article. Such information pertaining to any unit shall
also be supplied in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer, in such
form as may be prescribed in accordance with § 362-9 of this article,
within 10 days after the occupancy of any such unit changes.
§ 362-6 KENHORST CODE § 362-7
1:164
C. The owner of any unit required to obtain a rental permit pursuant to the
requirements of this article shall designate a person to serve as the
owner's agent. The owner or agent shall be legally responsible for
operating each unit in compliance with all provisions of this article and
the performance codes, the rental permit issued relating to the
maximum number of persons that may occupy such regulated unit and
all other provisions of this article. The agent shall reside either within
such premises where the regulated unit is located or within a five-mile
radius thereof. The owner of the regulated unit may also serve as the
agent, if such owner resides within the premises where the regulated
unit is located or within a five-mile radius of the territorial boundary of
the Borough of Kenhorst or if such owner resides more than five miles
from the territorial boundary of the Borough of Kenhorst but has a
place of business within the Borough of Kenhorst and is present at the
place of business during normal business hours. For purposes of this
section, "normal business hours" shall mean the period of time
commencing at 9:00 a.m. and continuing through and including 5:00
p.m., prevailing time, Monday through Friday, except legal holidays,
throughout the calendar year. In the absence of the owner, the agent
shall be responsible for providing access to such regulated unit so as to
permit the Code Enforcement Officer to make inspections thereof. The
agent shall be an individual not less than 18 years of age. The name,
address and phone numbers of the owner and agent shall be posted in a
conspicuous place within the regulated unit.
D. The owner of any regulated unit shall, within 10 days of becoming such
owner and thereafter annually, furnish in writing the following
information to the occupants and to the Code Enforcement Officer:
(1) The name, home and business addresses and home and business
phone numbers of each owner.
(2) The name, home and business addresses and home and business
phone numbers of the agent.
E. Regulation of occupant conduct and activities.
(1) The owner or agent of any regulated unit shall be responsible for
assuring that the conduct and activities of the occupants of every
regulated unit which the owner or agent owns in the Borough of
Kenhorst, which conduct or activity takes place at such regulated
unit or its premises, is in compliance with this article. In order to
achieve those ends, every owner or agent of a regulated unit shall
take appropriate contractual and enforcement action to cause the
conduct and activities of the occupants thereof to comply with this
article.
(2) Where an owner or agent does not manage the use of common
areas of the premises and the behavior of occupants and guests in
the common areas by appropriate contractual and enforcement
action, the owner or agent shall be directly responsible for the
§ 362-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-7
1:165
behavior of occupants and guests in common areas of the premises
as if the owner or agent were an occupant.
(3) Within five business days after the receipt of written notice from
the Code Enforcement Officer that a DCR has been issued as a
result of an occupant of a regulated unit having violated a provision
of this article, the owner or agent shall notify the occupants of the
regulated unit of the issuance of the DCR and its contents, utilizing
a form letter provided with such written notice, such form letter to
be in such form as is approved in accordance with § 362-5 of this
article. A copy of such form letter issued by the owner or agent to
the occupants shall be delivered to the Code Enforcement Officer
within such five business-day-period. Failure by the owner or agent
to comply with the foregoing provisions of § 362-7E(3) shall
constitute sufficient grounds for the issuance to the owner or agent
by the Code Enforcement Officer of an additional DCR and
additional penalties and/or enforcement actions.
(4) Remedial plan.
(a) Within 10 business days after the receipt of a written notice
from the Code Enforcement Officer that a DCR has been issued
as a result of an occupant or owner or agent of a regulated unit
having violated a provision of this article, the owner or agent
shall file with the Code Enforcement Officer a remedial plan,
on such form as is approved in accordance with § 362-4 of this
article, which shall, at a minimum, state the following:
[1] Set forth what action the owner or agent has taken to
remedy the violation;
[2] What steps the owner or agent has taken to prevent a
reoccurrence of the violation; and
[3] Set forth specific steps the owner or agent will take in the
future if the violation reoccurs.
(b) The Code Enforcement Officer shall review the report, and, if
the Code Enforcement Officer determines that adequate steps
have been taken or are proposed to be taken and the remedial
plan is adequate to address future violations, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall, within 10 business days after
receipt of the remedial plan, approve the remedial plan or
reject the remedial plan and issue written notice thereof to the
owner or agent. The owner or agent shall, on his or her
initiative, enforce the remedial plan. Failure to enforce the
remedial plan diligently shall be a violation of this article. If the
Code Enforcement Officer determines that the remedial plan
should not be approved and rejects the remedial plan, written
notice thereof shall be issued to the owner or agent, and within
10 business days of receiving such notice the owner or agent
shall refile a remedial plan which addresses the deficiencies
§ 362-7 KENHORST CODE § 362-7
1:166
found by the Code Enforcement Officer. The owner or agent
may appeal the Code Enforcement Officer's rejection of the
remedial plan to the Housing Appeals Board.
(5) This section shall not be construed as diminishing or relieving, in
any way, the responsibility of the occupants, responsible parties
and/or their guests for their conduct or activity, nor shall it be
construed as an assignment, transfer or projection over or onto any
owner or agent of any responsibility of the occupants, any
responsible parties or their guests for their conduct or activity, nor
shall it be construed as an assignment, transfer or projection over
or onto any owner or agent of any responsibility or liability which
occupants or their guests may have as a result of their conduct or
activity under any private cause of action, civil or criminal
enforcement proceeding or criminal law; nor shall this section be
construed so as to require an owner or agent to indemnify or
defend the occupants, any responsible party or their guests when
any such action or proceeding is brought against the occupant
based upon the occupant's conduct or activity, nor to, in and of
itself, impose any liability for negligence based upon any act or
omission of the owner or agent. Nothing herein is intended to
impose any additional civil/criminal liability upon owner or agent
other than that which is imposed by other laws or judicial decisions
or that which is imposed by this article. This section is not intended
to, nor shall its effect be, to limit any other enforcement remedies
which may be available to the Borough of Kenhorst against an
owner or agent, occupant or guest thereof.
F. Leases. Regulated units shall only be let pursuant to an agreement or
lease.
(1) All rental agreements and/or leases for the rental of regulated units
shall be in writing and shall be supplemented with the addendum
attached hereto as Exhibit A.96 No oral agreements or leases and no
oral modifications of agreements or leases are permitted. All
information required to be given to occupants and responsible
parties by the owner or agent, pursuant to this article and/or the
Pennsylvania Landlord and Tenant Act,97 shall be furnished before
the signing of the agreement or lease. The owner or agent shall
provide the occupant and responsible party with copies of the
rental agreement or lease and addendum upon execution. Exhibit A
shall not be submitted to the Borough of Kenhorst unless requested
pursuant to Subsection F(3) below.
(2) Commencing with the effective date of this article, this article shall
be available for purchase in the Borough Office and may be made
available by other appropriate means, such as electronically at the
Borough's website. Where a rental agreement or lease has been
96.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
97.Editor's Note: See 68 P.S. § 250.101 et seq.
§ 362-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-7
1:167
§ 362-8. Responsibilities of occupants; disruptive conduct.
entered into prior to the effective date of this article, the owner or
agent shall make the occupant aware of this article within 30 days
thereafter.
(3) The owner or agent shall secure a written acknowledgement from
the occupant at the time of signing the rental agreement or lease
that the occupant has received the information required by this
article on a form approved in accordance with this section and
which shall contain an acknowledgement of receipt of the
information by the occupant and any responsible party. Upon
request by the Code Enforcement Officer, the owner or agent,
within 10 business days of the request, shall furnish to the Code
Enforcement Officer two copies of said acknowledgement and
copies of the rental agreement(s) or lease(s) the owner or agent has
entered into for regulated units.
G. The owner or agent shall ensure that the regulated unit and the
premises upon which the regulated unit is located comply at all times
with the performance codes.
H. The owner or agent shall reply promptly to reasonable complaints and
inquiries from occupants.
I. The owner or agent shall comply with all provisions of the Landlord and
Tenant Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
J. All notices served upon the owner or agent by the Code Enforcement
Officer or the Housing Appeals Board shall be conspicuously posted by
the owner or agent within the unit to which the notice applies.
A. Peaceful enjoyment. The occupants of a regulated unit shall each
conduct themselves and require other persons, including, but not
limited to, guests on the premises and within the regulated unit with
the occupant's consent and consistent with agreements and leases in
effect, to conduct themselves in a manner that will not disturb the
peaceful enjoyment of the premises by others, and that will not disturb
the peaceful enjoyment of adjacent or nearby premises by the persons
occupying the same.
B. Illegal activities. The occupant shall not engage in, nor tolerate nor
permit others on the premises to engage in, any conduct declared
illegal under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code (18 Pa. C.S.A. § 101 et seq.)
or Liquor Code (47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.) or the Controlled Substance,
Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act (35 P.S. § 780-101 et seq.).
C. Disruptive conduct. It shall be a violation of this article for any occupant
or any other person to engage in disruptive conduct, as defined in this
article, on the premises of a regulated unit. When police or the Code
Enforcement Officer investigate an alleged incident of disruptive
conduct occurring in or about a regulated unit, the investigating officer
§ 362-7 KENHORST CODE § 362-8
1:168
§ 362-9. Enforcement; service of notices and orders; appeals.
shall complete a disruptive conduct report upon a finding that the
reported incident did, in his or her judgment, constitute disruptive
conduct as defined in this article. The information filled in on said
report shall include, to the extent possible, the identity or identities
of the alleged perpetrator(s) of the disruptive conduct and all other
obtainable information, including the factual basis for the disruptive
conduct, as requested on the prescribed form. Where the police make
such investigation, said police officer shall then submit the completed
disruptive conduct report to the Code Enforcement Officer. In all cases,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall mail a copy of the disruptive
conduct report to the owner or agent of the regulated unit in question
within five business days of the occurrence of the alleged disruptive
conduct, notwithstanding whether the person making the investigation
on behalf of the Borough of Kenhorst is the Code Enforcement Officer
or the police. The Code Enforcement Officer may also mail a copy of the
disruptive conduct report to other appropriate parties.
D. In addition to all obligations imposed upon occupants by this article,
occupants of regulated units shall comply with all other applicable
codes and ordinances of the Borough of Kenhorst and all other
applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the United
States of America.
E. The occupant of a regulated unit shall comply with all lawful provisions
of the rental agreement and/or lease entered into between owner or
agent and occupant.
F. The occupant of a regulated unit shall not intentionally cause, nor
permit nor tolerate others to cause, damage to the premises. Conduct
which results in damage to a property may be considered a violation of
this article and/or the performance codes and may be subject to a DCR.
G. The occupant of a regulated unit shall permit inspections of the
premises by the Code Enforcement Officer at reasonable times and
upon reasonable notice.
H. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to remove or deface
any notice, placard or document required to be posted within a
regulated unit, and it shall be unlawful for any person to occupy the
regulated unit unless all notices, placards and documents are posted as
required by this article.
A. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer believes, or has cause to
believe, that there is a violation of the provisions of this article or any
rule or regulation adopted pursuant to it, including by virtue of the
issuance of a DCR, the Code Enforcement Officer shall give notice of
the violation. Such notice shall:
§ 362-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-9
1:169
(1) Be in writing and shall state the place and manner of the violation,
including the address of the specific regulated unit in question.
(2) State the nature or condition of the violation.
(3) State the determination of the investigating officer with respect to
the violation, including a conspicuous statement that a DCR was
issued or whether the DCR includes performance code violations or
involves other criminal or legal ramifications.
(4) State the name of the person who he deems responsible therefor,
together with name of the owner of the premises involved and any
agent for the owner.
(5) State the date of the notice and the number of days allowed for
compliance with it.
(6) Be served upon the owner or agent of the premises involved, any
relevant responsible party appearing in the records of the Code
Enforcement Officer, and all other persons, if any, named in the
notice pursuant to Subsection A(4), and any notice served upon the
owner or agent and such other person or persons, if any, personally
or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, sent to
the last known address of such owner or agent and such other
person or persons, if any, and by posting the same in a conspicuous
place in or about the premises affected by the notice, shall be
deemed to have been properly served.
(7) The notice may, in addition, contain any other pertinent data,
information or statements which the Code Enforcement Officer
deems appropriate.
B. Any person affected by a notice of violation, determination or order
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer or affected by any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant to this article (except the establishment of
fees as set forth herein) may appeal said notice, determination, order,
rule or regulation to the Housing Appeals Board. The filing of such
appeal shall not stay the violation, except in the case of appeals of
enforcement or disciplinary action pursuant to § 362-10 of this article.
C. Except as otherwise provided relative to the regulation of student
homes, whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that an
emergency condition exists as a result of a violation of this article which
requires immediate action to protect public health and/or safety, he may
issue an order declaring the existence of such emergency and requiring
action to be taken to remedy such emergency; including but not limited
to Borough intervention for cleanup or condemnation of the property.
Such emergency order shall be effective immediately upon issuance.
Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith
immediately. However, such person may file an appeal to the Housing
Appeals Board as hereinabove provided for in Subsection B of this
section, but such appeal shall not serve as a supersede as to the Code
§ 362-9 KENHORST CODE § 362-9
1:170
§ 362-10. Violations and penalties.
Enforcement Officer's emergency order. In the case of any emergency
repairs or cleanup by the Borough, a lien may be placed on the property
without notice or further invoicing of the costs of the same after a single
invoicing requiring payment within 10 days.
D. Notwithstanding the requirements of Subsection A of this section, if the
Code Enforcement Officer determines or has reason to believe that a
violation of this article exists concerning the health, safety, welfare or
occupancy of the premises, he may proceed, without giving the notice
provided for in Subsection A of this section, to cause a citation to be
issued to the owner or agent and, in the case of violations involving
occupancy as more particularly set forth in § 362-7E of this article, to
the agent of the unit which the Code Enforcement Officer determines or
has information to reasonably believe is in violation of the provisions of
this article or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to it.
A. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of
this article or any order, notice, rule or regulation issued or made in
connection herewith shall, upon an unappealed violation as set forth in
§ 362-9 of this article or upon conviction thereof after an appeal, pay a
fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 and, in default of the
payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment in the Berks County
Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. Every violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense, and
each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. In the
event that any regulated unit is occupied by more than the maximum
number of persons allowed by and listed on the rental permit issued in
accordance with § 362-3 of this article, then each day of occupancy by
each such person in excess of such maximum number of occupants shall
constitute a separate offense under this article. It shall be a violation of
this article to let a unit subject to regulation under this article after
nonrenewal, suspension and/or revocation of a rental permit pursuant
to Subsections C through E of this section.
C. Disciplinary actions. Subject to the procedure set forth in Subsection A
of this section, the Code Enforcement Officer may initiate the
disciplinary actions set forth in this section against an owner or agent
with respect to a regulated unit for any of the reasons set forth in
Subsection D of this section:
(1) Nonrenewal. The denial of the privilege to apply for rental permit
renewal for a regulated unit after expiration of the permit term.
The owner shall be permitted to maintain occupants in the
regulated unit in question until the end of the current permit term,
but the Code Enforcement Officer shall not accept applications for
renewal of the rental permit until the expiration of the time set by
the Housing Appeals Board.
§ 362-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-10
1:171
(2) Suspension. The immediate loss of the privilege to let the regulated
unit for a period of time set by the Code Enforcement Officer or the
Housing Appeals Board. The Code Enforcement Officer may
suspend only until the matter can be scheduled for the next
possible Housing Appeals Board meeting, at which meeting the
Housing Appeals Board shall consider the propriety of the
suspension and set the period of time for its duration, if it is to be
continued. The owner or agent, after the expiration of the
suspension period, may apply for rental permit renewal for the
regulated unit without the need to show cause why the owner or
agent's privilege to apply for a rental permit should be reinstated.
Upon suspension, the owner or agent shall take immediate steps to
evict the occupants of the regulated unit in question.
(3) Revocation. The immediate loss of the privilege to let the regulated
unit for a period of time set by the Code Enforcement Officer or the
Housing Appeals Board and the loss of the privilege to apply for
renewal of the rental permit at the expiration of said time period.
The Code Enforcement Officer may revoke only until the matter can
be scheduled for the next possible Housing Appeals Board meeting,
at which meeting the Housing Appeals Board shall consider the
propriety of the revocation and set the period of time for its
duration, if it is to be continued. Upon the loss of the privilege to
let, the owner or agent shall take immediate steps to evict the
occupants of the regulated unit in question.
D. Grounds for imposing discipline.
(1) Actions subject to discipline.
(a) Any of the following may subject an owner to discipline as
provided for in Subsection C:
[1] Failure to abate a violation of the performance codes and/
or this article applicable to the premises within the time
directed by the Code Enforcement Officer.
[2] Refusal to permit the inspection of the premises by the
Code Enforcement Officer as required by this article.
[3] Failure to take such actions as may be required or
necessary to cause any open DCR to be deemed a closed
DCR by the Code Enforcement Officer by the end of the
permit year in which the DCR was issued, including, but
not limited to, failure to respond to notice of a DCR or
failure to perform an approved remedial plan in any
material respect.
[4] Failure to remedy and prevent further violations of this
article, other than with respect to disruptive conduct.
§ 362-10 KENHORST CODE § 362-10
1:172
(b) For purposes of this subsection, there need be no criminal
conviction before a violation can be found to exist.
(2) No discipline involving nonrenewal, suspension and/or revocation
shall be permitted unless the discipline has been preceded by the
issuance of a notice of violation permit.
E. Criteria for application of discipline.
(1) With respect to the issuance of a DCR, the Code Enforcement
Officer, when considering which of the discipline options to utilize
as set forth in this section, and the Housing Appeals Board, when
deciding any discipline matter under this section, shall consider the
following:
(a) The effect of the violation on the health, safety and welfare of
the occupants of the regulated unit and other residents of the
premises.
(b) The effect of the violation on the neighborhood.
(c) Whether the owner has a record of prior violations of this
article and other ordinances of the Borough of Kenhorst or has
received notices of violations as provided for in this article,
whether or not related to the regulated units in question. In
this regard, no closed DCR (and any enforcement actions
related thereto) shall be considered.
(d) Whether the owner has been subject to prior discipline under
this article. In this regard, no closed DCR (and any
enforcement actions related thereto) shall be considered. The
prior issuance of a formal warning in connection with the open
DCR shall be considered.
(e) The effect of disciplinary action on the occupants.
(f) The action taken by the owner or agent to remedy the violation
and to prevent future violations, including any approved
remedial plan submitted by the owner or agent in response to a
DCR with respect to any open DCR.
(g) The suitability of the policies and rental agreement or lease
terms employed by the owner or agent to manage the
regulated unit to enable the owner or agent to comply with the
provisions of this article.
(2) In addition to applying discipline as set forth in this section relating
to a DCR, the Code Enforcement Officer may recommend and the
Housing Appeals Board may impose upon the existing permit [or
subsequent permit(s) with respect to the performance codes]
reasonable conditions related to the regulated unit in question for
the purpose of fulfilling the goals of this article.
§ 362-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-10
1:173
F. Procedure for nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of permit.
(1) Following a determination that grounds exist for a formal warning
or for nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of a rental permit, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner or agent of the
action to be taken and the reason therefor. Such notification shall
be in writing, addressed to the owner or agent, and shall contain
the following information:
(a) The address and identification of the particular regulated
unit(s) affected.
(b) A description of the violation which has been found to exist.
(c) A statement that the owner or agent will receive a formal
warning, or that the rental permit for the affected regulated
unit(s) will be subject to suspension or revocation or
nonrenewal for the next permit year beginning August 1. In the
case of a suspension or revocation, the notice shall state the
date upon which such suspension or revocation will
commence, and in the case of a suspension, the notice shall
also state the duration of the suspension.
(d) A statement that, due to the nonrenewal, suspension or
revocation (as the case may be) of the rental permit, the owner
or agent or any person acting on the owner's behalf is
prohibited from letting or permitting occupancy of the affected
regulated unit(s) from and during the period said disciplinary
action is in effect for, at minimum, one year.
(e) A statement informing the owner or agent of the owner's right
to appeal the decision to issue a formal warning or to subject
the rental permit in question to suspension, revocation or
nonrenewal to the rental permit Appeals Board, as provided in
this article.
(2) The procedures applicable to this section shall be the same as those
of § 362-9A of this article, excepting § 362-9A(1) and (2).
G. In addition to any other remedy, discipline or enforcement action
provided for in this article, the Borough may enforce this article by
pursuing a civil action, including an action in equity or other equitable
injunctive relief, including therewith:
(1) The decision by the Borough to pursue any such action shall not be
deemed an election of remedy so as to preclude other enforcement,
disciplinary or other remedies available to the Borough for
enforcement of this article; and
(2) In the Borough's pursuit of any such action, a prima facie showing
of a violation of any final, unappealable enforcement or disciplinary
action or final, unappealable Housing Appeals Board order shall be
§ 362-10 KENHORST CODE § 362-10
1:174
sufficient to satisfy any legal requirement that the Borough
demonstrate irreparable harm as a prerequisite to obtaining
injunctive relief.
§ 362-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-10
1:175

ARTICLE II
Inspection; Registration; Rental Occupancy Permits
[Adopted 9-1-2016 by Ord. No. 57898]
§ 362-11. Findings.
The Borough of Kenhorst is experiencing an increase in rental housing
throughout all zoning districts in the Borough. The Borough wants to ensure
that these dwelling units are safe, sanitary and fit for human occupation
and use. In order to effectively and efficiently ensure that the dwelling units
are safe, sanitary and fit for human occupation and use, the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer must perform inspections annually of such dwelling
units and annually such units shall obtain a rental permit from the Borough.
§ 362-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any person or third-party agency
specifically designated as such by the Borough Council to enforce this
article, and shall include the duly authorized representatives of said Code
Enforcement Officer.
DWELLING — Any building or structure, except temporary housing, which
is wholly or partly used or intended to be used or available for use or
available to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used or available for use or available to be used for living or
sleeping.
MULTIPLE DWELLINGS — Any dwelling containing two or more dwelling
units.
OWNER — Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others, shall
have:
Legal or equitable title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof, which shall include corporate
entities;
A.
Charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling units as owner or
agent of owner, or as executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the
estate of the owner; or
B.
98.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided: "All ordinances or parts of ordinances
conflicting with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as they are
inconsistent with this ordinance. However, all existing notices of violations and penalties
that may be outstanding are not repealed or withdrawn."
§ 362-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-12
1:177
PERMIT — A rental occupancy permit issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership or
other entity.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling, or part thereof, containing one or more
rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or
more persons, who are not the husband, wife, son, daughter, mother, father,
sister or other of the owner or operator.
§ 362-13. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The inspections of all rental properties shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the version of the Property Maintenance Code observed by
the Borough as updated and amended from time to time.99 The Code
Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce the provisions of this
article and may make rules and regulations necessary for its administration,
including notice of entry for inspection, permit forms and similar
administrative regulations. At a minimum, all rental properties shall
maintain appropriate fire-suppression systems, safe ingress and egress,
general property maintenance and observance of the codes of the Borough.
Such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with this article and
shall be submitted to the Borough Council for approval. If the rules and
regulations so submitted to Borough Council are approved by Borough
Council, the same shall be filed in the office of the Code Enforcement Officer
and in the office of the Secretary of the Borough as an addends to this
article. Such rules and regulations as may be adopted shall then be deemed
to be a part of this article and to have the same effect as this article.
§ 362-14. Inspections.
Any person who, individually or as a corporation, who is the ownerof-
record by either deed or other instrument filed in the Recorder of
Deeds in and for Berks County, of a majority interest in a property.
For purposes of this article, "majority" shall mean at least 51%. For
purposes of this article, equitable ownership shall not be construed to
be actual ownership.
C.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized and directed to make, at a
minimum, inspections annually to determine the condition, occupancy
and/or use of any dwelling or dwelling unit rented or available for let or
any rooming house, and the premises thereof, located within the
Borough in order to safeguard the health and safety of the occupants
thereof and the general public. In the event more frequent inspections
are needed, the Code Enforcement Officer shall provide notice to the
owner of the dwelling unit and shall make all rental permits contingent
upon satisfactory inspection protocol. The Code Enforcement Officer is
further authorized to enter the same for the purposes of examining and
surveying all areas of any such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
99.Editor's Note: See Ch. 341, Property Maintenance, Art. III, Adoption of Standards.
§ 362-12 KENHORST CODE § 362-14
1:178
§ 362-15. Renting.
house, at reasonable times, which shall be deemed to be between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., prevailing time. Every owner or
occupant of any such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming house shall
extend the Code Enforcement Officer access to such dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming house for the purpose of making any inspection,
examination or survey thereof.
B. In the event that permission to enter any such dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming house for the purpose of inspection, examination or survey is
denied, the Code Enforcement Officer may apply to the appropriate
authority for a search warrant. In addition to the search warrant
provisions of this section, the refusal to permit entry shall be
considered a violation of this article for both the owner and the
occupant of the unit.
C. "Probable cause" shall mean:
(1) That inspection of said dwelling unit is part of a routine area
inspection being conducted as part of a systematic or concentrated
codes enforcement program;
(2) That the affiant has knowledge of a violation of housing or health
codes or other Borough codes that may endanger or otherwise
affect the health and safety of the citizens of the Borough; or
(3) That said entry is for the purpose of reinspecting a previous notice
of violation where not prior warrant was issued.
D. A warrant shall not be required:
(1) When entry is by permission or at the request of the occupant.
(2) Where an imminent danger to health and safety exists.
(3) Following an accident or inherent condition where immediate
inspection is required to determine if an imminent danger to health
or safety exists.
A. Whoever, as owner or agent, rents or holds out to let any dwelling unit,
rooming unit or other living unit, which shall be considered to be a
rental unit when any person lives in the unit who is not an owner of at
least 51% of the property interest or is an owner of less than 51% of an
entity who owns the title to the property is subject to the provisions of
this article and shall supply the Code Enforcement Officer with the
following information:
(1) The street address and mailing address (if different from the street
address) of any such dwelling, rooming house or boarding house.
(2) The number of dwelling units, rooming units or other living units
located within said dwelling, rooming house or boarding house,
§ 362-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-15
1:179
§ 362-16. Permits.
which number shall in no event exceed the number of such units
provided for on the housing permit issued to the owner or agent on
behalf of the owner.
(3) The name of each person occupying each dwelling unit, rooming
unit or other living unit.
(4) The period of time for which the rental is made.
(5) Supply a lease to the Borough consistent with the requirements in
Article I, Rental Conduct.
B. Such information shall be supplied to the Code Enforcement Officer
annually and, in addition, updated information pertaining to any
dwelling unit, rooming unit or other living unit shall also be supplied to
the Code Enforcement Officer within 10 days after the occupancy of
such dwelling unit, rooming unit or other living unit changes.
A. Rental occupancy permit ("rental permit"). No owner and/or person
shall let, rent or have available to let or rent or cause to be occupied any
dwelling or dwelling unit, and no owner and/or person shall operate a
rooming house or let or have available for operation for leasing to
another for occupancy any room in a rooming house, without first
obtaining a rental occupancy permit issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
B. Fees.
(1) Annual permit fees shall be determined and set from time to time
by resolution of the Borough Council. Such fee must be paid in full
to the Borough not later than January 31 of each year. Any annual
permit fee not paid to the Borough in full on or before January 31 of
the year in which it is first due shall be considered overdue and will
be assessed a penalty of $200 per year per unit.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer may permit owners or agents who
are required to obtain permits under this article to obtain such new
permits for 1/2 of the prescribed fee when the remaining permit
period is less than six months. Permits for less than the full permit
period will not be issued at the beginning of a permit period.
C. Exempt persons. No fee shall be required of an owner who is one of the
following:
(1) The United States Government, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the County of Berks, the Borough of Kenhorst, the
Governor Mifflin School District, or any agency thereof.
(2) A corporation or association organized and operated exclusively for
religious, charitable, or for one or more such purposes, provided
§ 362-15 KENHORST CODE § 362-16
1:180
§ 362-17. Occupancy.
When a rental permit is issued to the owner or agent on behalf of the owner
of a unit, such permit shall constitute notice to such owner or agent of the
maximum number of persons that may lawfully occupy the unit and the
residential uses therefor.
that no part of the net earnings or profits inure to the benefit of any
private shareholder or person.
(3) The exemptions contained in Subsection C(1) and (2) above shall,
nevertheless, not exempt owners or operators from compliance
with this article and all other applicable federal and state laws,
Borough ordinances and/or rules and regulations unless
specifically otherwise exempted herein.
D. Effective date of permit. Permits shall be issued to be effective as of the
first day of January each year and shall continue in effect for one
calendar year. Upon expiration of any permit, a new permit shall be
required for the further period of one year.
E. Display of permit. Every permit issued under this article shall be
maintained upon the premises and every permit issued under this
article pertaining to multiple dwelling units and rooming houses shall
be posted in a conspicuous place where it may be seen at all times; and
the same shall not be transferable in the event of a change in ownership
of the licensed premises.
F. Number of units. For the purpose of determining the number of units or
rooms to be included in a permit, the following definitions shall apply:
(1) Efficiency apartments and rented rooms used for purposes other
than sleeping shall be considered a dwelling unit.
(2) Any apartment unit or room occupied by the owner-operator of the
multiple dwelling unit or rooming house shall be excluded from the
total number of units or rooms.
(3) All buildings which are owned by the same person and are under
the same roof or connected by breezeways, passageways or similar
connection facilities, or which are constructed upon contiguous
sites and operated as one complex of units, may be combined to
determine the total number of units or rooms.
A. For the purpose of determining the number of units or rooms and the
maximum number of occupants of a regulated unit to be included in a
rental license, the following shall apply:
B. Any apartment or room occupied as a dwelling unit by the owner of a
boardinghouse shall be excluded from the total number of units or
rooms.
§ 362-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-17
1:181
§ 362-18. Dispute of occupancy number.
Any owner or agent who, upon receipt of a rental permit, disputes the
use and/or maximum occupancy listed thereon, may request in writing a
meeting concerning such use and/or occupancy with the Code Enforcement
Officer, such request to be filed within 10 business days after receipt of the
rental permit. If the dispute cannot be resolved in the aforesaid meeting
with the Code Enforcement Officer, the owner or agent may appeal to the
Housing Appeals Board, in which case such appeal period shall commence
on the day of such meeting; provided, however, that any appeal of any
aspect of a rental permit which sets forth a determination pursuant to
Chapter 475, Zoning, as amended from time to time.
§ 362-19. Inspection/property maintenance.
C. All buildings which are owned by the same person and which are under
the same roof or connected by breezeways, passageways or similar
connecting facilities or which are constructed upon contiguous sites
and operated and managed as one complex of units may be combined to
determine the total number of units or rooms.
D. Each rental permit issued shall set forth the maximum number of
occupants permitted to occupy the regulated unit, determined by
reference to and in accordance with performance codes.
A. No rental permit shall be issued until the rental unit and the premises
upon which the rental unit is located have been inspected by the Code
Enforcement Officer and the rental unit and the proposed use thereof
have been found to be in compliance with performance codes; provided,
however, that no inspection shall be required prior to the receipt of an
application for a rental unit, the application for which is made by the
owner of the rental unit within 30 days after becoming the owner of the
premises and so long as there is not outstanding in the records of the
Code Enforcement Officer any unresolved violations or inspection
requests pertaining to the regulated unit. If any deficiencies as set forth
under Chapter 341, Property Maintenance, Article III, Adoption of
Standards, as amended, are detected during inspection, no rental
permit shall be issued until such deficiencies are corrected, as
confirmed by subsequent inspections by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. In addition to the requirements for maintenance of rental units as set
forth in the Borough's property maintenance code ordinance and fire
code ordinances, units shall also comply with the following:
(1) There shall be no cooking facilities of any kind except for in the
central kitchen.
(2) No basement or cellar shall be used as a habitable bedroom unless
relief is granted by the Borough's Housing Appeals Board which
shall at a minimum include proof of approved secondary source of
ingress and egress for safety.
§ 362-17 KENHORST CODE § 362-20
1:182
§ 362-20. Failure to file application.
In the event an owner or agent fails to make an application for a rental
permit within 30 days after taking ownership of a property for which a
rental permit shall be required, the failure of which shall constitute a daily
violation of this article and shall subject the owner and agent to fines
and penalties as set forth herein. Such fines and penalties may result in
condemnation of a unit as set forth in Chapter 341, Article III.
§ 362-21. Applicability of other provisions.
All "use and occupancy" and "zoning" regulations and statutes shall apply
to rental housing within the Borough of Kenhorst.
§ 362-22. Enforcement; service of notices and orders; hearings.
A. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer believes, or has cause to
believe, that there is a violation of the provisions of this article or any
rules, regulations or codes (including but not limited to the BOCA
Codes) adopted by the Borough and related hereto, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall give notice of the violation to the person
responsible therefor, and such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing and shall state the description and manner of the
violation.
(2) State the nature or condition of the violation.
(3) State the determination of the Code Enforcement Officer in respect
to the violation.
(4) State the name of the person who the Code Enforcement Officer
deems responsible therefor, together with the name of the owner
and agent of the premises involved.
(5) State the date of the notice and the number of days allowed for
compliance with said notice.
(6) Be served upon the owner of the premises involved and all other
persons, if any, named in the notice pursuant to Subsection A(4) of
this section, and any notice served upon the owner and such other
person or persons, if any, personally or by certified or registered
mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, sent to the last
known address of such owner and such other person or persons, if
any, and by posting the same in a conspicuous place in or about the
premises affected by the notice, shall be deemed to have been
properly served.
(7) The notice may, in addition, contain any other pertinent data,
information or statements which the Code Enforcement Officer
deems appropriate.
§ 362-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-22
1:183
B. Any person affected by a notice of violation, determination or order
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer or affected by any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant to this article may appeal said notice,
determination, order, rule or regulation to the Borough Council. Any
such appeal must be filed in writing with the Code Enforcement Officer
within 10 days after the receipt by the appellant of such notice,
determination or order or within 20 days after any such the issuance of
a rule or regulation. At the time of filing such appeal, the appellant shall
pay to the Code Enforcement Officer a deposit, the amount of which
shall from time to time be established by resolution of Borough Council,
to cover the costs of such appeal. The Housing Appeals Board shall hold
a public hearing on the appeal within 30 days after the date the appeal
is filed. Notice of the hearing shall be given not less than 15 days prior
to the date of the hearing to the appellant, to the Code Enforcement
Officer and to any other person who may request such notice. At the
hearing, the Housing Appeals Board shall review the notice,
determination or order of the Code Enforcement Officer or the rule or
regulations which is the subject of the appeal, take such testimony, hear
such witnesses and, by a concurring vote of the majority of its
members, shall reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the
determination appealed from and shall make such order or decision as
in its opinion should be made. Failure to secure such concurring votes
shall be deemed a confirmation of the determination of the Code
Enforcement Officer. Within 20 days after said hearing, the Housing
Appeals Board shall advise the appellant, in writing, of its decision, and
a copy of said decision shall be filed with the Secretary of the Borough
and with the Code Enforcement Officer. Decisions of the Housing
Appeals Board may be further appealed to the Court of Common Pleas
of Berks County, Pennsylvania by the appellant within 20 days after
receipt of the decision of the Housing Appeals Board, or as otherwise
provided by law.
C. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that an emergency
condition exists which requires immediate action to protect public
health and/or safety, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue an order
declaring the existence of such emergency and requiring action to be
taken to remedy such emergency. Such emergency order shall be
effective immediately upon issuance. Any person to whom such order is
directed shall comply therewith immediately. However, such person
may file an appeal to the Housing Appeals Board as hereinabove
provided, but such appeal shall not serve as a supersedeas to the Code
Enforcement Officer's emergency order.
D. The Borough Council shall from time to time establish by resolution the
amount of the deposit to be paid by any person filing an appeal to the
Housing Appeals Board as hereinabove provided. Such deposit shall be
made to the Secretary of the Borough and shall be made at the same
time as the appeal is filed. The deposit shall be used by the Borough to
pay all costs and expenses incurred by the Borough and the Housing
Appeals Board pertaining to the appeal, which costs and expenses shall
§ 362-22 KENHORST CODE § 362-22
1:184
§ 362-23. Violations and penalties.
include, without limiting the foregoing, stenographic services, the fees
of the solicitor and any other professional or secretarial costs. In the
event that such costs and expenses are less than the amount of the
deposit, than any excess shall be returned to the appellant.
E. Notwithstanding the requirements of § 362-14 of this article, if the
Code Enforcement Officer determines or has reason to believe that a
violation of this article or any other Borough ordinance exists
concerning the health, safety, welfare or occupancy of the premises, the
Code Enforcement Officer may proceed, without giving the notice
provided for in § 362-14 of this article, to cause a citation to be issued to
the owner of the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming house which the
Code Enforcement Officer determines or has information to reasonably
believe is in violation of the provisions of this article, any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant to it or any other applicable Borough
ordinance.
F. There is hereby created a Housing Appeals Board of the Borough
consisting of the Codes Committee of the Borough Council. In the event
that an appeal commences and the Committee members change, absent
a change due to an election, the members of Borough Council who
commence a hearing shall see it through to a decision. In the event that
an election changes the makeup of the Board and the hearing
commences, the new member(s) of the Committee shall be permitted to
review any transcripts from prior hearings in order to make a decision
on the appeal application. Such appeals shall be held pursuant to any
rules and regulations of local agency appeals.
A. Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this
article or any order, notice, rule or regulation made in connection
herewith shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $1,000 and, in default of the payment thereof, shall
undergo imprisonment in the Berks County Prison for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
B. Every violation of this housing code shall constitute a separate offense,
and each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Any owner who fails to renew an expired permit within 10 days after the
expiration date of the permit shall, in addition to the penalties provided
for in Subsection A above, be subject to a penalty of $25 for each and
every additional ten-day period or part thereof during which the
expired permit is not renewed. The penalties imposed by this
Subsection C shall be payable to the Secretary of the Borough.
D. Any discipline or enforcement action imposed under this article which
is in any manner related to violations of the performance codes shall be
applicable to the premises in question notwithstanding any change in
the owner or its ownership of the premises. Any discipline or
§ 362-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-23
1:185
enforcement action imposed under this article with respect to any
premises for reasons other than violation of any of the performance
codes shall terminate, with respect to its applicability to such premises,
upon any conveyance and/or change in owner or its ownership of the
premises to a new owner, provided that:
(1) The new owner, if an individual, shall not be related to the existing
owner by blood, marriage, adoption or other decree of legal
custody; and
(2) The new owner, if a legal entity (other than an individual), shall not
be owned, wholly or partially, by the existing owner.
§ 362-23 KENHORST CODE § 362-23
1:186
Chapter 368
SALES, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 332. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 404.
§ 368-1. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the sale, storage or display
of newspapers or periodicals.
§ 368-2. Illegal to obstruct sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any vendor of foodstuffs or merchandise to store or
display their wares which will in any way obstruct the sidewalk or cartway
or any portion thereof so as to prevent the free use of the same by the
general public in the Borough.
§ 368-3. Temporary sale permits.100
Any person, firm or corporation that intends to conduct a temporary outdoor
sale of foodstuff, plants, flowers or merchandise of any kind in the Borough
shall first secure a temporary sales permit upon written application as
prescribed by the Borough and upon payment of a permit fee of per day in
an amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council, or
any fraction thereof, and an administrative fee as set by Borough Council.
§ 368-4. Exemptions.
Nonprofit organizations shall file a permit application as provided under
this chapter but shall be exempt from the payment of the permit fee
imposed.
§ 368-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kenhorst.
PERSONS — For the purpose of this chapter, shall mean individuals, firms,
unincorporated associations, partnerships, business corporations and
nonprofit corporations.
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 362-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 368-5
1:187
TEMPORARY PERMIT — A permit to conduct an outdoor sale for a period
not in excess of 45 days in any one calendar year which shall be conducted
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. only.
§ 368-6. Trash removal.
All rubbish, trash or debris generated by the outdoor sale shall not be
accumulated on the premises and shall be removed from the premises and
discarded by the person or entity to whom the permit was issued.
§ 368-7. Incendiary products prohibited.
Sale or distribution of any and all incendiary products commonly known as,
but not limited to, "fireworks" shall be strictly prohibited.
§ 368-8. Violations and penalties.101
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.
Chapter 373
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 475.
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 368-5 KENHORST CODE § 368-8
1:188
ARTICLE I
Sewer Rents and Charges
[Adopted 4-7-1960 by Ord. No. 163 (Ch. 17, Part 2, of the 1973 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 373-1. Definitions. [Amended 6-3-1971 by Ord. No. 285]
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — The Borough of Kenhorst Municipal Authority, a
municipality authority of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
BILLING UNIT — Includes, as applicable, each of the following: a "domestic
consumer unit," a "commercial establishment," an "industrial
establishment" and an "institutional establishment."
BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure for five days at 20° C., expressed in parts per million by weight.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania, a
municipal corporation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, acting by and
through its Council, or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its
authorized representatives.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Each room, group of rooms or
enclosure connected directly or indirectly to the sewer system and used or
intended for use in the operation of one business enterprise for the sale
and distribution of any product, commodity, article or service. Excluding
therefrom permissible home occupation units as defined by Chapter 475,
Zoning. For the definition of a "home occupation," Chapter 475, Zoning, is
hereby incorporated by reference.
COUNCIL — The group of elected officials acting as the governing body of
the Borough.
DOMESTIC CONSUMER UNIT — Each room, group of rooms or enclosure
connected directly or indirectly to the sewer system and occupied or
intended for occupancy as separate living quarters by a family or other
group of persons living together or by a person living alone.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes discharges into the sewer system from a domestic consumer unit,
commercial establishment, industrial establishment and institutional
establishment.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes, resulting from preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food and from handling, storage and sale of produce.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located within the Borough upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
structure domestic sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be
discharged.
§ 373-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-1
1:189
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any room, group of rooms or enclosure
connected directly or indirectly to the sewer system and used or intended
for use in the operation of one business enterprise for manufacturing,
processing, cleaning, laundering or assembling any product, commodity or
article. Excluding therefrom permissible home occupation units as defined
by Chapter 475, Zoning. For the definition of a "home occupation," Chapter
475, Zoning, is hereby incorporated by reference.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form of
energy rejected or escaping in the course of any industrial, manufacturing,
trade or business process or in the course of the development, recovery or
processing of natural resources, as distinct from domestic sewage.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any room, group of rooms or
enclosure connected directly or indirectly to the sewer system which does
not constitute a commercial establishment, a domestic consumer unit or an
industrial establishment. Excluding therefrom permissible home occupation
units as defined by Chapter 475, Zoning. For the definition of a "home
occupation," Chapter 475, Zoning, is hereby incorporated by reference.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located within the Borough.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, company, association, society,
corporation or other group or entity.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution, and is an indication of acidity or alkalinity of a
solution.
ppm — Parts per million.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — Garbage that has been shredded to
such a degree that all its particles will be carried freely under normal sewer
flow conditions, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system used
or usable for sewage collection purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
pumping, treating and disposing of domestic sewage and industrial wastes,
situate in or adjacent to the Borough, owned by the Authority and leased to
the Borough for operation and use in collecting and disposing of domestic
sewage and industrial wastes.
TOTAL SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension or dissolved in water, sewage or other liquids and which shall be
determined by laboratory analysis.
TOXIC SUBSTANCE — Any poisonous substance, including copper, cyanide
and chromium ions.
§ 373-2. Sewer rentals or charges.
Annual sewer rentals or charges for use of the sewer system hereby are
fixed and imposed upon and shall be collected from the owner of each
§ 373-1 KENHORST CODE § 373-2
1:190
improved property located within the Borough which shall be connected to
the sewer system whether such use of the sewer system or the connection
thereto or the benefit resulting from such use or connection shall be direct
or indirect.
§ 373-3. Amount and manner of computation of sewer rentals or
charges. [Amended 12-17-1970 by Ord. No. 282; 1-6-1972 by Ord.
No. 287; 1-5-1984 by Ord. No. 373; 6-6-1985 by Ord. No. 380;
8-6-1987 by Ord. No. 395; 1-4-1968 by Ord. No. 398; 2-1-1990 by
Ord. No. 409; 3-7-1991 by Ord. No. 420; 2-4-1993 by Ord. No. 425;
5-7-1998 by Ord. No. 446; 12-7-2006 by Ord. No. 513; 12-6-2007 by
Ord. No. 518]
A. Such sewer rentals or charges shall commence and shall be effective on
the date of connection of such improved property to the sewer system
or on the date when the Borough first shall be capable of accepting
domestic sewage and industrial wastes from such improved property
for transportation and treatment, whichever date last shall occur.
B. Such sewer rentals or charges shall be payable quarterly as hereinafter
in this article provided.
C. Each billing unit located in one building or on one improved property
shall be billed and considered as a separate billing unit, irrespective of
the fact that each such room, group of rooms or enclosure in such
building or on such improved property shall be owned by the same
person and irrespective of the fact that each such billing unit is not
connected separately and independently with the sewer system.
A. Basic sewer rentals or charges. [Amended 6-2-2011 by Ord. No.
533; 12-6-2012 by Ord. No. 553; 12-5-2013 by Ord. No. 558;
12-3-2015 by Ord. No. 573102]
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this article, sewer rentals and
charges for domestic sewage and industrial wastes discharged into
the sewer system from any improved property shall be based upon
the volume of metered water usage, adjusted if appropriate, as
provided in this article, or upon the actual metered volume of
discharge into the sewer system of such domestic sewage and
industrial wastes, as applicable and permitted in this article.
(2) Such sewer rentals or charges shall be computed in accordance
with the following rate schedule; subject, however, to the minimum
sewer rental or charge provided in this article:
102. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it shall become effective for the quarter
beginning 1-1-2016 and thereafter.
§ 373-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-3
1:191
§ 373-4. Time and method of payment.
Rate Schedule
Consumption of Water or Discharge of
Domestic Sewage and Industrial
Wastes into the Sewer System, as
applicable, in Gallons Per Quarter Rate Per Quarter
First 12,500 gallons or less each quarter of
each calendar year
$105
In excess of 12,500 gallons each quarter of
each calendar year
$0.0084 (per gallon)
(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing rate schedule, the minimum sewer
rental or charge shall be $105 per billing unit per quarterly billing
period during each quarter of each calendar year, which minimum
sewer rental or charge shall include the first 12,500 gallons of
water consumption or discharge of domestic sewage and industrial
wastes into the sewer system as applicable per billing unit per
quarterly billing period.
B. Additional sewer rentals or charges for industrial wastes. Industrial
wastes may be stronger and more difficult to treat than domestic
sewage. Therefore, a sewer rental or charge, in addition to the basic
sewer rental or charge provided in Subsection A of this section, shall be
made in accordance with the following formula:
F = 1 + R (S1 Sa) (B1 Ba)
Sa Ba
Where:
F = Factor to be applied to basic rate
R = Ratio of annual extra cost of treatment to the total annual
cost of treatment
S1 = Total solids of industrial wastes (suspended solids plus
dissolved solids) from the particular improved property in
ppm
Sa = Average total solids of domestic sewage (800 ppm)
B1 = BOD of industrial wastes from the particular improved
property in ppm
Ba = Average BOD of domestic sewage (200 ppm)
A. Sewer rentals or charges imposed by this article shall be payable
quarterly.
B. All bills with respect to billing units shall be rendered each calendar
quarter on the first days of January, April, July and October of each year
for service during the preceding quarter annum.
§ 373-3 KENHORST CODE § 373-4
1:192
§ 373-5. Liens for sewer rentals or charges; filing and collection of
liens.
The sewer rentals or charges hereby imposed shall be a lien on the
improved property connected to and served by the sewer system from
the date such sewer rental or charge becomes due and payable under
provisions of this article. All sewer rentals or charges hereby imposed which
shall not be paid after 30 days, as provided in § 373-10 of this article, shall
be entered as a lien against the improved property so connected to and
served by the sewer system, which lien shall be filed in the office of the
Prothonotary of Berks County, Pennsylvania, in the manner provided by law
for the filing of municipal claims. All delinquent bills shall be collected by
the Borough in any manner permitted and authorized by law.
§ 373-6. Meters required.
When any person shall connect to the sewer system any room, group of
rooms or enclosure constituting a domestic consumer unit, a commercial
establishment, an industrial establishment or an institutional establishment,
such person, at his own expense, shall have installed, if such then shall
not be installed, a water meter or meters, or a sewer meter or meters, as
shall be required or permitted under terms of this article for the purpose
of making possible the determination of sewer rentals or charges under
provisions of this article.
C. All bills shall be due and payable without penalty one day after mailing
or delivery by or in behalf of the Borough to the person responsible for
payment thereof. If quarterly bills shall not be paid within 30 days after
such shall become due and payable, a penalty of 10% shall be added.
Payments mailed and postmarked on or before such 30th day shall be
deemed to be payments within the period allowed for payment without
penalty. If such 30th day shall be a legal holiday or a Sunday, payments
made on or mailed and postmarked on the next succeeding business
day not a legal holiday shall be deemed to be payments within the
period allowed for payment without penalty.
D. Whenever service to any billing unit shall begin after the first day or
shall terminate before the last day of any calendar quarter, the sewer
rental or charge for such period shall be prorated equitably for that
portion of the calendar quarter during which service was provided by
the Borough.
E. Every owner of improved property which is connected to the sewer
system initially shall provide the Borough with and thereafter shall keep
the Borough advised of his correct address. Failure of any person to
receive quarterly bills for sewer rentals or charges shall not be
considered an excuse for nonpayment, nor shall such failure result in an
extension of the period of time during which such bill shall be payable
without penalty.
§ 373-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-7
1:193
§ 373-7. Measuring volume of industrial wastes; admission of
industrial wastes into sewer system.
A. Methods of measuring volume of industrial wastes.
(1) Whenever a person purchasing all water used from a municipal
source shall discharge only industrial wastes into the sewer
system, the volume of water purchased shall be used as a measure
of the quantity of industrial wastes so discharged.
(2) Whenever a person purchasing all water used from a municipal
source shall discharge combined domestic sewage and industrial
wastes into the sewer system, the volume of water purchased
chargeable as industrial wastes shall be the total volume of water
purchased, less the volume of water determined to be domestic
sewage. The volume of water determined to be domestic sewage
shall be determined, at the option of the Borough, in either of the
following ways:
(a) Actual measured flow; or
(b) By multiplying the average number of employees in the
establishment during the calendar quarter annum preceding
the time of billing by 2,250 gallons.
(3) Whenever a person purchasing all water used from a municipal
source and discharging industrial wastes into the sewer system
also shall discharge unpolluted cooling water either to a separate
storm sewer or to some other outlet, an allowance in the nature of a
credit for the volume of water so otherwise discharged shall be
made in computing the sewer rentals or charges. The person so
discharging cooling water shall install a meter or meters, as
necessary, at his own expense, to measure accurately the volume of
water claimed as such credit in order to permit the Borough to
determine such allowance.
(4) Whenever a person using a private water supply shall discharge
industrial wastes into the sewer system, such person shall install,
at his own expense, either a water meter or meters on the source or
sources of supply, as may be required to measure the total volume
of water used, which total volume of water used shall be subject to
adjustment as provided in Subsections A(2) and (3) of this section,
or a sewer meter or meters to measure the entire volume of
domestic sewage and/or industrial wastes discharged into the
sewer system, which volume shall be subject to adjustment as
provided in Subsection A(2) of this section.
B. Measurement of concentration of industrial wastes.
(1) Either the Borough or the owner of any room, group of rooms or
enclosure constituting an industrial establishment from which
industrial wastes are discharged may request the collection and
§ 373-7 KENHORST CODE § 373-7
1:194
§ 373-8. Prohibited wastes.
analysis of samples of industrial wastes for use as a basis of
determining additional sewer rentals or charges as provided in
Subsection B of § 373-3 of this article. Such collection and analysis
shall be made by a competent registered engineer acceptable to
and approved by the Borough. Costs of such collection and analysis
shall be paid by the party requesting the same.
(2) The analysis of samples obtained shall be made in accordance with
the latest edition of the "Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Sewage," as published by the American Public Health
Association.
C. Control manholes. When required by Borough, the owner of any room,
group of rooms or enclosure constituting an industrial establishment
from which industrial wastes are discharged into the sewer system shall
install a suitable control manhole in the sewer service line serving such
industrial establishment in order to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of such industrial wastes. Such manhole, when required,
shall be accessible, shall be so located and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the Borough. The manhole shall be
installed by such owner, at his own expense, and shall be maintained by
such owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
D. Changes in type of industrial wastes. If the owner of any room, group of
rooms or enclosure constituting an industrial establishment from which
industrial wastes are discharged into the sewer system shall propose to
change methods of operation so as to alter the type of industrial wastes
then being discharged into the sewer system, such owner shall notify
the Borough, in writing, at least 10 days prior to such change, so that
the Borough may sample the industrial wastes immediately after such
change takes place in order to make the determinations provided for or
required by this article.
E. Exclusion from the sewer system of certain water. Exclusion from the
sewer system of non-contaminated wastewaters and waters used solely
for cooling purposes may be required by the Borough or such exclusion
may be optional on the part of any person if not required by the
Borough.
F. Reservation of rights by Borough. No provision of this article shall be
construed as preventing any special arrangement or agreement
between the Borough and any person whereby industrial wastes of
unusual strength or character may be accepted into the sewer system,
subject to equitable payment in connection therewith by the person
concerned.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any sewer any
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface
drainage.
§ 373-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-8
1:195
§ 373-9. Screening and holding tanks.
B. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewer
system any of the following described wastes or waters:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.;
(2) Any water or waste containing more than 100 ppm by weight of fat,
oil or grease;
(3) Any gasoline, benzine, naptha, fuel oil or other inflammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
(4) Any garbage, except properly shredded garbage;
(5) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or
viscous substance capable of causing obstruction or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage treatment
plant where such wastes are to be treated;
(6) Any water or waste having a pH (as determined by the consulting
engineers of the Borough) lower than 4.5 or higher than 9.0 or
containing any other corrosive property capable of causing damage
or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the aforesaid
sewage treatment plant;
(7) Any water or waste containing any toxic substance in sufficient
quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
or to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to create any
hazard in the receiving water of the aforesaid sewage treatment
plant;
(8) Any water or waste containing total solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle
such materials for sewage treatment processes; or
(9) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance or a hazard to life or of preventing entry into any
sewer for maintenance and repair; unless otherwise permitted,
authorized or approved by the Borough and the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any duly constituted board, commission or
department thereof having jurisdiction in the premises.
A. Industrial establishments shall install fine screens to remove husks,
hulls, vegetable skins, peelings, threads, lint, grease and other such
non-settleable and floating solids, or other organic or inorganic
substances determined by the Borough to overload, impair the
efficiency of or cause difficulties in operation of the sewage treatment
plant used to treat and dispose of the wastes or in maintaining required
quality of treatment plant effluent.
§ 373-8 KENHORST CODE § 373-9
1:196
§ 373-10. Borough rights; refusing connection; compelling
discontinuance of system use.
The Borough reserves the right to refuse to any person the privilege of
connection of any improved property to the sewer system, or to compel the
discontinuance of use of a sewer and the sewer system, by any person, or
to compel the pretreatment of any industrial wastes, in order to prevent
discharges into the sewer system of any wastes deemed to be harmful
to the sewer system or to have a deleterious effect on sewage treatment
processes.
§ 373-11. Access.
Representatives of the Borough shall have access at all times to any
improved property which shall be connected to the sewer system and
to any meters used for purposes of establishing or determining water
consumption, water excluded from the sewer system or domestic sewage
or industrial wastes discharged to the sewer system for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance
with provisions of this article.
§ 373-12. Additions to and changes of sewer rentals or charges;
adoption of additional rules and regulations.
B. Any improved property discharging 50,000 gallons or more of domestic
sewage and/or industrial wastes per day into the sewer system and
having large variations in the rate of discharge of such within a twentyfour-
hour period shall install suitable holding tanks for equalizing the
rate of discharge uniformly over the entire twenty-four-hour period.
The average rate of discharge during any twenty-four-hour period shall
not be exceeded by more than 50% at any time during such twenty-fourhour
period.
A. The Borough reserves the right to adopt and promulgate and, from time
to time, the Borough may adopt and promulgate, as it shall deem
necessary, additional classifications and sewer rentals or charges, or
modifications of the schedule of sewer rentals or charges as set forth in
this article, which additional classifications and sewer rentals or
charges, or modifications, as the case may be, shall be, shall become
and shall be construed as a part of this article.
B. The Borough reserves the right to adopt and promulgate and, from time
to time, the Borough may adopt and promulgate such additional rules
and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper for the use and
operation of the sewer system, which rules and regulations shall be,
shall become and shall be construed as a part of this article.
§ 373-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-12
1:197

ARTICLE II
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 4-14-1960 by Ord. No. 164 (Ch. 17, Part 1, of the 1973
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 373-13. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — The Borough of Kenhorst Municipal Authority, a
municipality authority of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania, a
municipal corporation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, acting by and
through its Council or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its
authorized representatives.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property, located within the Borough, upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
structure sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be
discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form of
energy rejected or escaping in the course of any industrial, manufacturing,
trade or business process or in the course of the development, recovery or
processing of natural resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located within the Borough.
PERSON — Any individual, firm partnership, company, association, society,
corporation or other group or entity.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from any improved property.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system used
or usable for sewage collection purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
transporting, pumping, treating and disposing of sanitary sewage and
industrial wastes, situate in or adjacent to the Borough, owned by the
Authority and leased to the Borough for operation and use in collecting and
disposing of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes.
STREET — Includes any street, road, lane, court, alley, public square or
highway.
§ 373-14. Property owners to make connections; time limit.
The owner of any improved property abutting on or adjoining any street in
which is a sewer shall connect such improved property with such sewer, in
such manner as the Borough may require, within 60 days after notice to
§ 373-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-14
1:199
such owner from the Borough to make such connection, for the purpose of
discharge of all sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from such improved
property, subject to such rules, regulations, limitations and restrictions as
shall be established herein or otherwise shall be established by the Borough
from time to time.
§ 373-15. Notice to connect required.
The notice to be given by the Borough to the owner of any improved
property abutting on or adjoining any street in which is a sewer requiring
such owner to connect such improved property to such sewer, which notice
is referred to in § 373-14 of this article, shall be given by the Borough as
soon as a sewer is in place which can receive sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes from the particular improved property and which can transport the
same for treatment and disposal.
§ 373-16. Contents of notice.
The notice to be given by the Borough to the owner of any improved
property abutting on or adjoining any street in which is a sewer requiring
such owner to connect such improved property to such sewer, which notice
is referred to in § 373-14 of this article, shall consist of a copy of this
article, including any amendments and/or supplements at the time in effect,
or a summary of each section thereof, and a written or printed document
requiring such connection and specifying that such connection shall be
made within the time prescribed in § 373-14 of this article.
§ 373-17. Authority for Borough to make connection and collect
cost.
If the owner of any improved property abutting on or adjoining any street
in which is a sewer, after 60 days' notice from the Borough to connect such
improved property to such sewer, in accordance with the foregoing sections
of this article, shall fail to connect such improved property to such sewer, as
required and in the manner provided in this article, the Borough may make
such connection and may collect from such owner the costs and expenses
thereof by a municipal claim, an action in assumpsit or by such other legal
proceeding as may be permitted or provided by law.
§ 373-18. Sewage to be discharged into sewer after connection.
All sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from any improved property, after
connection of such improved property with a sewer, shall be conducted and
discharged into such sewer, subject to such rules, regulations, limitations
and restrictions as shall be established in this article or otherwise shall be
established, from time to time, by the Borough.
§ 373-14 KENHORST CODE § 373-19
1:200
§ 373-19. Unlawful to make opening into sewer system without
permit.
No person shall uncover, connect with, make any opening into or use, alter
or disturb, in any manner, any sewer or any part of the sewer system
without first obtaining a permit, in writing, from the Borough. Application
for a permit required under this section shall be made by the owner of the
improved property served or to be served.
§ 373-20. Conditions for connection to sewer. [Amended 8-4-1988
by Ord. No. 401; 2-1-1990 by Ord. No. 407]
No person shall make or shall cause to be made any connection of any
improved property with a sewer until such person shall have fulfilled all of
the following conditions:
§ 373-21. Separate connection required.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, each improved property shall
be connected separately and independently with a sewer through a service
connection to be designated in each case by the Borough. Grouping of more
than one improved property upon one service connection to a sewer shall
not be permitted, except under special circumstances and for good sanitary
reasons or other good cause shown, but then only after special permission
of the Borough, in writing, shall have been secured.
§ 373-22. Manner of making connection.
Any connection to a sewer shall be made at a place designated by the
Borough and where a lateral or service connection in such sewer is
provided. All joints shall be sealed, shall be made airtight and shall be
made smooth and clean inside in order to permit free flow of sanitary
sewage and industrial wastes without any obstruction. All work pertaining
A. Such person shall notify the Secretary of the Borough of the desire and
intention to connect to a sewer.
B. Before commencing or proceeding with any work relative to connecting
any property to the sanitary sewer system of the Borough, the owner of
the property must apply for, and obtain, a permit from the Borough of
Kenhorst Municipal Authority authorizing such connection. The fee for
such permit to connect shall be $2,500 and shall be known as the
"tapping fee," plus the actual construction costs incurred. Any excess
over administration costs and construction costs incurred shall be
refunded to the property owner.
C. Such person shall give the Secretary of the Borough at least 24 hours'
written notice of the time when such connection will be made in order
that the Borough, by its authorized representatives, can supervise and
inspect the work performed in making such connection and can
supervise the testing thereof, if necessary.
§ 373-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-22
1:201
to such connection with a sewer, including testing, shall be, financially and
otherwise, the responsibility of the owner of the improved property with
which connection is made, subject to the right of supervision and inspection
herein reserved by the Borough. The owner of such improved property shall
indemnify and save harmless the Borough from all loss or damage that
may be occasioned by the Borough, directly or indirectly, as a result of the
connection of such improved property to such sewer.
§ 373-23. Certain substances not to be deposited on public or
private property.
§ 373-24. Certain receptacles not to be connected to sewer.
No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle at any
time shall be connected with a sewer.
§ 373-25. Certain receptacles not to be maintained on improved
property.
A. No person shall place or deposit or permit to be placed or deposited
upon public or private property within the Borough any sanitary sewage
or industrial wastes in violation of § 373-14 of this article.
B. No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged to any natural
outlet within the Borough any sanitary sewage or industrial wastes in
violation of § 373-14 of this article, except where suitable treatment has
been provided which is satisfactory to the Borough.
A. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall be maintained upon any improved property, after the expiration of
the time specified in § 373-14 of this article, from which improved
property connection with a sewer shall have been made or shall be
required to be made; and it shall be unlawful for any owner of an
improved property, after the expiration of the time specified in § 373-14
of this article, to erect, construct, use or maintain thereon or to cause to
be erected, constructed, used or maintained thereon any privy vault,
cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle for disposition of
sanitary sewage and industrial wastes in any manner other than into
the sewer system.
B. Every such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar
receptacle shall be abandoned and, at the discretion of the Borough,
shall be cleansed and filled, at the expense of the owner of such
improved property, under the direction and supervision of the Borough;
and any such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar
receptacle not so abandoned and, if required by the Borough, cleansed
and filled, shall constitute a nuisance, and such nuisance may be
abated, as provided by law, at the expense of the owner of such
improved property.
§ 373-22 KENHORST CODE § 373-26
1:202
§ 373-26. Certain substances not to be discharged into sewer.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any sewer, directly
or indirectly, any substance which could be detrimental to a sewer or to the
operation of the sewer system.
§ 373-27. Refusal of connection; discontinuance of use; compelling
pretreatment of sewage.
The Borough reserves the right to refuse to any person the privilege of
connection of any improved property to the sewer system, or to compel
the discontinuance of use of a sewer by any person, or to compel the
pretreatment of industrial wastes, in order to prevent the discharge into
the sewer system of any wastes which may be deemed by the Borough to
be harmful to the sewer system or to have a deleterious effect on sewage
treatment processes.
§ 373-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1970 by Ord.
No. 281; 4-29-1975 by Ord. No. 330; 4-29-1975 by Ord. No. 339103]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code, provided that each three-month period during which a
violation shall continue shall be deemed and shall be taken to be a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
§ 373-29. Borough reserves right to make rules and regulations.
The Borough reserves the right to adopt and promulgate, from time to
time, additional rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper
relating to connections to the sewer system, which additional rules and
regulations shall become and shall be construed as a part of this article.
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 373-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-29
1:203

ARTICLE III
Sewer Use
[Adopted 6-1-2000 by Ord. No. 459 (Ch. 17, Part 3, of the 1973 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 373-30. Adoption.
The Borough of Kenhorst hereby adopts the "City of Reading Sewer Use
Ordinance," which is made a part hereof and incorporated herein by
reference as fully as if set out at length in this article.104
§ 373-31. Ownership of sewer system.
For the purpose of this article, whenever the term "City of Reading" or "the
City" or any other reference to the ownership of the sewer system is used,
such references shall also mean the Borough of Kenhorst.
§ 373-32. Rights, powers, remedies and enforcement.
The Borough of Kenhorst shall have all rights, powers, remedies and
enforcement capabilities under federal, state and local law as those given
to the City of Reading under federal, state and local laws as an owner
of a sewer system and specially under the "City of Reading Sewer Use
Ordinance."
104. Editor's Note: The City of Reading Sewer Use Ordinance is on file at the Borough offices.
§ 373-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-32
1:205
Chapter 378
SKATEBOARDS AND OTHER RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 327. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 404.
§ 378-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Kenhorst Borough Skate Board
Ordinance."
§ 378-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT — Any equipment used for recreational
purposes which shall include, but not be limited to, scooters, roller blades,
roller skates, basketball posts and nets, hockey nets, hockey boxes and
ramps.[Added 11-1-2001 by Ord. No. 470]
SKATEBOARD — Any wooden, metal or plastic board on one side of which
is affixed two or more wheels and which is used for coasting and is guided
by the distribution of weight of the user.
§ 378-3. Use of skateboards on public streets and sidewalks
prohibited.
Immediately upon the enactment of this chapter, it shall be illegal for
anyone to operate a skateboard or boards on the public streets and
sidewalks of the Borough of Kenhorst.
§ 378-4. Use of recreational equipment on public streets and
sidewalks prohibited. [Added 11-1-2001 by Ord. No. 470]
Immediately upon enactment of this chapter, it shall be illegal for anyone
to operate any type of recreational equipment on the public streets and
sidewalks of the Borough of Kenhorst.
§ 378-5. Violations and penalties.105
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 373-32 KENHORST CODE § 378-5
1:206
Chapter 384
SOLID WASTE
§ 378-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-5
1:207

ARTICLE I
Waste Management and Recycling
[Adopted 8-2-2012 by Ord. No. 543]
§ 384-1. Short title.
This article will be known and may be cited as the "Kenhorst Borough Waste
Reduction and Recycling Ordinance."
§ 384-2. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the Solid Waste Management Act, P.L.
380, No. 97, July 7, 1980,106 and the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling
and Waste Reduction Act, Act. No. 101, July 28, 1988.107
§ 384-3. Purpose and goals.
It is the purpose of this article to:
A. Require waste reduction and recycling as a means of managing
municipal waste, conserving resources and supplying energy.
B. Protect the public health, safety and welfare from the short- and longterm
dangers of collection, transportation, processing and storage of
municipal waste.
C. Utilize, wherever feasible, the capabilities of private enterprise in
accomplishing the desired objectives of an effective, comprehensive
solid waste management program.
D. Establish and implement within the Borough of Kenhorst a recycling
program to return valuable materials to productive use, to conserve
energy and to protect capacity at municipal waste processing or
disposal facilities.
E. Recycle at least 25% of all municipal waste and source-separated
recyclable materials generated in the Borough of Kenhorst on and after
January 1, 1997.
F. The weight or volume of municipal waste generated per capita in the
Borough of Kenhorst on January 1, 1997, should to the greatest extent
practicable, be less than the weight or volume of municipal waste
generated per capita on the effective date of this article.
G. Each person living or working in the Borough of Kenhorst shall be
taught the economic, environmental and energy value of recycling and
waste reduction, and shall be encouraged through a variety of means to
participate in such activities.
106. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
107. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 384-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-3
1:209
§ 384-4. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
ABATEMENT — The restoration, reclamation, recovery, etc., of a natural
resource adversely affected by the activity of a person.
AVERAGE DAILY VOLUME — The mean daily volume received at a facility
taking into account weather, seasonal variations, scheduled community
cleanup days and other factors.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including, but not limited
to, stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
COMMONWEALTH AGENCY — The commonwealth and its departments,
boards, commissions and agencies, commonwealth-owned universities, and
the State Public School Building Authority, the State Highway and Bridge
Authority, and any other authority now in existence or hereafter created or
organized by the commonwealth.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events sponsored in whole or in part by a
municipality, or conducted within a municipality and sponsored privately,
which include, but are not limited to, fairs, bazaars, socials, picnics and
organized sporting events that will be attended by 200 or more individuals
per day.
DEGRADABLE PLASTIC BEVERAGE CARRIER — Plastic beverage carriers
that degrade by biological processes, photodegradation, chemodegradation
or degradation by other natural processes. The degradation process does
not produce or result in a residue or by-product considered to be hazardous
waste.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth and its authorized representatives.
DISPOSAL — The deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing
of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner that the solid waste
or a constituent of the solid waste enters the environment, is emitted into
the air or is discharged to the waters of this commonwealth.
FEASIBILITY STUDY — A study which analyzes a specific municipal waste
processing or disposal system to assess the likelihood that the system can
be successfully implemented, including, but not limited to, an analysis of
the prospective market, the projected costs and revenues of the system, the
municipal waste-stream that the system will rely upon and various options
available to implement the system.
H. The Borough of Kenhorst shall, to the greatest extent practicable,
procure and use products and materials with recycled content, and
procure and use materials that are recyclable.
§ 384-3 KENHORST CODE § 384-4
1:210
HOST MUNICIPALITY — The municipality other than the county within
which a municipal waste landfill or resource recovery facility is located or
is proposed to be located.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in
service, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, orphanages,
schools and universities.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings,
and similar material, and may include grass clippings per Solid Waste
Management Act requirements.108
LOCAL PUBLIC AGENCY —
MANAGEMENT — The entire process, or any part thereof, of storage,
collection, transportation, processing, treatment and disposal of solid
wastes by any person engaging in such process.
MUNICIPAL — Of, or pertaining to, any office or other property under the
control of any branch or arm of the Federal Government of the United
States of America, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any political
subdivision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania including, but not limited
to, Kenhorst Borough, any counties, cities, boroughs, townships and
municipal authorities.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Public facilities operated by Kenhorst
Borough and other governmental and quasi-governmental authorities.
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING PROGRAM — A source-separation and collection
program for recycling Borough waste or source-separated recyclable
materials, or a program for designated dropoff points or collection centers
for recycling Borough waste or source-separated recyclable materials, that
is operated by or on behalf of the Borough of Kenhorst. The term includes
any source-separation and collection program for composting yard waste
that is operated by or on behalf of the Borough of Kenhorst. The term
shall not include any program for recycling construction/demolition waste
or sludge from sewage treatment plants or water supply treatment plants.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
Counties, cities, boroughs, towns, townships, school districts, and any
other authority now in existence or hereafter created or organized by
the commonwealth.
A.
All municipal or school or other authorities now in existence or
hereafter created or organized by any county, city, borough, township
or school district or any combination thereof.
B.
Any and all other public bodies, authorities, councils of government,
officers, agencies or instrumentalities of the foregoing, whether
exercising a governmental or proprietary function.
C.
108. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 384-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-4
1:211
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
in the Solid Waste Management Act109 from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or
air pollution control facility. The term does not include source-separated
recyclable materials.
MUNICIPAL WASTE LANDFILL — Any facility that is designated, operated
or maintained for the disposal of municipal waste, whether or not such
facility possesses a permit from the department under the Solid Waste
Management Act.110 The term does not include any facility that is used
exclusively for disposal of construction/demolition waste or sludge from
sewage treatment plants or water supply treatment plants.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
OPERATOR — A person engaged in solid waste processing or disposal.
Where more than one person is so engaged in a single operation, all persons
shall be deemed jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the
provisions of this article.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution
or cooperative enterprise. In any provisions of this article prescribing a
fine, imprisonment or penalty, or any combination of the foregoing, the term
"person" shall include the officers and directors of any corporation or other
legal entity having officers and directors.
PLASTIC BEVERAGE CARRIER — Plastic rings or similar plastic connectors
used as holding devices in the packaging of beverages, including, but not
limited to, all carbonated beverages, liquors, wines, fruit juices, mineral
waters, soda and beer.
POLLUTION — Contamination of any air, water, land or other natural
resources of the Borough of Kenhorst that will create or is likely to create a
public nuisance or to render the air, water, land or other natural resources
harmful, detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare or to
domestic, municipal, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or
other legitimate beneficial uses or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or
other life.
POST-CONSUMER MATERIAL — Any product generated by a business or
consumer which has served its intended end use, and which has been
separated or diverted from solid waste for the purposes of collection,
recycling, and disposition. The term includes industrial by-products that
would otherwise go to disposal or processing facilities. The term does not
include internally generated scrap that is commonly returned to industrial
or manufacturing processes.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal waste or any technology used to convert part
or all of such waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing facilities include,
109. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
110. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 384-4 KENHORST CODE § 384-4
1:212
but are not limited to, transfer facilities, composting facilities and resource
recovery facilities.
PROJECT DEVELOPMENT — Those activities required to be conducted
prior to constructing a processing or disposal facility that has been shown
to be feasible, including, but not limited to, public input and participation,
siting, procurement and vendor contract negotiations, and market and
municipal waste supply assurance negotiations.
PUBLIC AGENCY — Any commonwealth agency or local public agency.
RECYCLED CONTENT — Goods, supplies, equipment, materials and printed
items containing post-consumer materials.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the mechanized
separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than through
combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials other than a
fuel for the operation of energy.
RECYCLING FACILITY — A facility employing a technology that is a process
that separates or classifies municipal waste and creates or recovers
reusable materials that can be sold to or reused by a manufacturer as a
substitute for or a supplement to virgin raw materials. The term "recycling
facility" shall not mean transfer stations or landfills for solid waste nor
composting facilities or resource recovery facilities.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material or
other waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations and
any sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility or air pollution control
facility, provided that it is not hazardous. The term shall not include coal
refuse as defined in the Act of September 24, 1968 (P.L. 1040, No. 318),
known as the "Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act."111 The term shall not
include treatment sludges from coal mine drainage treatment plants,
disposal of which is being carried on pursuant to and in compliance with
a valid permit issued pursuant to the Act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No.
394), known as the "Clean Streams Law."112
RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY — A processing facility that provides
for the extraction and utilization of materials or energy from municipal
waste that is generated off site, including, but not limited to, a facility that
mechanically extracts materials from municipal waste, a combustion facility
that converts the organic fraction of municipal waste to usable energy, and
any chemical and biological process that converts municipal waste into
a fuel product. The term also includes any facility for the combustion of
municipal waste that is generated off site, whether or not the facility is
operated to recover energy. The term does not include:
111. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq.
112. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 384-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-4
1:213
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to municipal, residual
or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials. The term does not include coal ash or drill cuttings.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT ACT — The Act of July 7, 1980 (P.L. 380, No.
97).113
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials that are
separated from municipal waste at the point of origin for the purpose of
recycling.
STORAGE — The containment of any municipal waste on a temporary basis
in such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall be
presumed that the containment of any municipal waste in excess of one
year constitutes disposal. This presumption can be overcome by clear and
convincing evidence to the contrary.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any municipal waste at any
time after generation.
TREATMENT — Any method, technique or process, including, but not
limited to, neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical or
biological character or composition of any municipal waste so as to
neutralize such waste or so as to render such waste safer for transport,
suitable for recovery, suitable for storage or reduced in volume.
WASTE REDUCTION — Design, manufacture or use of a product to
minimize weight of municipal waste that requires processing or disposal,
including, but not limited to:
§ 384-5. Powers, duties and responsibilities of Borough.
A. Any composting facility.
B. Methane gas extraction from a municipal waste landfill.
Any separation and collection center, dropoff point or collection center
for recycling, or any source separation or collection center for
composting leaf waste.
C.
Any facility, including all units in the facility, with a total processing
capacity of less than 50 tons per day.
D.
Design or manufacturing activities which minimize the weight or
volume of materials contained in a product, or increase durability or
recyclability; and
A.
Use of products that contain as little material as possible, are capable
of being reused or recycled or have an extended useful life.
B.
A. Responsibilities. The Borough of Kenhorst shall have the power and its
duty shall be to assure the proper and adequate transportation,
collection and storage of municipal waste which is generated or present
113. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 384-4 KENHORST CODE § 384-5
1:214
§ 384-6. Designated sites.
The Borough Council hereby requires that all municipal waste generated
within its jurisdiction shall be disposed of or processed at a designated
permitted facility as outlined in the Berks County Solid Waste Management
Plan. Such facility shall retain this designation until Berks County adopts a
waste flow control ordinance as part of a plan submitted to the Department
of Environmental Protection pursuant to Section 501(a), (b) or (c) of the
Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act.115 Upon
approval of a municipal waste management plan for Berks County by the
Department, the site for the disposal or processing of the Borough of
Kenhorst waste shall, thereafter, be designated thereby.
§ 384-7. Borough of Kenhorst recycling program.
The Borough of Kenhorst hereby establishes and implements a source
separation and collection program for recyclable materials in accordance
with Section 1501 of the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
within its boundaries, to assure adequate capacity for the disposal
of municipal waste generated within its boundaries by means of the
procedure set forth in Section 1111 of the Municipal Waste Planning,
Recycling and Waste Reduction Act114 and to adopt and implement a
program for the collection and recycling of municipal waste or sourceseparated
recyclable materials as provided in this article.
B. Powers. In carrying out its duties under this section, Borough Council
may adopt resolutions establishing procedures, regulations and
standards for the recycling, transportation, storage and collection of
municipal wastes, or source-separated recyclable materials which shall
not be less stringent than, and not in violation of or inconsistent with,
the provisions and purposes of the Solid Waste Management Act, the
Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act and the
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto.
C. Duties. The Borough of Kenhorst shall implement the provisions of this
article by collecting, transporting, processing or marketing sourceseparated
materials or may contract, subject to competitive bidding,
with any person to carry out its duties for the recycling, transportation,
collection and storage of municipal waste and source-separated
recyclable materials, if the recycling, transportation, collection or
storage activity or facility is conducted or operated in a manner that is
consistent with the Solid Waste Management Act, the Municipal Waste
Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, this article and the
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. Any such person shall be
jointly and severally responsible with the Borough of Kenhorst when
carrying out its duties for transportation, collection or storage activity
or facility.
114. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.1111.
115. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.501(a), (b) and (c).
§ 384-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-7
1:215
Reduction Act.116 The source separation and collection program shall
include the following regulations:
A. Persons are hereby required to separate plastic, glass, cans and paper
materials, deemed appropriate hereafter, from other municipal waste
generated at their homes, apartments and other residential
establishments and to store such material until collection. The plastic,
glass, cans and paper materials shall be designated periodically from
the following: clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel and bimetallic
cans, high-grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated paper and plastics.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to impair the ownership of
separated materials by the person who generated them unless and until
such materials are placed at curbside or similar location for collection
by the contractor.
B. Persons are hereby required to separate leaf waste from other
municipal waste generated at their homes, apartments and other
residential establishments until collection unless those persons have
otherwise provided for the composting of leaf waste. The Borough
Council of the Borough of Kenhorst shall allow an owner, landlord or
agent of an owner or landlord of multifamily rental housing properties
with four or more units to comply with its responsibilities under this
section by establishing a collection system for recyclable materials at
each property. The collection system must include suitable containers
for collection and sorting materials, easily accessible locations for the
containers, and written instructions to the occupants concerning the
use and availability of the collection system. Owners, landlords and
agents of owners or landlords who comply with this article shall not be
liable for the noncompliance of occupants of their buildings.
C. Persons are hereby required to separate high-grade office paper,
aluminum, corrugated paper and leaf waste and other material deemed
appropriate generated at commercial, municipal or institutional
establishments and from community activities and to store the material
until collection. The Borough Council of the Borough of Kenhorst shall
exempt persons occupying commercial, institutional and municipal
establishments within its municipal boundaries from the requirements
of this article if those persons have otherwise provided for the recycling
of materials they are required by this article to recycle. To be eligible
for an exemption under this subsection, a commercial or institutional
solid waste generator must, annually, by not later than January 31,
provide written documentation to the Borough of Kenhorst of the total
number of tons recycled.
D. At least twice per month, the designated separated materials are
hereby required to be placed at the curbside or a similar location in
plastic containers for collection by the contractor and a collection
charge shall be billed to each dwelling unit within the Borough of
Kenhorst according to procedures established pursuant to a resolution
116. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.1501.
§ 384-7 KENHORST CODE § 384-7
1:216
§ 384-8. Public notice.
The Borough of Kenhorst shall establish a comprehensive and sustained
public information and education program concerning recycling program
features and requirements. As a part of this program, the Borough
Secretary shall, at least 30 days prior to the initiation of the recycling
program and at least once every six months thereafter, notify all persons
occupying residential, commercial, institutional and municipal premises
within its boundaries of the requirements of this article. The Borough
Secretary shall, as he or she deems necessary and appropriate, place an
advertisement in a newspaper circulating in the Borough of Kenhorst, post
a notice in public places where public notices are customarily posted,
including a notice with other official notifications periodically mailed to
residential taxpayers or utilize any combination of the foregoing.
§ 384-9. Recycling by operator.
An operator of a landfill or resource recovery facility may contract with the
Borough of Kenhorst to provide recycling services in lieu of the curbside
recycling program as determined from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council. The contract must ensure that at least 25% of the waste
received is recycled, provided that the economic and environmental impact
of the proposed technology used for the recycling receives prior approval
from the Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 384-10. Annual report.
On or before February 15 of each year, the Borough Secretary shall submit
a report to Berks County which shall describe the weight or volume of
materials that were recycled by the municipal recycling program in the
preceding calendar year.
of the Borough Council in order to recover that portion of the cost of
collection which cannot be recovered through the sale of the recycled
materials.
E. The contractor shall collect recyclable materials from the curbside or
similar locations designated by resolution at least twice per month from
each residence or other person generating municipal waste in the
Borough of Kenhorst.
F. The Borough of Kenhorst may solicit bids and award contracts for the
sale of collected materials for recycling giving preferential
consideration, for the collection, marketing and disposition of
recyclable and yard waste materials, to persons engaged in the
business of recycling on the effective date of this article, whether or not
the persons were operating for profit.
§ 384-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-11
1:217
§ 384-11. Violations and penalties.117
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 384-11 KENHORST CODE § 384-11
1:218
Chapter 393
STORAGE CONTAINERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 404. Zoning — See Ch. 475.
§ 384-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-11
1:219

ARTICLE I
Portable Home Storage Units
[Adopted 8-6-2009 by Ord. No. 526 (Ch. 13, Part 6, of the 1973 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 393-1. Permit required.
Portable on-demand storage structures and temporary storage units
(hereinafter known as "PODS®") placed on a residential, corporate or
association property shall first secure a permit from the Borough of
Kenhorst office.
§ 393-2. Application; insurance.
§ 393-3. Fees.118
Permit fees for the use of PODS® shall be as set from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council.
§ 393-4. Placement of units.
PODS® units shall be placed on the owner's driveway of the property. All
locations must be paved off-street surfaces.
§ 393-5. Placement on streets; signs and markings.119
If PODS® units must be placed on a street, the property owner must obtain
preapproval of the location and erect no-parking signs 24 hours to 48 hours
prior to placement of the PODS®. No-parking signs may be obtained at the
Borough of Kenhorst. The fee for each no-parking sign shall be as set by
resolution of Borough Council. All PODS® must have reflective fluorescent
signs posted, and blinking lights, which shall be visible at night.
§ 393-6. Limitation on number.
Only one PODS® unit may be placed at or near a property at one time.
A. The petitioner must first submit an application and receive a permit
from the Borough.
B. An insurance certificate providing liability insurance in the amount of
$100,000 provided by the company supplying the PODS® must
accompany the application.
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 393-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 393-7
1:221
§ 393-7. Violations and penalties.120
Any person who shall place a PODS® unit in violation of this article shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 393-7 KENHORST CODE § 393-7
1:222
Chapter 398
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 190.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 241.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
410.
Zoning — See Ch. 475.
§ 393-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 393-7
1:223

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 398-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Schuylkill River
Watershed Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 398-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood reduction efforts in
upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater
recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can
also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns, accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion
of streambeds and stream banks, thereby elevating sedimentation),
destroying aquatic habitat and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals
and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss
of recharge.
C. A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM),
including minimization of impacts of development, redevelopment and
activities causing accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public
health, safety, welfare, and the protection of the people of the
municipality and all the people of the commonwealth, their resources,
and the environment.
D. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed poses a threat to surface
and groundwater quality.
E. Stormwater can be an important water resource by providing
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
F. Impacts from stormwater runoff can be minimized by using project
designs that maintain the natural hydrologic regime, and sustain high
water quality, groundwater recharge, stream base flow and aquatic
ecosystems. The most cost-effective and environmentally advantageous
way to manage stormwater runoff is through nonstructural project
design, minimizing impervious surfaces and sprawl, avoiding sensitive
§ 398-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-2
1:225
§ 398-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and
welfare within the Schuylkill River Watershed by maintaining the natural
hydrologic regime by minimizing the impacts described in § 398-2 through
provisions designed to:
areas (i.e., stream buffers, floodplains, steep slopes), and designing to
topography and soils to maintain the natural hydrologic regime.
G. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
H. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
I. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth by the
municipality.
A. Promote alternative project designs and layout that minimizes impacts
to surface and groundwater.
B. Promote nonstructural best management practices (BMPs).
C. Minimize increases in stormwater volume.
D. Minimize impervious surfaces.
E. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems at
their source by regulating activities that cause these problems.
F. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
G. Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems.
H. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, which requires
a minimum of structures and relies on natural processes.
I. Focus on infiltration of stormwater, to maintain groundwater recharge,
to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality and to
otherwise protect water resources.
J. Maintain existing base flows and quality of streams and watercourses,
where possible.
K. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 93.4a to protect and maintain "existing
uses" and maintain the level of water quality to support those uses in all
§ 398-2 KENHORST CODE § 398-3
1:226
§ 398-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff, surface and groundwater quality and quantity by the authority of:
§ 398-5. Applicability; regulated activities.
streams, and to protect and maintain water quality in special protection
streams.
L. Address the quality and quantity of stormwater discharges from the
development site.
M. Provide a mechanism to identify controls necessary to meet the NPDES
permit requirements.
N. Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program to
address nonstormwater discharges into the municipality's separate
storm sewer system.
O. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
P. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
Q. Provide performance standards and design criteria for watershed-wide
stormwater management and planning.
R. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management facilities and BMPs that are implemented in
the municipality.
A. The Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as
amended, the "Storm Water Management Act" (hereinafter referred to
as "the Act").
B. The Water Resources Planning Act of 2002, 27 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.,
as amended.121
C. The Borough Code, 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1201 et seq., as amended.122
D. The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), Act 247, as
amended.123
A. This chapter shall apply to those areas of the municipality that are
located within the Schuylkill River Watershed, as delineated in
Appendix D which is hereby adopted as part of this chapter.124
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
123. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
124. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 398-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-5
1:227
§ 398-6. Compatibility with other ordinance requirements.
B. This chapter shall only apply to permanent nonstructural and structural
stormwater management best management practices (BMPs)
constructed as part of any of the regulated activities listed in this
section.
C. This chapter contains only the stormwater management performance
standards and design criteria that are necessary or desirable from a
watershed-wide perspective. Local stormwater management design
criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system design and
details, outlet structure design, etc.) shall continue to be regulated by
the applicable municipal ordinances and applicable state regulations.
D. The following activities are defined as "regulated activities" and shall
be regulated by this chapter:
(1) Land development.
(2) Subdivisions.
(3) Alteration of the natural hydrologic regime.
(4) Construction or reconstruction of, or additional impervious or
semipervious surfaces (driveways, parking lots, roads, etc.).
(5) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(6) Redevelopment of a site, which will increase runoff or change a
discharge point. Any redevelopment that does not increase the
runoff must still comply with § 398-12, Nonstructural project
design, § 398-13, Groundwater recharge, § 398-14, Water quality
requirements, and § 398-15, Stream bank erosion requirements.
(7) Diversion piping or encroachments in any natural or man-made
channel.
(8) Nonstructural and structural stormwater management BMPs or
appurtenances thereto.
(9) Regulated earth disturbance.125
(10) Any of the above regulated activities which were approved more
than five years prior to the effective date of this chapter and
resubmitted for municipal approval.
A. Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance.
125. Editor's Note: Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management
controls are also regulated under existing state law and implementing regulations. This
chapter shall operate in coordination with those parallel requirements; the requirements
of this chapter shall be no less restrictive in meeting the purposes of this chapter than
state law.
§ 398-5 KENHORST CODE § 398-6
1:228
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of the
municipality's requirements regarding stormwater matters which do
not conflict with the provisions of this chapter, such as local stormwater
management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection
system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.). Conflicting
provisions in other municipal ordinances or regulations shall be
construed to retain the requirements of this chapter addressing state
water quality requirements.
§ 398-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-6
1:229

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 398-7. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 398-8. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of man's activity and the natural processes of a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — The work of producing crops and raising
livestock including tillage, plowing, disking, harrowing, pasturing and
installation of conservation measures. For purposes of regulation by this
chapter, construction of new buildings or impervious area is not considered
an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also
the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS — Those maintained by the contractor as he
constructs the project and upon which he documents the actual locations of
the building components and changes to the original contract documents.
These, or a copy of same, are turned over to the engineer at the completion
of the project.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, unit of
government, or any other similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained."
§ 398-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-8
1:231
APPLICANT — A person who has filed an application for approval to engage
in any regulated activities as defined in § 398-5 of this chapter.
BANKFULL — The channel at the top-of-bank or point where water begins
to overflow onto a floodplain.
BASE FLOW — Portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater; the
sustained discharge that does not result from direct runoff or from water
diversions, reservoir releases, piped discharges, or other human activities.
BIORETENTION — A stormwater retention area which utilizes woody and
herbaceous plants and soils to remove pollutants before infiltration occurs.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Methods, measures or practices
to prevent or reduce surface runoff and/or water pollution, including but not
limited to structural and nonstructural stormwater management practices
and operation and maintenance procedures. See also "nonstructural best
management practice (BMP)."
BUFFER — The area of land immediately adjacent to any stream, measured
perpendicular to and horizontally from the top of bank on both sides of a
stream. (See "top of bank.")
CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an open
surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and manmade
drainage ways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes flowing
partly full.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, and headward cutting
of small channels and waterways, caused by stormwater runoff or bankfull
flows.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Berks County Conservation District.
CULVERT — A structure with appurtenant works, which carries water under
or through an embankment or fill.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid
or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad or other
purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNEE — The agent of the Berks County Planning Commission, Berks
County Conservation District and/or agent of the governing body involved
with the administration, review or enforcement of any provisions of this
chapter by contract or memorandum of understanding.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL (QUALIFIED) — A Pennsylvania registered
professional engineer, registered landscape architect, professional
geologist, qualified soils scientist or a registered professional land surveyor
qualified to perform the specific design task at hand based upon the
applicable code of ethics.
§ 398-8 KENHORST CODE § 398-8
1:232
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DESIGNATED WATERSHED (ACT 167) — A watershed which is listed under
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection's "Index of
Designated Watersheds (Stormwater Management)" pursuant to the Storm
Water Management Act, P.L. 864, No. 167, October 4, 1978,126 and
published in the Pennsylvania Bulletin on May 31, 1980, and August 9,
1980, as amended on November 19, 1991, April 21, 1992, June 21, 1994,
April 16, 1996, April 15, 1997 and December 16, 1997.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at
a predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely
shortly after any given rainfall event and are dry until the next rainfall
event.
DEVELOPER — A person that seeks to undertake any regulated activities at
a project site in the municipality.
DEVELOPMENT — Any human-induced change to improved or unimproved
real estate, whether public or private, including but not limited to land
development, construction, installation, or expansion of a building or other
structure, land division, street construction, drilling, and site alteration
such as embankments, dredging, grubbing, grading, paving, parking or
storage facilities, excavation, filling, stockpiling, or clearing. As used in
this chapter, "development" encompasses both new development and
redevelopment.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land where any regulated
activities in the municipality are planned, conducted or maintained.
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE DISCHARGE — Drainage discharge not confined
to a single point location or channel, such as sheet flow or shallow
concentrated flow.
DISCHARGE — 1. (verb) To release water from a project, site, aquifer,
drainage basin or other point of interest. 2. (noun) The rate and volume
of flow of water such as in a stream, generally expressed in cubic feet per
second (volume per unit of time). See also "peak discharge."
DISCHARGE POINT — The point of discharge for a stormwater facility.
DISTURBED AREAS — Unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
DITCH — An artificial waterway for irrigation or stormwater conveyance.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of the
lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located such that overland or
pipe flow from the site would be directed towards it.
126. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 398-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-8
1:233
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility
designed to transmit stormwater runoff and shall include channels, swales,
pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the municipal governing body
after the drainage plan has been approved.
DRAINAGE PLAN — The documentation of the stormwater management
system, if any, to be used for a given development site, the contents of which
are established in § 398-22.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of land, including, but not limited to, clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land development,
agricultural plowing or tilling, timber harvesting activities, road
maintenance activities, mineral extraction, and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EMERGENCY SPILLWAY — A conveyance area that is used to pass peak
discharge greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
stormwater facility.
ENCROACHMENT — A structure or activity that changes, expands or
diminishes the course, current or cross section of a watercourse, floodway
or body of water.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including
channels, is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan for a project site,
which identifies BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality which
satisfy Pennsylvania Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93,
Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to antidegradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior to the
proposed alteration. If the initial condition of the site is undeveloped land,
the land use shall be considered as "meadow" unless the natural land cover
is proven to generate lower curve numbers or Rational "C" value, such as
forested lands.
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land
areas from the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of this
commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from
any natural source or delineated by applicable Department of Housing
and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard
Boundary — Mapped as being a special flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains, which are reasonably required to carry and discharge
§ 398-8 KENHORST CODE § 398-8
1:234
the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies
have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year frequency floodway, it
is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from
the stream to 50 feet from the top of bank.
FLUVIAL GEOMORPHOLOGY — The study of landforms associated with
river channels and the processes that form them.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forest land with no change of land use
proposed. These include timber inventory and preparation of forest
management plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road
design and construction, timber harvesting and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design high
water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, swale, or diversion berm. The
space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GRADE — A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground, specified
in percent and shown on plans as specified herein. (To) Grade: to finish the
surface of a roadbed, top of embankment or bottom of excavation.
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad
and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to convey surface
water.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the earth's surface, often between
saturated soil and rock that supplies wells and springs.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies without degrading groundwater quality.
HEC-HMS — The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering
Center (HEC) - Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS). This model was used to
model the Schuylkill River watershed during the Act 167 plan development
and was the basis for the standards and criteria of this chapter.
HIGH-QUALITY WATERS — Surface waters having quality which exceeds
levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife and
recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pennsylvania Code Title 25,
Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(a).
HOTSPOTS — Areas where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater.
HYDROGRAPH — A graph of discharge versus time for a selected point in
the drainage system.
HYDROLOGIC REGIME (NATURAL) — The hydrologic cycle or balance
that sustains quality and quantity of stormwater, base flow, storage, and
groundwater supplies under natural conditions.
§ 398-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-8
1:235
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — A classification of soils by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service, formerly the Soil Conservation Service,
into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, which are
very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils, which are not very
permeable and produce much more runoff.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of water
into the ground. Impervious surface includes, but is not limited to, any
roof, parking or driveway areas, and any new streets and sidewalks. Any
surface areas designed to be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to
be impervious surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILL — Development that occurs on smaller parcels that remains
undeveloped but are within or very close proximity to urban areas. The
development relies on existing infrastructure and does not require an
extension of water, sewer or other public utilities.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolates
downward to recharge groundwater.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the underground water (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench).
INLET — The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A stream that flows only part of the time.
Flow generally occurs for several weeks or months in response to seasonal
precipitation, due to groundwater discharge.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure;
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or
other features;
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the PA
Municipalities Planning Code.127
C.
127. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 398-8 KENHORST CODE § 398-8
1:236
LIMITING ZONE — A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or
underlying strata, which includes one of the following:
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in the Schuylkill River hydrologic model.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for calculation
of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per
second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of
flow and slope. "Open channels" may include closed conduits so long as the
flow is not under pressure.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for a
municipality, planning agency or joint planning commission.
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
NATURAL CONDITION — Existing conditions.
NATURAL HYDROLOGIC REGIME — See "hydrologic regime."
NATURAL RECHARGE AREA — Undisturbed surface area or depression
where stormwater collects, and a portion of which infiltrates and
replenishes the underground and groundwater.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water body
from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible,
confined, or discrete conveyances.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES — Water flowing in stormwater
collection facilities, such as pipes or swales, which is not the result of a
rainfall event or snowmelt.
NONSTRUCTURAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Methods
of controlling stormwater runoff quantity and quality, such as innovative
site planning, impervious area and grading reduction, protection of natural
depression areas, temporary ponding on site and other techniques.
A seasonal high water table, whether perched or regional, determined
by direct observation of the water table or indicated by soil mottling.
A.
A rock with open joints, fracture or solution channels, or masses of
loose rock fragments, including gravel, with insufficient fine soil to fill
the voids between the fragments.
B.
A rock formation, other stratum or soil condition which is so slowly
permeable that it effectively limits downward passage of water.
C.
§ 398-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-8
1:237
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act,128
which is delegated to DEP in Pennsylvania.
NRCS — Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously SCS).
OUTFALL — "Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where
the municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of the
commonwealth.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal to a stream, river, lake, tidewater or
artificial drain.
PARENT TRACT — The parcel of land from which a land development or
subdivision originates, determined from the date of municipal adoption of
this chapter.
PARKING LOT STORAGE — Involves the use of parking areas as temporary
impoundments with controlled release rates during rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL — The computer-based hydrologic model
developed at the Pennsylvania State University.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough of
Kenhorst.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92a.2.129
POSTCONSTRUCTION — Period after construction where disturbed areas
are stabilized, stormwater controls are in place and functioning and all
proposed improvements in the approved land development plan are
completed.
PRETREATMENT — Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to provide
storage or filtering to trap coarse materials and other pollutants before
they enter the system, but not necessarily meet the water quality volume
requirements of § 398-14.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated earth
disturbance activities in the municipality are planned, conducted or
maintained.
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak
flow.
128. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-8 KENHORST CODE § 398-8
1:238
RECHARGE — The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration
of rainfall, other surface waters, or land application of water or treated
wastewater.
RECONSTRUCTION — Demolition of, and subsequent rebuilding of
impervious surface.
RECORD DRAWINGS — Original documents revised to suit the as-built
conditions and subsequently provided by the engineer to the client. The
engineer takes the contractor's as-builts, reviews them in detail with his/
her own records for completeness, then either turns these over to the client
or transfers the information to a set of reproducibles, in both cases for the
client's permanent records.
REDEVELOPMENT — The demolition, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, or improvement exceeding 2,000 square feet of land disturbance
performed on sites where existing land use is commercial, industrial,
institutional, or multifamily residential. Maintenance activities such as toplayer
grinding and repaving are not considered to be redevelopment.
Interior remodeling projects and tenant improvements are also not
considered to be redevelopment. Utility trenches in streets are not
considered redevelopment unless more than 50% of the street width is
removed and repaved.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions that have an
impact on stormwater runoff quality or quantity and that are specified in
§ 398-5 of this chapter.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Earth disturbance
activity one acre or more with a point source discharge to surface waters or
the municipality's storm sewer system, or five acres or more regardless of
the planned runoff. This includes earth disturbance on any portion of, part,
or during any stage of, a larger common plan of development.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of existing conditions peak rate of runoff
from a site or subarea to which the proposed conditions peak rate of runoff
must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
REPAVING — Replacement of the impervious surface that does not involve
reconstruction of an existing paved (impervious) surface.
REPLACEMENT PAVING — Reconstruction of and full replacement of an
existing paved (impervious) surface.
RETENTION BASIN — A structure in which stormwater is stored and not
released during the storm event. Retention basins do not have an outlet
other than recharge and must infiltrate stored water in no more than four
days.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the
twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to recur on the
average of once every 25 years.
§ 398-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-8
1:239
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used
to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the existing
road cross-section, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road
surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches and
other similar activities.
ROOF DRAINS — A drainage conduit or pipe that collects water runoff from
a roof and leads it away from the structure.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating
controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SALDO — Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.130
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located
and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material transported
by water during construction.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water or air.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is directed
for infiltration into the underground water.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains)
primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHALLOW CONCENTRATED FLOW — Stormwater runoff flowing in
shallow, defined ruts prior to entering a defined channel or waterway.
SHEET FLOW — A flow process associated with broad, shallow water
movement on sloping ground surfaces that is not channelized or
concentrated.
SOIL-COVER-COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called Curve Number (CN).
SOURCE WATER PROTECTION AREAS (SWPA) — The zone through which
contaminants, if present, are likely to migrate and reach a drinking water
well or surface water intake.
SPECIAL GEOLOGIC FEATURES — Carbonate bedrock features, including
but not limited to closed depressions, existing sinkholes, fracture traces,
130. Editor's Note: See Ch. 410, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 398-8 KENHORST CODE § 398-8
1:240
lineaments, joints, faults, caves and pinnacles, which may exist and must
be identified on a site when stormwater management BMPs are being
considered.
SPECIAL PROTECTION SUBWATERSHEDS — Watersheds for which the
receiving waters are exceptional value (EV) or high-quality (HQ) waters.
SPILLWAY — A conveyance that is used to pass the peak discharge of the
maximum design storm controlled by the stormwater facility.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under state
regulations,protection of designated and existing uses (See 25 Pa. Code
Chapters 93 and 96), including:
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure based
on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the
change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and
depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm event
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See "return
period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation reaching
the ground surface.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT — Those subareas in which some
type of detention is required to meet the plan requirements and the goals of
Act 167.
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a "designated use," such
as "cold water fishery" or "potable water supply," which are listed in
Chapter 93. These uses must be protected and maintained under state
regulations.
A.
"Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
of whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Regulated earth
disturbance activities must be designed to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to
protect those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water
quality in special protection streams.
B.
Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete, these characteristics can be
impacted by addition of pollutants such as sediment, and changes
in habitat through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result
of changes in land surface area from those activities. Therefore,
permanent discharges to surface waters must be managed to protect
the stream bank, streambed and structural integrity of the waterway, to
prevent these impacts.
C.
§ 398-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-8
1:241
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff quality, rate or quantity. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention
and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration
structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing those land
use activities that will influence stormwater runoff quality and quantity and
that would impact the Maiden Creek Watershed adopted by Berks County,
Lehigh County, and Schuylkill County as required by the Act of October 4,
1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167),131 and known as the "Schuylkill River Watershed
Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the
applicant or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the particular site of interest according to this chapter.
STREAM — A natural watercourse.
STREAM BUFFER — The land area adjacent to each side of a stream,
essential to maintaining water quality. (See "buffer.")
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses a regulated
water of this commonwealth.
SUBAREA (SUBWATERSHED) — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed
for which stormwater management criteria have been established in the
stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of
conveyance of surface, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within
or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME-OF-CONCENTRATION (TC) — The time for surface runoff to travel
from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point of
131. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 398-8 KENHORST CODE § 398-8
1:242
interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland
flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
TOP-OF-BANK — Highest point of elevation in a stream channel cross
section at which a rising water level just begins to flow out of the channel
and over the floodplain.
VERNAL POND — Seasonal depressional wetlands that are covered by
shallow water for variable periods from winter to spring, but may be
completely dry for most of the summer and fall.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water,
wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance
of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
WELLHEAD —
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA — The surface and subsurface area
surrounding a water supply well, well field, spring or infiltration gallery
supplying a public water system, through which contaminants are
reasonably likely to move toward and reach the water source.
WET BASIN — Pond for urban runoff management that is designed to detain
urban runoff and always contains water.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas.
A. A structure built over a well.
B. The source of water for a well.
§ 398-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-8
1:243

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management
§ 398-9. General requirements.
A. Applicants proposing regulated activities in Schuylkill River Watershed
which do not fall under the exemption criteria shown in § 398-21 shall
submit a drainage plan consistent with the Schuylkill River Watershed
Stormwater Management Plan to the municipality for review. These
criteria shall apply to the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages.
B. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM site plan is
specifically exempted by this chapter:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality
issues written approval of an SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
C. SWM site plans approved by the municipality in accordance with this
chapter shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
D. The municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures
for meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in
this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of,
and do not conflict with, state law, including but not limited to the Clean
Streams Law.132
E. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all the requirements under the Pennsylvania Code
Title 25 and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual) 2, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Department of Environmental Protection, No. 363-2134- 008, as
amended and updated.
F. For all regulated activities, implementation of the volume controls in
accordance with the chapter is required.
G. The applicant is required to evaluate practicable alternatives to the
surface discharge of stormwater, the creation of impervious surfaces
and the degradation of waters of the commonwealth, and must maintain
as much as possible the natural hydrologic regime.
132. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 398-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-9
1:245
H. The drainage plan must be designed consistent with the sequencing
provisions of § 398-12 to ensure maintenance of the natural hydrologic
regime and to promote groundwater recharge and protect groundwater
and surface water quality and quantity. The drainage plan designer
must proceed sequentially in accordance with Article III of this chapter.
I. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent with this
chapter.
J. Existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto adjacent
property shall not be altered in any manner which could cause property
damage without permission of the affected property owner(s) and shall
be subject to any applicable discharge criteria specified in this chapter.
K. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to any
applicable discharge criteria in the general direction of existing
discharge, whether proposed to be concentrated or maintained as
diffused drainage areas, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. If
diffused drainage discharge is proposed to be concentrated and
discharged onto adjacent property, the applicant must document that
adequate downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding or other impacts will result from the
concentrated discharge.
L. Where a development site is traversed by existing watercourses,
drainage easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such
watercourses. The terms of the easement shall conform to the stream
buffer requirements contained in § 398-14E of this chapter.
M. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
would be located in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth or
wetlands shall be subject to approval by PaDEP through the joint permit
application process, or, where deemed appropriate by PaDEP, the
general permit process. When there is a question whether wetlands
may be involved, it is the responsibility of the applicant or his agent to
show that the land in question cannot be classified as wetlands,
otherwise approval to work in the area must be obtained from PaDEP.
N. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
would be located on state highway rights-of-way shall be subject to
approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT).
O. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc. are encouraged, where soil
conditions permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need for detention
facilities or other structural BMPs.
§ 398-9 KENHORST CODE § 398-9
1:246
§ 398-10. Permit requirements by other government entities.
The following permit requirements may apply to certain regulated earth
disturbance activities, and must be met prior to commencement of
regulated earth disturbance activities, as applicable:
P. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches in order to promote overland flow and infiltration/
percolation of stormwater where advantageous to do so. When it is
more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, then
it shall be permitted on a case by case basis by the municipality.
Q. All stormwater runoff shall be pretreated for water quality prior to
discharge to surface or groundwater.
R. Operations and maintenance of permanent stormwater BMPs shall be
addressed as required by Article VII.
S. In selecting the appropriate BMPs or combinations thereof, the
applicant shall consider the following:
(1) Total contributing area.
(2) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
(3) Slope and depth to bedrock.
(4) Seasonal high water table.
(5) Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
(6) Erodibility of soils.
(7) Land availability and configuration of the topography.
(8) Peak discharge and required volume control.
(9) Stream bank erosion.
(10) Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality
problems.
(11) The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
(12) The nature of the pollutant being removed.
(13) Maintenance requirements.
(14) Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat.
(15) Recreational value.
T. Transference of runoff from one DEP designated Act 167 watershed to
another shall be prohibited.
§ 398-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-10
1:247
§ 398-11. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by DEP under 25
Pa. Code Chapter 105.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands,
subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state
highway right-of-way, or require access from a state highway, shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PENNDOT).
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
105.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until the municipality receives an approval from the
Conservation District of an erosion and sediment control plan for
construction activities.
B. DEP has regulations that require an erosion and sediment control plan
for any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more, under
25 Pa. Code § 102.4(b).
C. In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92a, a DEP "NPDES
Construction Activities" permit is required for regulated earth
disturbance activities.133
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or County
Conservation District must be provided to the municipality. The
issuance of an NPDES construction permit [or permit coverage under
the statewide General Permit (PAG-2)] satisfies the requirements
Subsection A of this section.
E. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the project
site at all times.
F. Additional erosion and sediment control design standards and criteria
are recommended to be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed.
They shall include the following:
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-10 KENHORST CODE § 398-11
1:248
§ 398-12. Nonstructural project design (sequencing to minimize
stormwater impacts).
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase to
maintain maximum infiltration capacity.
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until
the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has
achieved final stabilization.
A. The design of all regulated activities shall include the following steps in
sequence to minimize stormwater impacts:
(1) The applicant is required to evaluate practicable alternatives to the
surface discharge of stormwater, the creation of impervious
surfaces and the degradation of waters of the commonwealth, and
must maintain as much as possible the natural hydrologic regime of
the site.
(2) An alternative is practicable if it is available and capable of being
done after taking into consideration cost, existing technology and
logistics in light of overall project purposes, and other municipal
requirements.
(3) All practicable alternatives to the discharge of stormwater are
presumed to have less adverse impact on quantity and quality of
waters of the commonwealth unless otherwise demonstrated.
B. The applicant shall demonstrate that they designed the regulated
activities in the following sequence to minimize the increases in
stormwater runoff and impacts to water quality:
(1) Prepare an Existing Resource and Site Analysis Map (ERSAM),
showing environmentally sensitive areas, including but not limited
to steep slopes, ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands, hydric soils,
vernal pools, floodplains, stream buffer zones, hydrologic soil
groups A and B (areas conducive to infiltration), special geologic
features, any existing recharge areas and any other requirements
outlined in Chapter 410, Subdivision and Land Development.
(2) Establish appropriate buffers for each of the delineated
environmentally sensitive areas per the municipal zoning
ordinance (see § 398-14E for stream buffers and § 398-18I for
special geologic feature buffers).
(3) Prepare a draft project layout avoiding sensitive areas identified in
§ 398-12B(1).
(4) Identify site specific existing conditions drainage areas, discharge
points, recharge areas and hydrologic soil groups A and B.
(5) Evaluate nonstructural stormwater management alternatives.
§ 398-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-12
1:249
§ 398-13. Groundwater recharge (infiltration/recharge/
bioretention).
Maximizing the groundwater recharge capacity of the area being developed
is required. Design of the infiltration stormwater management facilities
shall give consideration to providing groundwater recharge to compensate
for the reduction in the percolation that occurs when the ground surface
is disturbed or impervious surface is created. It is recommended that roof
runoff be directed to infiltration BMPs which can be over-designed to
compensate for the infiltration losses due to parking areas. It is
recommended that roof runoff be directed to infiltration BMPs which may
be designed to compensate for the runoff from parking areas. These
measures are required to be consistent with § 398-3, and take advantage
of utilizing any existing recharge areas. Infiltration may not be feasible on
every site due to site-specific limitations such as soil type. If it cannot be
physically accomplished due to seasonal high water table, soil permeability
rate, soil depth or setback distances from special geologic features, then
the design professional shall be responsible to show that this cannot be
physically accomplished. If it can be physically accomplished, then the
(a) Minimize earth disturbance.
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces.
(c) Break up large impervious surfaces.
(6) Satisfy infiltration objective (§ 398-13) and provide for stormwater
pretreatment prior to infiltration. Pretreatment may not be
necessary for rooftop runoff which enters the infiltration facility
directly from a roof leader.
(7) Satisfy water quality (§ 398-14) and stream bank erosion protection
objective (§ 398-15).
(8) Determine what management district the site falls into (Appendix
D)134 and conduct an existing conditions runoff analysis.
(9) Prepare final project design to maintain existing conditions
drainage areas and discharge points, to minimize earth disturbance
and impervious surfaces, and to the maximum extent possible, to
ensure the remaining site development has no surface or point
discharge.
(10) Conduct a proposed conditions runoff analysis based on the final
design and to meet the release rate and in turn the overbank flow
and extreme event requirements (§ 398-16).
(11) Manage any remaining runoff through treatment prior to
discharge, as part of detention, bioretention, direct discharge or
other structural control.
134. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 398-12 KENHORST CODE § 398-13
1:250
volume of runoff to be infiltrated shall be determined from § 398-13A(3)
depending on demonstrated site conditions and shall be the greater of the
two volumes.
A. Infiltration BMPs shall meet the following minimum requirements:
(1) Infiltration requirements.
(a) Regulated activities will be required to infiltrate, where site
conditions permit, a portion of the runoff created by the
development as part of an overall stormwater management
plan designed for the site. The volume of runoff to be infiltrated
shall be determined from § 398-13A(3)(a) or (b), depending
upon demonstrated site conditions.
(2) Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed areas
shall be selected based on suitability of soils and site conditions
and shall be constructed on soils that have the following
characteristics:
(a) A minimum depth of 36 inches between the bottom of the BMP
and the limiting zone.
(b) An infiltration and/or percolation rate sufficient to accept the
additional stormwater load and drain completely as
determined by field tests conducted by the applicant's design
professional.
(c) The infiltration facility shall be capable of completely
infiltrating the required retention (infiltration) volume within
four days (96 hours).
(d) Pretreatment shall be provided prior to infiltration.
(3) The size of the infiltration facility shall be based upon the following
volume criteria:
(a) NRCS Curve Number equation.
[1] The NRCS runoff equation shall be utilized to calculate
infiltration requirements (I) in inches.
Equation 398-13.1
I (Infiltration requirement, in inches) = (200/CN) - 2
Where:
CN = SCS (NRCS) curve number of existing
conditions contributing to the infiltration
facility
[2] This equation is displayed graphically in, and the
infiltration requirement can be determined from Figure
398-13.1.
§ 398-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-13
1:251
Figure 398-13.1. Infiltration requirement based
upon NRCS Curve Number
[3] The retention (infiltration) volume (Rev) required to meet
the infiltration requirement would therefore be computed
as:
Equation 305.2
Rev = I * impervious area (square feet)/(12 in/ft) = cubic
feet
Where:
I = infiltration requirements (in inches)
(b) Annual recharge water budget approach.
[1] It has been determined that infiltrating 0.46 inches of
runoff from the impervious areas will aid in maintaining
the hydrologic regime of the watershed. If the goals of
§ 398-13A(3)(a) cannot be achieved, then 0.46 inches of
rainfall shall be infiltrated from all impervious areas, up to
an existing site conditions curve number of 81. Above a
curve number of 81, Equation 398-13.1 or the curve in
§ 398-13 KENHORST CODE § 398-13
1:252
Figure 398-13.1 should be used to determine the
infiltration requirement.
[2] The retention (infiltration) volume (Rev) required again
would therefore be computed as:
Rev = (0.46 or I, whichever is less) * impervious area
(sq.ft.)/(12in/ft) = cubic feet
B. Soils. A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be required
where practicable to determine the suitability of infiltration facilities.
The evaluation shall be performed by a qualified design professional,
and at a minimum, address soil permeability, depth to bedrock and
subgrade stability. The general process for designing the infiltration
BMP shall be:
(1) Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and man-made
features within the site to determine general areas of suitability for
infiltration practices. In areas where development on fill material is
under consideration, conduct geotechnical investigations of
subgrade stability; infiltration is not permitted to be ruled out
without conducting these tests.
(2) Provide field tests such as double-ring infiltrometer or hydraulic
conductivity tests (at the level of the proposed infiltration surface)
to determine the appropriate hydraulic conductivity rate.
Percolation tests are not recommended for design purposes.
(3) Design the infiltration structure for the required retention (Rev)
volume based on field determined capacity at the level of the
proposed infiltration surface.
(4) If on-lot infiltration structures are proposed by the applicant's
design professional, it must be demonstrated to the municipality
that the soils are conducive to infiltrate on the lots identified.
C. Carbonate areas. The applicant is required to investigate the ability of
all areas on the site which are not underlain by carbonate rock to meet
the infiltration requirements of § 398-13A. If this investigation proves
infeasible, infiltration can occur on areas underlain by carbonate rock
by following the recommended procedure below in conjunction with
Figure B-4 in Appendix B.135 However, the applicant is not required to
use infiltration in carbonate areas even if the site falls into the
"Recommended" range on Figure B-4 in Appendix B. If infiltration is not
proposed, the calculated infiltration volume (§ 398-13A) shall be treated
by an acceptable BMP.
(1) Infiltration BMP loading rate percentages in Figure B-4 in
Appendix B shall be calculated as follows:
135. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 398-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-13
1:253
(2) The area tributary to the infiltration BMP shall be weighted as
follows:
Area Description Weighting
All disturbed area to be made
impervious
100%
All disturbed areas to be made pervious 50%
All undisturbed impervious areas 100%
All undisturbed pervious areas 0%
(3) Soil thickness is to be measured from the bottom of any proposed
infiltration BMP. The effective soil thickness in Figure B-4 in
Appendix B136 is the measured soil thickness multiplied by the
thickness factor based on soil permeability, as follows:
Permeability Range Thickness Factor
6.0 to 12.0 inches/hour 0.8
2.0 to 6.0 inches/hour 1.0
1.0 to 2.0 inches/hour 1.4
0.75 to 1.0 inches/hour 1.2
0.5 to 0.75 inches/hour 1.0
(4) No infiltration structure in non-carbonate areas shall be within 50
feet of a boundary with carbonate rock, except when a preliminary
site investigation has been done showing the absence of special
geologic features within 50 feet of the proposed infiltration area.
D. Stormwater hotspots. Following is a list of examples of designated
hotspots. If a municipality designates a site or use as a hotspot, it has
important implications for how stormwater is managed. First and
foremost, untreated stormwater runoff from hotspots shall not be
allowed to recharge into groundwater where it may contaminate water
supplies. Therefore, the Rev requirement shall not applied to
development sites that fit into the hotspot category (the entire WQv
must still be treated). Second, a greater level of stormwater treatment
shall be considered at hotspot sites to prevent pollutant washoff after
construction. EPA's NPDES stormwater program requires some
industrial sites to prepare and implement a stormwater pollution
prevention plan.
(1) Examples of hotspots:
136. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 398-13 KENHORST CODE § 398-13
1:254
(a) Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities.
(b) Vehicle fueling stations.
(c) Vehicle service and maintenance facilities.
(d) Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities.
(e) Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.).
(f) Industrial sites (based on Standard Industrial Codes).
(g) Marinas (service and maintenance).
(h) Outdoor liquid container storage.
(i) Outdoor loading/unloading facilities.
(j) Public works storage areas.
(k) Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials.
(l) Commercial container nursery.
(m) Other land uses and activities as designated by an appropriate
review authority.
(2) The following land uses and activities are not normally considered
hotspots:
(a) Residential streets and rural highways.
(b) Residential development.
(c) Institutional development.
(d) Office developments.
(e) Nonindustrial rooftops.
(f) Pervious areas, except golf courses and nurseries [which may
need an integrated pest management (IPM) plan].
(3) While large highways [average daily traffic volume (ADT) greater
than 30,000] are not designated as a stormwater hotspot; however,
it is important to ensure that highway stormwater management
plans adequately protect groundwater.
E. Where infiltration is proposed in source water protection areas as
defined by the local municipality or water authority, the applicant shall
work with the appropriate entity to ensure protection of the water
supply.
F. Infiltration facilities shall be used in conjunction with other innovative
or traditional BMPs, stormwater control facilities, and nonstructural
stormwater management alternatives.
§ 398-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-13
1:255
§ 398-14. Water quality requirements.
The applicant shall comply with the following water quality requirements
of this article. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the
municipality shall commence until approval by the municipality of a plan
which demonstrates compliance with state water quality requirements
postconstruction is complete.
G. Where salt or chloride (salt storage) would be a pollutant, since soils do
little to filter this pollutant and it may contaminate the groundwater, a
qualified design professional shall evaluate the possibility of
groundwater contamination from the proposed infiltration facility and
perform a hydrogeologic justification study if necessary.
H. The infiltration requirement in high quality or exceptional value waters
shall be subject to the Department's Chapter 93 Antidegradation
Regulations.
I. An impermeable liner will be required in detention basins where the
possibility of groundwater contamination exists. A hydrogeologic study
may be required by the municipality.
J. The municipality may, upon its sole discretion, require the applicant to
provide safeguards against groundwater contamination for land uses
that may cause groundwater contamination should there be a mishap or
spill.
K. Unless otherwise specified in Chapter 475, Zoning, the following
setbacks for infiltration facilities shall apply:
(1) One hundred feet from water supply wells.
(2) Ten feet downslope or 100 feet upslope from building foundations.
(3) Fifty feet from septic system drainfields.
(4) Fifty feet from a geologic contact with carbonate bedrock, unless a
preliminary site investigation is done in the carbonate bedrock to
show the absence of special geologic features within 50 feet of the
proposed infiltration area.
(5) One hundred feet from the property line unless documentation is
provided to show all setbacks from wells, foundations and
drainfields on the neighboring property will be met.
A. The BMPs shall be designed, implemented and maintained to meet state
water quality requirements, and any other more stringent requirements
as determined by the municipality.
B. To control postconstruction stormwater impacts from regulated earth
disturbance activities, state water quality requirements can be met by
BMPs, including site design, which provide for replication of
preconstruction stormwater infiltration and runoff conditions, so that
§ 398-13 KENHORST CODE § 398-14
1:256
§ 398-15. Stream bank erosion requirements.
postconstruction stormwater discharges do not degrade the physical,
chemical or biological characteristics of the receiving waters. As
described in the DEP Comprehensive Stormwater Management Policy
(#392-0300-002, September 28, 2002), this may be achieved by the
following:
(1) Infiltration. Replication of preconstruction stormwater infiltration
conditions;
(2) Treatment. Use of water quality treatment BMPs to ensure filtering
out of the chemical and physical pollutants from the stormwater
runoff; and
(3) Stream bank and streambed protection. Management of volume
and rate of postconstruction stormwater discharges to prevent
physical degradation of receiving waters (e.g., from scouring).
C. For areas within defined special protection subwatersheds which
include exceptional value (EV) and high quality (HQ) waters, the
temperature and quality of water and streams shall be maintained
through the use of temperature-sensitive BMPs and stormwater
conveyance systems.
D. To accomplish the above, the applicant shall submit original and
innovative designs to the Municipal Engineer for review and approval.
Such designs may achieve the water quality objectives through a
combination of BMPs (best management practices).
E. If a perennial or intermittent stream passes through the site, the
applicant shall create a stream buffer extending a minimum of 50 feet
to either side of the top of bank of the channel. The buffer area shall be
maintained with and encouraged to use appropriate native vegetation
(reference to Appendix H of Pennsylvania Handbook of Best
Management Practices for Developing Area for plant lists). If the
applicable rear or side yard setback is less than 50 feet, the buffer
width may be reduced to 25% of the setback to a minimum of 10 feet. If
an existing buffer is legally prescribed (i.e., deed, covenant, easement,
etc.) and it exceeds the requirements of this chapter, the existing buffer
shall be maintained. [The municipality may select a smaller or larger
buffer width if desired, but the selected buffer may not be less than 10
feet.] This does not include lakes or wetlands.
F. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office must be provided to
the municipality. The issuance of an NPDES Construction Permit [or
permit coverage under the statewide General Permit (PAG-2)] satisfies
the requirements of Subsection A of this section.
A. In addition to control of the water quality volume, in order to minimize
the impact of stormwater runoff on downstream stream bank erosion,
§ 398-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-15
1:257
§ 398-16. Stormwater management districts.
the primary requirement is to design a BMP to detain the proposed
conditions two-year, twenty-four-hour design storm to the existing
conditions one-year flow using the SCS Type II distribution.
Additionally, provisions shall be made (such as adding a small orifice at
the bottom of the outlet structure) so that the proposed conditions oneyear
storm takes a minimum of 24 hours to drain from the facility from
a point where the maximum volume of water from the one-year storm is
captured. (i.e., the maximum water surface elevation is achieved in the
facility). Release of water can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the
invert of the water quality orifice is at the invert of the facility).
B. The minimum orifice size in the outlet structure to the BMP shall be a
three-inch diameter orifice and a trash rack shall be installed to prevent
clogging. On sites with small contributing drainage areas to this BMP
that do not provide enough runoff volume to allow a twenty-four-hour
attenuation with the three-inch orifice, the calculations shall be
submitted showing this condition. Orifice sizes less than three inches
can be utilized provided that the design will prevent clogging of the
intake.
C. In "no detention" areas (District C) only (see § 398-16), the objective is
not to attenuate the storms greater than the two-year recurrence
interval. This can be accomplished by configuring the outlet structure
not to control the larger storms, or by a bypass channel that diverts only
the two-year stormwater runoff into the basin, or conversely, diverts
flows in excess of the two-year storm away from the basin.
A. The Schuylkill River Watershed has been divided into stormwater
management districts as shown on the Management District Map in
Appendix D.137
(1) In addition to the quantity requirements specified on the Map, the
groundwater recharge (§ 398-13), water quality (§ 398-14), and
stream bank erosion control (§ 398-15), requirements shall be
implemented.
(2) Development sites located in each of the districts must control
proposed conditions runoff rates to existing conditions runoff rates
for the design storms in accordance with the table located on the
Map.
(3) For any site which proposes direct discharge, the site may only
utilize any available capacity in the downstream conveyance
system which is equivalent to the ratio of the proposed
development site acreage to the total watershed acreage to the
downstream conveyance system. Therefore, if the proposed
development site is 10% of the total watershed area, the increase in
137. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 398-15 KENHORST CODE § 398-16
1:258
runoff may only use up 10% of the documented available
downstream, capacity at peak flow.
B. General. Proposed condition rates of runoff from any regulated activity
shall not exceed the peak release rates of runoff prior to development
for the design storms specified on the Stormwater Management District
Watershed Map (Appendix D138) and in this section.
C. District boundaries. The boundaries of the Stormwater Management
Districts are shown on an Official Map that is available for inspection at
the municipal office. A copy of the Official Map at a reduced scale is
included in the Appendix D.139 The exact location of the Stormwater
Management District boundaries as they apply to a given development
site shall be determined by mapping the boundaries using the two-foot
topographic contours (or most accurate data required) provided as part
of the drainage plan.
D. Sites located in more than one district. For a proposed development site
located within two or more stormwater management district category
subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall meet the
Management District Criteria for which the discharge is located, as
indicated in this section. The calculated peak discharges shall apply
regardless of whether the grading plan changes the drainage area by
subarea. An exception to the above may be granted if discharges from
multiple subareas recombine in proximity to the discharge site. In this
case, peak discharge in any direction shall follow Management District
A criteria provided that the overall site discharge meets the
Management District Criteria for which the discharge is located.
E. Off-site areas. Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development
site are not subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable
peak runoff rates. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed
to safely convey off-site flows through the development site.
F. Site areas. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed
development activity differs significantly from the total site area, only
the proposed impact area utilizing stormwater management measures
shall be subject to the Management District Criteria. In other words,
unimpacted areas bypassing the stormwater management facilities
would not be subject to the Management District Criteria.
G. "No harm" option. For any proposed development site not located in a
provisional direct discharge district, the applicant has the option of
using a less restrictive runoff control (including no detention) if the
applicant can prove that "no harm" would be caused by discharging at a
higher runoff rate than that specified by the stormwater management
plan. The "no harm" option is used when an applicant can prove that the
proposed condition hydrographs can match existing conditions
138. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
139. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 398-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-16
1:259
hydrographs, or if it can be proved that the proposed conditions will
not cause increases in peaks at all points downstream. Proof of "no
harm" must be shown based upon the following downstream impact
evaluation, which shall include a downstream hydraulic capacity
analysis consistent with § 398-16H to determine if adequate hydraulic
capacity exists. The applicant shall submit to the municipality this
evaluation of the impacts due to increased downstream stormwater
flows in the watershed.
(1) The hydrologic regime of the site must be maintained.
(2) The downstream impact evaluation shall include hydrologic and
hydraulic calculations necessary to determine the impact of
hydrograph timing modifications due to the proposed development
upon a dam, highway, structure, natural point of restricted stream
flow or any stream channel section, established with the
concurrence of the municipality.
(3) The evaluation shall continue downstream until the increase in flow
diminishes due to additional flow from tributaries and/or stream
attenuation.
(4) The peak flow values to be used for downstream areas for the
design return period storms (two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-,
and one-hundred-year) shall be the values from the calibrated
model for the Schuylkill River Watershed. These flow values can be
obtained from the original Act 167 watershed stormwater
management plans.
(5) Applicant-proposed runoff controls which would generate
increased peak flow rates at storm drainage problem areas would,
by definition, be precluded from successful attempts to prove "no
harm," except in conjunction with proposed capacity improvements
for the problem areas consistent with § 398-16H.
(6) A financial distress shall not constitute grounds for the municipality
to approve the use of the "no-harm" option.
(7) Capacity improvements may be provided as necessary to
implement the "no-harm" option which proposes specific capacity
improvements to provide that a less stringent discharge control
would not create any harm downstream.
(8) Any "no-harm" justifications shall be submitted by the applicant as
part of the drainage plan submission per Article IV.
H. Downstream hydraulic capacity analysis. Any downstream capacity
hydraulic analysis conducted in accordance with this chapter shall use
the following criteria for determining adequacy for accepting increased
peak flow rates:
§ 398-16 KENHORST CODE § 398-16
1:260
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased runoff associated with a two-year return period event
within their banks at velocities consistent with protection of the
channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities shall be based upon
criteria included in the DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution
Control Program Manual.
(2) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
increased twenty-five-year return period runoff without creating
any hazard to persons or property.
(3) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must
pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be designed in
accordance with DEP Chapter 105 regulations (if applicable) and,
at minimum, pass the increased twenty-five-year return period
runoff.
I. Hardship option.
(1) The municipality may hear requests for waivers where it is alleged
that the provisions of this (Act 167) ordinance inflict unnecessary
hardship upon the applicant. The waiver request shall be in writing
and accompanied by the requisite fee based upon a fee schedule
adopted by the municipality. A copy of the waiver request shall be
provided to each of the following: municipality, municipal engineer,
municipal solicitor and Berks County Planning Commission. The
request shall fully document the nature of the alleged hardship.
(2) The municipality may grant a waiver, provided that all of the
following findings are made in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity of lot size or shape, or exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due
to such conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions
generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
Stormwater Management District in which the property is
located;
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter, including
the "no harm" provisions, and that the authorization of a
waiver is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of
the property;140
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant;
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-16
1:261
§ 398-17. Calculation methodology.
(d) That the waiver, if authorized, will represent the minimum
waiver that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue; and
(e) That financial hardship is not the criteria for granting of a
hardship waiver.
(3) In granting any waiver, the municipality may attach such conditions
and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of Act 167 and this chapter. If a hardship waiver is
granted, the applicant must still manage the quantity, velocity,
direction and quality of resulting storm runoff as is necessary to
prevent injury to health, safety or other property.
(a) For regulated activities in § 398-5D(1) and (2), the municipal
governing body shall hear requests for and decide on hardship
waiver requests on behalf of the municipality.
(b) For regulated activities in § 398-5D(4), (5), (6), (7) and (8), the
Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for and decide on
hardship waiver requests on behalf of the municipality.
(c) The municipality shall not waive the water quality provisions of
this chapter.
A. Stormwater runoff from all development sites with a drainage area of
greater than 200 acres shall be calculated using a generally accepted
calculation technique that is based on the NRCS Soil Cover Complex
Method. Table 398-17.1 summarizes acceptable computation methods
and the method selected by the design professional shall be based on
the individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular
site. The municipality may allow the use of the Rational Method to
estimate peak discharges from drainage areas that contain less than
200 acres. The Soil Complex Method shall be used for drainage areas
greater than 200 acres.
§ 398-16 KENHORST CODE § 398-17
1:262
Table 398-17.1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Plans
Method
Method
Developed by Applicability
TR-20
(or commercial
computer package
based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of full
hydrology computer model is
desirable or necessary.
TR-55
(or commercial
computer package
based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans within
limitations described in
TR-55.
HEC-1/HEC-HMS U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers
Applicable where use of full
hydrologic computer model is
desirable or necessary.
PSRM Penn State
University
Applicable where use of a
hydrologic computer model is
desirable or necessary;
simpler than TR-20 or HEC-1.
Rational Method (or
commercial
computer package
based on Rational
Method)
Emil Kuichling
(1889)
For sites less than 200 acres
and with time of
concentration less than 60
minutes (tc< 60 min), or as
approved by the municipality
and/or Municipal Engineer.
Other methods Varies Other computation
methodologies approved by
the municipality and/or
Municipal Engineer.
B. All calculations consistent with this chapter using the Soil Cover
Complex Method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the
various return period storms according to the region in which they are
located as presented in Table B-1 in Appendix B of this chapter.141 If a
hydrologic computer model such as PSRM or HEC-1/HEC-HMS is used
for stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration of rainfall shall be
24 hours. The SCS "S" curve shown in Figure B-1, Appendix B, of this
chapter shall be used for the rainfall distribution.
C. For the purposes of existing conditions flow rate determination,
undeveloped land shall be considered as "meadow" in good condition,
unless the natural ground cover generates a lower curve number or
141. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 398-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-17
1:263
§ 398-18. Other requirements.
Rational "C" value (i.e., forest), as listed in Table B-2 or B-3 in Appendix
B of this chapter.
D. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate times of concentration for overland flow
and return periods from the Design Storm Curves from Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Design Rainfall Curves (1986) (Figures
B-2 to B-4). Times of concentration for overland flow shall be calculated
using the methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time to
time by NRCS). Times of concentration for channel and pipe flow shall
be computed using Manning's equation.
E. Runoff Curve Numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions
to be used in the Soil Cover Complex Method shall be obtained from
Table B-2 in Appendix B of this chapter.142
F. Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for use
in the Rational Method shall be obtained from Table B-3 in Appendix B
of this chapter.
G. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning equation shall be used
for hydraulic computations, and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Values for Manning's roughness
coefficient (n) shall be consistent with Table B-4 in Appendix B of this
chapter.
H. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this chapter using any
generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.
I. The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the
performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by routing the
design storm hydrograph through these facilities using the Storage
Indication Method. For drainage areas greater than 200 acres in size,
the design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation
method that produces a full hydrograph (i.e., TR-20, TR-55, HEC-1,
PSRM). The municipality may approve the use of any generally
accepted full hydrograph approximation technique that shall use a total
runoff volume that is consistent with the volume from a method that
produces a full hydrograph.
A. Any stormwater facility located on state highway rights-of-way shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT).
B. Pretreatment shall be provided prior to infiltration.
142. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 398-17 KENHORST CODE § 398-18
1:264
§ 398-19. NPDES requirements.
Federal regulations approved October 1999 require operators of small
municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s) to obtain NPDES Phase II
permits from DEP by March 2003. (NPDES II is an acronym for the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Phase II Stormwater Permitting
Regulations.) This program affects all municipalities in "urbanized areas"
of the state. This definition applies to all Schuylkill River watershed
municipalities identified in Table III-1 of the Schuylkill River Stormwater
Management Plan Volume II as NPDES Phase II municipalities. Therefore,
these identified municipalities will be subject to the NPDES Phase II
requirements mandated by the Federal Clean Water Act144 as administered
by DEP. For more information on NPDES II requirements, contact the DEP
Regional Office.
C. All wet basin designs shall incorporate biologic controls consistent with
the West Nile Guidance found in Appendix F.143
D. Any other drainage conveyance facility that does not fall under Chapter
105 regulations must be able to convey, without damage to the drainage
structure or roadway, runoff from the twenty-five-year design storm
with a minimum 1.0 foot of freeboard measured below the lowest point
along the top of the roadway. Any facility that constitutes a dam as
defined in PaDEP Chapter 105 regulations may require a permit under
dam safety regulations. Any facility located within a PennDOT right-ofway
must meet PennDOT minimum design standards and permit
submission requirements.
E. The design of any proposed roadway drainage facilities shall be
consistent with the PennDOT Design Manual Part 2, Publication 13M.
F. Storm sewers must be able to convey proposed conditions runoff from a
one-hundred-year design storm without surcharging inlets, where
appropriate.
G. Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels,
and at all points of discharge.
H. The design of all stormwater management facilities shall incorporate
sound engineering principles and practices. The municipality reserves
the right to disapprove any design that would result in the construction
in or continuation of a stormwater problem area.
I. No stormwater detention facility shall be placed within 50 feet of a
special geologic feature. No stormwater conveyance facility shall be
constructed within 50 feet of a special geologic feature, unless it is
constructed of concrete pipe utilizing watertight joints, or an approved
equal.
143. Editor's Note: Appendix F is included as an attachment to this chapter.
144. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 398-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-19
1:265

ARTICLE IV
Drainage Plan Requirements
§ 398-20. General requirements.
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter, the preliminary or final
approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of
any building or occupancy permit, or the commencement of any earth
disturbance activity may not proceed until the property owner or applicant
or his/her agent has received written approval of a drainage plan from the
municipality and an adequate erosion and sediment control plan review by
the Conservation District.
§ 398-21. Exemptions.
A. General exemptions. The following land use activities are exempt from
the drainage plan submission requirements of this chapter:
(1) Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
(2) Agriculture when operated in accordance with a conservation plan
or erosion and sediment control plan (E&S) found adequate by the
Conservation District.
(3) Forest management operations which are following the
Department of Environmental Protection's management practices
contained in its publication "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Guidelines for Forestry" and are operating under an
approved E&S plan and must comply with stream buffer
requirements in § 398-14E. A copy of the approved E&S plan shall
be submitted to the municipality to prove exemption from the
requirements of the stormwater ordinance.
B. Stormwater quantity control exemption.
(1) Any regulated activity that meets the impervious area exemption
criteria in Table 398-21.1 shall not be required to submit a drainage
plan implementing the stormwater quantity controls, specified in
§ 398-16 of this chapter. These criteria shall apply to the total
development even if development is to take place in phases. The
date of the municipal ordinance adoption shall be the starting point
from which to consider tracts as "parent tracts" in which future
subdivisions and respective impervious area computations shall be
cumulatively considered. Impervious areas existing on the parent
tract prior to adoption of this chapter shall not be considered in
cumulative impervious area calculations for exemption purposes.
§ 398-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-21
1:267
Table 398-21.1
Impervious Area Exemption Criteria
Total Parcel Size
(acres)
Minimum
Distance*
(feet)
Impervious Area
Exemption
(square feet)
<1/4 0 2,500
>1/4 to 1 0 5,000
>1 to 2 100 10,000
>2 250 15,000
* Note: The minimum distance between the proposed impervious
area and/or stormwater controls/structures discharge point to
the downstream property line.
(2) Applicants whose activities are exempted under Subsection B(1)
above shall still be required to meet the groundwater recharge
(§ 398-13), water quality (§ 398-14), and stream bank erosion
(§ 398-15) controls of this chapter. Drainage plans in accordance
with § 398-22A(2), B(7), (8), (11), (15) and (22), and D(2) must still
be submitted. Any exemption must first be approved by the
municipality.
C. Additional exemption criteria.
(1) Exemption responsibilities. An exemption shall not relieve the
applicant from implementing such measures as are necessary to
protect the public health, safety, and property. An exemption shall
not relieve the applicant from providing adequate stormwater
management for regulated activities to meet the purpose of this
chapter; however, drainage plans will not have to be submitted to
the municipality.
(2) HQ and EV streams. This exemption shall not relieve the applicant
from meeting the special requirements for watersheds draining to
high quality (HQ) or exceptional value (EV) waters, identified and
Source Water Protection Areas (SWPA) and requirements for
nonstructural project design sequencing (§ 398-12), groundwater
recharge (§ 398-13), water quality (§ 398-14), and stream bank
erosion (§ 398-15).
(3) Drainage problems. If a drainage problem is documented or known
to exist downstream of, or expected from the proposed activity,
then the municipality may require a drainage plan submittal.
D. The municipality may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the municipality believes may
pose a threat to public health, safety, property or the environment.
§ 398-21 KENHORST CODE § 398-22
1:268
§ 398-22. Drainage plan contents.
The drainage plan shall consist of a general description of the project
including sequencing items described in § 398-12, calculations, maps and
plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and
erosion and sediment control plan by title and date. The cover sheet of
the computations and erosion and sediment control plan shall refer to the
associated maps by title and date. All drainage plan materials shall be
submitted to the municipality in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat,
and well organized; otherwise, the drainage plan shall not be accepted for
review and shall be returned to the applicant. The following items shall be
included in the drainage plan:
A. General.
(1) General description of the project, including those areas described
in § 398-12.
(2) General description of permanent stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications of the materials
to be used for stormwater management facilities.
(3) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all
stormwater management facilities.
(4) An erosion and sediment control plan, including all reviews and
approvals by the Conservation District.
(5) A general description of nonpoint source pollution controls.
(6) Regulated activities that create disconnected impervious areas
smaller than a cumulative total of 500 square feet are exempt from
the peak rate control and the SWM site plan preparation
requirements of this chapter.
B. Maps. Map(s) of the project area shall be submitted on twenty-fourinch-
by-thirty-six inch sheets and/or shall be prepared in a form that
meets the requirements for recording at the offices of the Recorder of
Deeds of Berks County. If Chapter 410, Subdivision and Land
Development, has more stringent criteria, then the more stringent
criteria shall apply. The contents of the map(s) shall include, but not be
limited to:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities or
other identifiable landmarks.
(2) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(3) Existing streams, lakes, ponds or other waters of the
commonwealth within the project area.
§ 398-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-22
1:269
(4) Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries, stream
buffers, existing drainage courses, areas of natural vegetation to be
preserved, and the total extent of the upstream area draining
through the site.
(5) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers,
and water lines within 50 feet of property lines.
(6) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
(7) Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount of
impervious area that would be added.
(8) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
(9) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(10) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
(11) The date of submission.
(12) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet; for tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale shall be one inch
equals no more than 100 feet.
(13) A North arrow.
(14) The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(15) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(16) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project.
(17) Location of all open channels.
(18) Overland drainage patterns and swales.
(19) A fifteen-foot wide access easement around all stormwater
management facilities that would provide ingress to and egress
from a public right-of-way.
(20) The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities.
(21) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would be
located on/off-site. All on/off-site facilities shall meet the
performance standards and design criteria specified in this
chapter.
§ 398-22 KENHORST CODE § 398-22
1:270
(22) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that any
revision to the approved drainage plan must be approved by the
municipality and the Conservation District.
(23) The following signature block for the Design Engineer:
"I, (Design Engineer), on this date (date of signature), hereby
certify that the drainage plan meets all design standards and
criteria of the Schuylkill River Watershed Act 167 Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
C. Supplemental information.
(1) A written description of the following information shall be
submitted:
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project
designed in accordance with § 398-12.
(b) Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this chapter.
(c) Stormwater management techniques to be applied both during
and after development.
(d) Expected project time schedule.
(e) Development stages (project phases) if so proposed.
(f) An operation and maintenance plan in accordance with
§ 398-31 of this chapter.
(2) An erosion and sediment control plan.
(3) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and peak flows)
on adjacent properties and on any existing municipal stormwater
collection system that may receive runoff from the project site.
(4) A Declaration of Adequacy and Highway Occupancy Permit from
the PennDOT District Office when utilization of a PennDOT storm
drainage system is proposed.
D. Stormwater management facilities.
(1) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail.
(2) When infiltration facilities such as seepage pits, beds or trenches
are used, the locations of existing and proposed septic tank
infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
(3) All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the
stormwater management facilities must be shown.
§ 398-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-23
1:271
§ 398-23. Plan submission.
The municipality shall require receipt of a complete plan, as specified in this
chapter. For any activities that require an NPDES permit for stormwater
discharges from construction activities, a PaDEP joint permit application, a
PennDOT highway occupancy permit, or any other permit under applicable
state or federal regulations, or are regulated under Chapter 105 (Dam
Safety and Waterway Management) or Chapter 106 (Floodplain
Management) of PaDEP's Rules and Regulations, the proof of application
for said permit(s) or approvals shall be part of the plan. The plan shall be
coordinated with the state and federal permit process and the municipal
SALDO review process.
§ 398-24. Drainage plan review.
A. For projects which require SALDO approval, the drainage plan shall be
submitted by the applicant as part of the preliminary plan submission
where applicable for the regulated activity.
B. For these regulated activities that do not require SALDO approval, see
§ 398-20, General requirements.
C. Six copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted and distributed as
follows:
(1) Two copies to the municipality accompanied by the requisite
municipal review fee, as specified in this chapter.
(2) Two copies to the Conservation District.
(3) One copy to the Municipal Engineer.
(4) One copy to the County Planning Commission/Department.
A. The Municipal Engineer shall review the drainage plan for consistency
with the adopted Schuylkill River Watershed Act 167 Stormwater
Management Plan. Any found incomplete shall not be accepted for
review and shall be returned to the applicant.
B. The Municipal Engineer shall review the drainage plan for any
subdivision or land development against the Chapter 410, Subdivision
and Land Development, provisions not superseded by this chapter.
C. The County Conservation District shall review and approve the E&S
plan for consistency with PaDEP's Chapter 102 regulations.
D. SWM site plan review and approval procedure.
(1) If a SWM site plan does not involve a subdivision and/or land
development, the review of the SWM site, recommendations,
approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval, i.e., the review
and decision period, shall occur within 45 days of submission to the
municipality. However, the municipality, in its sole discretion, may
§ 398-23 KENHORST CODE § 398-24
1:272
extend the review and decision period another 45 days due to the
nature of the application and/or site conditions. If an extension of
another 45 days is imposed or granted by the municipality beyond
the first forty-five-day review and decision period designated by
this subsection, the municipality shall notify the applicant in
writing and deliver such notice to said applicant within 15 days
of the decision to extend the review and decision period by the
municipality. If no extension is imposed or granted by the
municipality beyond the first forty-five-day review and decision
period, and no decision has been rendered by the municipality
within that period, the SWM site plan shall be deemed approved.
Similarly, if after a forty-five-day extension of the review and
decision period has been imposed or granted by the municipality,
and no decision has been rendered by the municipality within that
period, the SWM site plan shall be deemed approved.
(2) If a SWM site plan involves a subdivision and/or land development
plan, the period of time from the submission to the municipality of
the subdivision and/or land development plan application which
includes the SWM plan and the approval, approval with conditions,
or disapproval, i.e., review and decision period, shall be 90 days, in
accordance with the procedure for approval of plats in Section 508
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.145
(3) From the time an applicant for approval of a plat involving a
subdivision or land development plan, whether preliminary or final,
which includes a SWM site plan, is duly filed with the municipality,
no change or amendment of this chapter or other governing
ordinance or plan shall affect the decision on such application in
accordance with the provisions of the governing ordinances or
plans as they stood at the time the application was duly filed, as
specified in Section 508(4)(i) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.146
E. Decision notification procedure. In all cases, the decision of the
municipality to approve or disapprove the SWM site plan shall be in
writing and shall be delivered to the applicant no later than 15 days
following the decision. If the SWM site plan is disapproved, the written
decision by the municipality shall specify the defects in the application,
describe the requirements that were not met, and shall cite the
provisions of this chapter relied upon. If the SWM site plan is approved
with conditions, the notification to the applicant shall state the
acceptable conditions for approval and the time limit for satisfying such
conditions. The time limit for satisfying conditions of approval shall be
the time limit prescribed for conditional approval of subdivision and
land development plans as stated in Chapter 410, Subdivision and Land
145. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
146. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4)(i).
§ 398-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-24
1:273
§ 398-25. Modification of plans.
Development, or the Berks County Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, where applicable.
F. For regulated activities under this chapter that require an NPDES
permit application, the applicant shall forward a copy of the Municipal
Engineer's letter stating that the drainage plan is consistent with the
stormwater management plan to the Conservation District. PaDEP and
the Conservation District may consider the Municipal Engineer's review
comments in determining whether to issue a permit.
G. No building permits for any regulated activity specified in § 398-5 of
this chapter if the drainage plan has been found to be inconsistent with
the stormwater management plan, as determined by the Municipal
Engineer, or without considering the comments of the Municipal
Engineer. All required permits from PaDEP must be obtained prior to
issuance of a building permit.
H. The applicant shall be responsible for completing record drawings of all
stormwater management facilities included in the approved drainage
plan. The record drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with
the design plans shall be submitted to the Municipal Engineer for final
approval. In no case shall the municipality approve the record drawings
until the municipality receives a copy of an approved declaration of
adequacy and/or highway occupancy permit from the PennDOT District
Office, NPDES permit, and any other applicable permits or approvals,
from PaDEP or the Conservation District. The above permits and
approvals must be based on the record drawings.
I. The municipality's approval of a drainage plan shall be valid for a period
not to exceed five years. Commencing on the date that the municipality
signs the approved drainage plan. If stormwater management facilities
included in the approved drainage plan have not been constructed, or if
constructed, and record drawings of these facilities have not been
approved within this five-year time period, then the municipality may
consider the drainage plan disapproved and may revoke any and all
permits. Drainage plans that are considered disapproved by the
municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 398-26 of this
chapter.
A. A modification to a drainage plan under review by the municipality for a
development site that involves a change in stormwater management
facilities or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of
stormwater management facilities, or that is necessary because soil or
other conditions are not as stated on the drainage plan as determined
by the Municipal Engineer, shall require a resubmission of the modified
drainage plan consistent with § 398-23 of this chapter and be subject to
review as specified in § 398-24 of this chapter.
§ 398-24 KENHORST CODE § 398-25
1:274
§ 398-26. Resubmission of disapproved drainage plans.
A disapproved drainage plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the Municipal Engineer's concerns documented in writing and
addressed to the Municipal Secretary in accordance with § 398-23 of this
chapter and distributed accordingly and be subject to review as specified in
§ 398-24 of this chapter. The applicable municipal review and inspection fee
must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved drainage plan.
B. A modification to an already approved or disapproved drainage plan
shall be submitted to the municipality, accompanied by the applicable
municipal review and inspection fee. A modification to a drainage plan
for which a formal action has not been taken by the municipality shall
be submitted to the municipality, accompanied by the applicable
municipal review and inspection fee.
§ 398-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-26
1:275

ARTICLE V
Inspections
§ 398-27. Schedule of inspections.
A. The Municipal Engineer or his municipal designee shall inspect all
phases of the installation of the permanent stormwater management
facilities as deemed appropriate by the Municipal Engineer.
B. During any stage of the work, if the Municipal Engineer or his
municipal designee determines that the permanent stormwater
management facilities are not being installed in accordance with the
approved stormwater management plan, the municipality shall revoke
any existing building permits and issue a cease-and-desist order until a
revised drainage plan is submitted and approved, as specified in this
chapter.
C. A final inspection of all stormwater management facilities shall be
conducted by the Municipal Engineer or his municipal designee and to
confirm compliance with the approved drainage plan prior to the
issuance of any occupancy permit.
§ 398-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-27
1:277

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 398-28. Municipality drainage plan review and inspection fee.
Fees shall be established by the municipality to defray plan review and
construction inspection costs incurred by the municipality. All fees shall be
paid by the applicant at the time of drainage plan submission. Review and
inspection fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the municipal
governing body based on the size of the regulated activity and based
on the municipality's costs for reviewing drainage plans and conducting
inspections pursuant to § 398-27. The municipality shall periodically update
the review and inspection fee schedule to ensure that review costs are
adequately reimbursed.
§ 398-29. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall, at a minimum, cover:
A. Administrative costs.
B. The review of the drainage plan by the municipality and the Municipal
Engineer.
C. The site inspections.
D. The inspection of stormwater management facilities and drainage
improvements during construction.
E. The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities and drainage improvements presented in the drainage plan.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
§ 398-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-29
1:279

ARTICLE VII
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 398-30. Performance guarantee.
§ 398-31. Responsibilities for operations and maintenance of
stormwater controls and BMPs.
A. For subdivisions and land developments, the applicant shall provide a
financial guarantee to the municipality for the timely installation and
proper construction of all stormwater management controls as:
required by the approved drainage plan equal to or greater than the full
construction cost of the required controls; or in the amount and method
of payment provided for in Chapter 410, Subdivision and Land
Development.
B. For other regulated activities, the municipality may require a financial
guarantee from the applicant.
C. At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the release of
the performance guarantee, the applicant or his representatives shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified person verifying that all permanent
facilities have been constructed according to the plans and
specifications and approved revisions thereto.
(2) Provide a set of record drawings.
D. After the municipality receives the certification, a final inspection shall
be conducted by the municipal engineer or designee to certify
compliance with this chapter.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of a Stormwater Control
and BMP Operations and Maintenance plan which describes how the
permanent (e.g., postconstruction) stormwater controls and BMPs will
be properly operated and maintained.
B. The following items shall be included in the stormwater control and
BMP operations and maintenance plan:
(1) Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the requirements
for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Berks
County, and shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-sixinch
sheets. The contents of the maps(s) shall include, but not be
limited to:
(a) Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater controls and BMPs;
(b) The location of the project site relative to highways, municipal
boundaries or other identifiable landmarks;
§ 398-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-31
1:281
(c) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet, or others as
appropriate;
(d) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within
the project site area;
(e) Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, and areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved;
(f) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and water lines within 50 feet of property lines of the
project site;
(g) Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative
cover, including the type and amount of impervious area that
would be added;
(h) Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings;
and
(i) A fifteen-foot wide access easement around all stormwater
controls and BMPs that would provide ingress to and egress
from a public right-of-way.
(2) A description of how each permanent stormwater control and BMP
will be operated and maintained, and the identity of the person(s)
responsible for operations and maintenance;
(3) The name of the project site, the name and address of the owner of
the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the
plan; and
(4) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater controls and BMPs are fixtures that can be altered or
removed only after approval by the municipality.
C. The stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan for
the project site shall establish responsibilities for the continuing
operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater controls and
BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements
are to be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater controls and
BMPs may also be dedicated to and maintained by the municipality;
(2) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single
ownership, or if sewers and other public improvements are to be
privately owned and maintained, then the operation and
maintenance of stormwater controls and BMPs shall be the
responsibility of the owner or private management entity.
§ 398-31 KENHORST CODE § 398-31
1:282
§ 398-32. Municipality review of stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
§ 398-33. Adherence to approved stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater control
and BMP required by an approved stormwater control and BMP operations
and maintenance plan, or to allow the property to remain in a condition
which does not conform to an approved stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
§ 398-34. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately
owned stormwater controls and BMPs.
§ 398-35. Stormwater management easements.
D. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The municipality reserves
the right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance
responsibility for any or all of the stormwater controls and BMPs.
A. The municipality shall review the stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan for consistency with the purposes and
requirements of this chapter, and any permits issued by DEP.
B. The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing whether the
stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan is
approved.
C. The municipality may require a "record drawing" of all stormwater
controls and BMPs, and an explanation of any discrepancies with the
operations and maintenance plan.
A. The property owner shall sign an operations and maintenance
agreement with the municipality covering all stormwater controls and
BMPs that are to be privately owned. The agreement shall be
substantially the same as the agreement in Appendix A of this
chapter.147
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of
all permanent stormwater controls and BMPs. The agreement shall be
subject to the review and approval of the municipality.
A. Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for
off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the Municipal
Engineer.
147. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 398-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-35
1:283
§ 398-36. Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
facilities.
§ 398-37. Recording of approved stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan and related agreements.
§ 398-38. Municipal stormwater control and BMP operation and
maintenance fund.
B. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property
owner if necessary for: access for inspections and maintenance; or
preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and
detention areas and other stormwater controls and BMPs, by persons
other than the property owner. The purpose of the easement shall be
specified in any agreement under § 398-34.
A. Prior to final approval of the site's drainage plan, the applicant shall
sign and record the Maintenance Agreement contained in Appendix
A148 which is attached and made part hereof, covering all stormwater
control facilities that are to be privately owned.
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all facilities.
The Maintenance Agreement shall be subject to the review and
approval of the municipal solicitor and governing body.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent stormwater controls and
BMPs will be placed, constructed or implemented, as described in the
stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan, shall
record the following documents in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds
for Berks County, within 15 days of approval of the stormwater control
and BMP operations plan by the municipality:
(1) The operations and maintenance plan, or a summary thereof;
(2) Operations and maintenance agreements under § 398-34; and
(3) Easements under § 398-35.
B. The municipality may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
this section.
A. Persons installing stormwater controls or BMPs shall be required to pay
a specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater Control and BMP
Operation and Maintenance Fund to help defray costs of periodic
inspections and maintenance expenses. The amount of the deposit shall
be determined as follows:
148. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 398-35 KENHORST CODE § 398-38
1:284
(1) If the stormwater control or BMP is to be privately owned and
maintained, the deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections
performed by the municipality for a period of 10 years, as
estimated by the municipal engineer. After that period of time,
inspections will be performed at the expense of the municipality.
(2) If the stormwater control or BMP is to be owned and maintained by
the municipality, the deposit shall cover the estimated costs for
maintenance and inspections for 10 years. The municipal engineer
will establish the estimated costs utilizing information submitted by
the applicant.
(3) The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to present
worth of the annual series values. The municipal engineer shall
determine the present worth equivalents, which shall be subject to
the approval of the governing body.
B. If a stormwater control or BMP is proposed that also serves as a
recreation facility (e.g., ballfield, lake), the municipality may reduce or
waive the amount of the maintenance fund deposit based upon the
value of the land for public recreation purpose.
C. If at some future time a stormwater control or BMP (whether publicly or
privately owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers or
other storage facility, the unused portion of the maintenance fund
deposit will be applied to the cost of abandoning the facility and
connecting to the storm sewer system or other facility. Any amount of
the deposit remaining after the costs of abandonment are paid will be
returned to the depositor.
D. If stormwater controls or BMPs are accepted by the municipality for
dedication, the municipality may require persons installing stormwater
controls or BMPs to pay a specified amount to the Municipal
Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund, to
help defray costs of operations and maintenance activities. The amount
may be determined as follows:
(1) If the stormwater control or BMP is to be owned and maintained by
the municipality, the amount shall cover the estimated costs for
operations and maintenance for 10 years, as determined by the
municipality.
(2) The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual
series values.
E. If a stormwater control or BMP is proposed that also serves as a
recreation facility (e.g., ball field, lake), the municipality may adjust the
amount due accordingly.
F. Long-term maintenance. The municipality shall require applicants to
pay a fee to the Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund to cover long-
§ 398-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-38
1:285
term maintenance of stormwater control and best management
practices.
G. Stormwater-related problems. The municipality may require applicants
to pay a fee to the Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund to cover
stormwater related problems which may arise from the land
development and earth disturbance.
§ 398-38 KENHORST CODE § 398-38
1:286
ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 398-39. Prohibited discharges.
A. No person in the municipality shall allow, or cause to allow, stormwater
discharges into the municipality's separate storm sewer system which
are not composed entirely of stormwater, except: as provided in
Subsection B below; and discharges allowed under a state or federal
permit.
B. Discharges which may be allowed based on a finding by the
municipality that the discharge(s) do not significantly contribute to
pollution to surface waters of the commonwealth, are:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources including dechlorinated water line and fire
hydrant flushings.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(5) Air-conditioning condensate.
(6) Water from individual residential car washing.
(7) Spring water from crawl space pumps.
(8) Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains.
(9) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(10) Lawn watering.
(11) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(12) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater.
C. In the event that the municipality determines that any of the discharges
identified in § 398-39B significantly contribute to pollution of waters of
the commonwealth, or is so notified by DEP, the municipality will notify
the responsible person to cease the discharge.
D. Upon notice provided by the municipality under § 398-39C, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the
municipality, to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of
pollution caused by the discharge.
§ 398-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-39
1:287
§ 398-40. Prohibited connections.
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in § 398-39B
above:
§ 398-41. Roof drains.
§ 398-42. Alteration of BMPs.
E. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter the separate storm sewer system,
and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks; and
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the separate storm sewer system which has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records, and approved by the
municipality.
A. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches in order to promote overland flow and infiltration/
percolation of stormwater where advantageous to do so. When it is
more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, then
it shall be permitted on a case-by-case basis by the municipality.
B. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm
sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be
permitted by the municipality.
C. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing
stormwater control or BMP, unless it is part of an approved
maintenance program, without the written approval of the municipality.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a stormwater control or BMP or within a drainage easement, which
would limit or alter the functioning of the stormwater control or BMP,
without the written approval of the municipality.
§ 398-39 KENHORST CODE § 398-42
1:288
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 398-43. Right of entry.
§ 398-44. Public nuisance.
§ 398-45. Enforcement generally.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the municipality to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operation and maintenance of the stormwater controls or
BMPs in regard to any aspect governed by this chapter.
B. Stormwater control and BMP owners and operators shall allow persons
working on behalf of the municipality ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater control or BMP in the
municipality such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/
or sampling of the discharges from such stormwater control or BMP.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the municipality access to a
stormwater control or BMP is a violation of this article.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Whenever the municipality finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the municipality may
order compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such
notice may require, without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) The implementation of stormwater controls and BMPs; and
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater controls and BMPs.
§ 398-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-45
1:289
§ 398-46. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
§ 398-47. Violations and penalties.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Said notice
may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done
by the municipality or designee and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Any building, land development or other permit or approval issued by
the municipality may be suspended or revoked by the municipality for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit;
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the regulated activity;
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard
or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the municipality
when:
(1) The Municipal Engineer or designee has inspected and approved
the corrections to the stormwater controls and BMPs, or the
elimination of the hazard or nuisance; and/or
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation of this chapter, law,
or rule and regulation has been corrected.
C. A permit or approval which has been revoked by the municipality
cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under
the procedures outlined in this chapter.
A. Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.149
B. In addition, the municipality, through its solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 398-45 KENHORST CODE § 398-47
1:290
§ 398-48. Notification.
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued
hereunder, the municipality shall provide written notification of the
violation. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Failure to comply
within the time specified shall subject such person to the penalty provisions
of this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not
prevent the municipality from pursuing any and all remedies. It shall be
the responsibility of the owner of the real property on which any regulated
activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred, to comply with
the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 398-49. Enforcement.
The municipal governing body is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter. All inspections regarding compliance
with the drainage plan shall be the responsibility of the municipal engineer
or other qualified persons designated by the municipality.
law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate
forms of remedy or relief.
A. A set of design plans approved by the municipality shall be on file at the
site throughout the duration of the construction activity. Periodic
inspections may be made by the municipality or designee during
construction.
B. Adherence to approved plan. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to undertake any regulated activity under § 398-5 on any
property except as provided for in the approved drainage plan and
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to
alter or remove any control structure required by the drainage plan
pursuant to this chapter or to allow the property to remain in a
condition which does not conform to the approved drainage plan.
C. At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the release of
the performance guarantee, the owner or his representatives shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified person verifying that all permanent
facilities have been constructed according to the plans and
specifications and approved revisions thereto.
(2) Provide a set of as-built (record) drawings.
D. After receipt of the certification by the municipality, a final inspection
shall be conducted by the municipal engineer or designated
representative to certify compliance with this chapter.
§ 398-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-49
1:291
§ 398-50. Appeals.
E. Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit and at the request of the
applicant, the governing body will schedule a hearing to discuss the
noncompliance if there is no immediate danger to life, public health or
property. The expense of a hearing shall be the owner's responsibility.
F. Occupancy permit. An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the
certification of completion pursuant to § 398-49C(1) has been secured.
The occupancy permit shall be required for each lot owner and/or
applicant for all subdivisions and land development in the municipality.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Borough of Kenhorst or its
designee may appeal to the Borough within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Borough of Kenhorst may
appeal to the County Court of Common Pleas in the County where the
activity has taken place within 30 days of the municipal decision.
§ 398-49 KENHORST CODE § 398-50
1:292
Chapter 404
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumpsters — See Ch. 205.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 341.
Outdoor sales — See Ch. 368.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 398.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
410.
§ 398-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-50
1:293

ARTICLE I
Excavations and Openings
[Adopted 8-3-1950 by Ord. No. 89 (Ch. 19, Part 1, of the 1973 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 404-1. Permit required for opening or excavation of street or
thoroughfare.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any opening
or excavation in or under any street, alley or thoroughfare within the limits
of said Borough unless and until a permit therefor be secured from the
Borough Secretary, for each separate undertaking, such permit to be in a
form prescribed by said Secretary. The police officers of the Borough shall
promptly prohibit any work being done without a proper permit or contrary
to the terms hereof.
§ 404-2. Permit fee; permit to specify details. [Amended 12-1-2016
by Ord. No. 582]
The charge for said permit shall, for each separate undertaking, be in
an amount as set from time to time by resolution of Borough Council.
Every such permit shall specify where said opening or excavation may
be made together with the probable length, width and depth thereof, and
such further information as the Secretary may require; and any additional
surface to be disturbed may be endorsed on the permit by the said
Secretary; provided, that, emergency breaks or leaks may be repaired and
a permit therefor secured within 24 hours.
§ 404-3. Safety precautions; liability for damage.
It shall be the duty of any person, or persons, firms or corporations to
whom a permit is issued or by whom any opening or excavation is made as
aforesaid to provide and maintain proper and adequate guards, barriers and
lights to prevent accidents, and they shall assume all risks and be liable for
all damages by reason of the openings and excavations and by reason of any
failure to properly fill the hole or trench and maintain the disturbed surface
in a safe condition.
§ 404-4. Standard procedures. [Amended 4-29-1975 by Ord. No.
338]
A. Excavation. Excavations within existing cartways of the Borough shall
be done with hand-operated pneumatic tools and hydraulically operated
equipment or by such other methods as will furnish a clean cut in the
pavement and base without undue disturbance to subgrade or
fragmentation of surrounding street or roadway. All excess excavation
materials shall be the responsibility of the person, firm, corporation,
bureau or utility for proper disposal.
§ 404-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404-4
1:295
B. Backfilling. Backfill within the cartway area shall consist of suitable
material acceptable by the Engineer compacted in layers not to exceed
six inches in depth to a point 12 inches from road surface. The trench
area from the road surface to a minimum depth of 12 inches shall
consist of Pennsylvania Department of Transportation No. 2RC crushed
aggregate placed and properly compacted in six-inch layers.
C. Restoration.
(1) Temporary restoration.
(a) Method I.
[1] First application. Bituminous material upon the subbase at
the rate of 0.5 gallon per square yard followed by
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation No. 1B
crushed aggregate spread at the rate of 30 to 35 pounds
per square yard, thoroughly rolled and compacted.
[2] Second application. Bituminous material upon the No. 1B
crushed aggregate noted above at the rate of 0.5 gallon
per square yard followed by additional Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation No. 1B crushed aggregate
spread at the rate of 30 pounds to 35 pounds per square
yard, thoroughly rolled and compacted.
(b) Method II. In lieu of Subsection C(1)(a), as noted above, an
alternate method of temporary restoration consisting of
bituminous stockpile patching material type 2P-B or 2P-C, two
inches thick, may be placed and properly compacted within the
trench area.
(c) Responsibility. All temporary restoration shall be maintained
by the person, firm, corporation, bureau or utility for a
minimum of 90 days after backfilling or as otherwise directed
by the Borough Engineer. During this period, any sinking or
other deterioration of the trench area shall be repaired.
(2) Permanent restoration.
(a) Method I. All temporary restoration shall be removed from the
trench area and additional material immediately adjacent
thereto for a minimum distance of 12 inches, in order to
accommodate permanent restoration. The entire area shall
then be properly rolled and compacted. Upon the compacted
subbase and/or subgrade shall be constructed an eight-inchthick
crushed aggregate base course meeting the
requirements of Section 310, Form 408, latest revision,
followed by a one-and-one-half-inch-thick ID-2A bituminous
concrete binder course and one-inch-thick ID-2A bituminous
concrete wearing course. Upon completion of permanent
restoration, the jointure of existing cartway and new
§ 404-4 KENHORST CODE § 404-4
1:296
construction shall be sealed with hot bituminous material of
the class and type designated for the surface course for a
distance of six inches on both sides thereof.
(b) Method II. All temporary restoration shall be removed from the
trench area and additional material immediately adjacent
thereto for a minimum distance of 12 inches, in order to
accommodate permanent restoration. The entire area shall
then be properly rolled and compacted. Upon the compacted
subbase and/or subgrade shall be constructed a five-inch-thick
bituminous concrete base course followed by a one-and-onehalf-
inch-thick ID-2A bituminous concrete wearing course.
Upon completion of permanent restoration, the jointure of
existing cartway and new construction shall be sealed with hot
bituminous material of the class and type designated for the
surface course for a distance of six inches on both sides
thereof.
(c) Method III. During excavation, should it be determined by
visual observation by the Engineer that the street or cartway
combined depth of surface and base is three inches or less in
thickness in lieu of permanent restoration heretofore
mentioned in Subsection C(2)(a) and (b), bituminous material
meeting the requirements of Section 470, Form 408, latest
revision, shall be applied to temporary restoration (Method I
only — Method II not included) at the rate of 0.5 gallon/s.y.
followed by Pennsylvania Department of Transportation No. 1B
crushed aggregate spread at the rate of 30 pounds to 35
pounds per square yard, thoroughly rolled and compacted.
D. Responsibility. The person, firm, corporation, bureau or utility
responsible for permanent restoration shall maintain and repair said
restoration for a period of two years following completion of permanent
restoration to the satisfaction of the Borough.
E. Guidelines and plan. All work shall be in accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Form 408, latest revision, Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Form M 945-B, latest revision, and as
shown on the plan prepared by Spotts, Stevens and McCoy, Inc.,
Borough Engineers, being Plan No. 7026-049-A-001, attached hereto
and made a part hereof.150
F. Miscellaneous. All excavation and restoration within rights-of-way and/
or easements of the Borough shall be subject to replacement in kind
acceptable to the Engineer/Building Inspector and in compliance with
Borough ordinances.
G. State and Borough forms and regulations. Should the forms,
specifications and/or regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
150. Editor's Note: Said plan is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 404-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404-4
1:297
§ 404-5. Notice to repair excavation; time limit; Borough to make
repair at expense of permittee.
If the work in filling or maintaining the surface shall not be promptly or shall
be unskillfully or improperly or incompletely done, the Borough Engineer,
or any other person designated by Council, may cause the same to be done
in the manner he deems proper after at least 10 days' written notice to
the permittee that the same be done; and the expense thereof, including
any overhead expense, shall be charged to the permittee together with 10%
additional as a penalty. No permit shall be issued to any person, firm or
corporation in default under this section until the costs and penalty herein
provided are paid, and no further permit shall be granted to any person,
firm or corporation unless and until the openings or excavations already
caused by him or it have been properly filled and the surface maintained
as aforesaid, in a safe condition and at the proper grade, of which said
Engineer, or other person designated, shall be the judge.
§ 404-6. Borough does not assume responsibility for excavation or
opening.
In no case shall any opening or excavation made by any person, firm or
corporation be considered in the charge or care of the Borough or any
officer or person employed by the Borough, and no officer or employe is
authorized to in any way take or assume any jurisdiction over any such
opening or excavation. However, if the person, firm or corporation causing
the opening to be made deems it to their advantage to employ the same
workmen as do similar work for the Borough, they may do so.
§ 404-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-29-1975 by Ord. No.
339]
Any violation of this article shall be considered a summary violation, and
any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon summary conviction before a Magisterial District Judge, be fined a
sum not to exceed $300, together with costs thereof, and, in default of the
payment thereof, undergo imprisonment in the Berks County Prison for a
period not to exceed 90 days.
§ 404-8. Deposits. [Added 10-17-1963 by Ord. No. 204; 4-29-1975 by
Ord. No. 331; 4-29-1975 by Ord. No. 339151]]
or Borough, which are incorporated by reference in this article be
subsequently amended, replaced or in any other way changed, this
article shall be automatically amended to incorporate herein the
subsequent, similar forms, specifications and/or regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and Borough. It is the intent of this
article to achieve a strong degree of uniformity therewith.
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 404-4 KENHORST CODE § 404-8
1:298
A. Deposit for excavation required. In addition to all permits now or
hereafter required, and all permit fees required to be paid therefor, all
persons, firms or corporations, or their agents, shall deposit in cash
such sum as shall be set by resolution of Borough Council with the
Borough Secretary before digging or excavating within any street
within the Borough or removing or destroying the paving thereof,
except for the installation or repair of gas and water lines.
B. Excess cost of repair over deposit to be paid by permit holder. If the
Borough shall restore the street area affected to grade or repave the
same, and if the cost of said regrading and repaving said street area
and maintaining the same for a period of six months thereafter shall be
in excess of the deposit amount required by Subsection A of this
section, then the person, firm or corporation digging or excavating said
street area or removing or destroying said paving, shall pay the excess
of said cost over the required deposit to the Borough upon the
completion of said regrading or repaving, and in the case of
maintenance, upon and at the times said maintenance is required.
C. Partial refund of deposit authorized under certain conditions. If the
Borough should restore the street area affected to grade or repave the
same, and if the cost of said regrading and repaving said street area
and maintaining the same for six months after said regrading and
repaving are completed, is less than the deposit amount required by
Subsection A of this section, then the Borough shall, at the end of six
months after said regrading and repaving are completed, refund said
excess to the person, firm or corporation paying said deposit.
D. Refund of deposit authorized if permit holder restores street. If the
person, firm, or corporation who digs or excavates said street area or
removes or destroys the paving thereof, at its own expense, restores
said street area to grade, and repaves the same in a manner
satisfactory to the Borough Engineer, and maintains the said area for a
period of six months after said regrading or repaving, then the Borough
shall, at the end of six months after said regrading and repaving are
completed, refund said deposit to the person, firm or corporation who
paid the same.
§ 404-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404-8
1:299

ARTICLE II
Use of Construction Equipment on Streets and Sidewalks
[Adopted 8-7-1969 by Ord. No. 268 (Ch. 19, Part 3, of the 1973 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 404-9. Use of supports for construction equipment on streets and
sidewalks regulated.
No person shall place or cause to be placed, any leg, brace, or other
temporary support for any backhoe, crane, derrick, or similar type
equipment upon any public street or sidewalk surface within the Borough
of Kenhorst, without first placing adequate pads, planks, mats, or other
protection under any such leg, brace, or other temporary support for said
equipment whenever such leg, brace, or other temporary support would
otherwise rest upon the street or sidewalk surface.
§ 404-10. Use of streets and sidewalks by construction equipment
regulated.
No person shall use or operate, or permit to be used or operated, any
vehicle with metal cleats or metal treads upon any public street or sidewalk
surface in said Borough without first placing adequate protection on said
cleats, or treads, or without first placing pads, planks, mats, or similar
protective material between said street or sidewalk surface and said cleats
or treads.
§ 404-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-29-1975 by Ord. No.
333; 4-29-1975 by Ord. No. 339152]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 404-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404-11
1:301

ARTICLE III
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 7-5-1973 by Ord. No. 308 (Ch. 19, Part 5, of the 1973 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 404-12. Requirement for removal of snow and ice.
The owner, occupant or tenant of any real estate fronting upon or alongside
of any of the streets of the Borough of Kenhorst is hereby required to
remove, or cause to be removed, from any paved or unpaved sidewalk or
pedestrian walkway in front of or alongside of said real estate all snow, ice
or sleet thereon fallen or formed within 12 hours after the same shall have
ceased to fall or to form. Provided: that snow or ice that has ceased to fall or
to be formed after 6:00 of any evening may be removed at any time before
6:00 p.m. of the following day.
§ 404-13. Responsibility for removal of snow and ice.
The owner of such real estate shall be responsible for conforming to the
requirements of this article where such real estate is occupied by such
owner or is unoccupied; the tenant or occupier thereof where such real
estate is occupied by such tenant or occupier only; and the owner thereof
where the real estate is a multiple-business or multiple dwelling property,
occupied by more than one tenant or occupier.
§ 404-14. Authority for Borough to remove ice and snow and collect
expenses and additional amount.
In any case where the owner, occupant or tenant as aforesaid, shall fail,
neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this article within
the time limit prescribed in § 404-12, the Borough may proceed immediately
to clear all snow and/or ice from the sidewalk of such delinquent, and to
collect the expenses of such removal, with an additional amount of 10%
from such owner, occupant or tenant, as the case may be, which may be in
addition to any fine or penalty imposed under § 404-15 of this article.
§ 404-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-29-1975 by Ord. No.
335; 4-29-1975 by Ord. No. 339153]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 404-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404-16
1:303
§ 404-16. Unlawful to cast snow and/or ice in streets of the
Borough. [Added 3-1-1984 by Ord. No. 376; amended 12-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 532154]
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether owner, occupant, tenant, or
agent thereof, in removing snow or ice from property fronting upon or
alongside of any of the streets of the Borough of Kenhorst, to cast, plow or
deposit snow or ice from said property, its sidewalks, driveways or other
areas, onto the streets, cartways or public roads of the Borough of Kenhorst
at any time after said streets, cartways or public roads of the Borough have
been cleared of snow and ice by plowing, shoveling and salting or cindering
thereof by the Borough. It is the property owner's responsibility to inform
any snow removal contractors of the requirements presented herein.
§ 404-17. Unlawful to relocate any accumulation of snow. [Added
1-5-1995 by Ord. No. 436]
It shall be unlawful for any person to relocate any accumulation of snow
in the Borough streets or public pedestrian walkway other than to private
property which will cause or tend to cause an obstruction to vehicular traffic
or hamper snow removal efforts by the Borough.
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 404-16 KENHORST CODE § 404-17
1:304
ARTICLE IV
Sidewalks, Curbs and Driveway Entrances
[Adopted 12-6-1979 by Ord. No. 360 (Ch. 19, Part 2, of the 1973
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 404-18. Definitions and interpretations.
The following words, when used in this article, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise, shall be defined as follows:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kenhorst.
COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Kenhorst.
ENGINEER — The Engineer of the Borough of Kenhorst.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The Manager of the Borough of Kenhorst.
INSPECTING OFFICER — The Building Inspector as appointed by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Kenhorst or, in his absence, the Borough
Engineer or Borough Manager.
SIDEWALK AREA — The area between the street curbline and the rightof-
way line of a street as shown on the topographical survey, recorded
subdivision plan or as established by ordinance.
STREET — As defined in Chapter 410, Subdivision and Land Development,
of the Code of the Borough of Kenhorst (see § 410-39). It includes street,
avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct,
and any other ways used or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or
pedestrians, whether public or private. Included is all the land between the
street right-of-way lines, whether improved or unimproved. "Street" may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, division strips, or other
areas within the street right-of-way lines.
§ 404-19. Grading, construction and repair; permits. [Amended
12-1-2005 by Ord. No. 498]
A. The grading of sidewalk areas and the construction and repairing of
sidewalks, curbs, and driveway entrances along and in the streets of the
Borough shall be done by the owner or owners of the lot or lots abutting
thereon in accordance with the lines and grades as established by
ordinance, as shown on the topographical survey of the Borough, or as
shown on recorded subdivision plans and in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
B. It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or
other entity to grade any sidewalk area, construct or repair any
sidewalk, curb, or driveway entrance within the Borough except in
compliance with the provisions of this article.
C. Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity desiring to grade any
sidewalk area or to construct or repair any sidewalk, curb, or driveway
entrance shall first obtain a permit therefor from the proper official of
§ 404-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404-19
1:305
the Borough for issuing the aforesaid permit only after the following
conditions have been satisfied:
(1) The filing of a written application with said Borough official upon
such form as approved by Council setting forth the location,
purpose, and description of the improvement.
(2) The approval of said application by the Inspecting Officer.
(3) The payment of an established fee in accordance with a fee
schedule adopted by resolution shall be paid to the aforesaid
Borough official at the time of filing the written application.
(4) In all cases of new construction of curb, sidewalk, or driveway
entrance, or resetting any curb, sidewalk, or driveway entrance, in
excess of 10 feet in length, and in the case of any other type work
as specifically requested by the applicant, the Borough Engineer or
Borough Manager shall furnish applicant with necessary lines and/
or grades, the cost of which, in accordance with a fee schedule
adopted by resolution, shall be paid by the applicant to the proper
Borough official at the time of filing the written application.
D. A permit shall be effective for a period of 90 days from the date of
issuance and may, prior to expiration of the original or renewal period,
be renewed by the proper Borough official for a period of 90 days by the
person, firm, corporation, or other entity to whom the original permit
was issued, providing that reference points have not been disturbed or
destroyed. When reference points have been disturbed, they shall be
reestablished at the applicant's expense.
E. The form of application and permit shall be adopted from time to time
by Borough Council by resolution. A copy thereof shall remain on file at
the Borough office.
F. From time to time, Borough Council shall, by resolution, adopt details
and specifications for the construction and repair of curbs, sidewalks,
and driveway entrances, which shall remain on file and available at the
Borough office.
G. All sidewalk areas shall be graded, and all sidewalks, curbs and
driveway entrances shall be constructed, reconstructed, or repaired, all
to be in conformance with the most recent details and specifications
adopted by Council. On neglect or refusal by the owner or owners of the
abutting lot or lots to grade any sidewalk areas, to construct or repair
any sidewalk, to construct, set, reset, or repair any curb or driveway
entrance, within 60 days after notice so to do from the Borough through
its proper officials, or longer time established by the Council, said
Council shall cause the same to be done and shall collect from said
owner or owners of the lot or lots the cost thereof as provided for in the
Borough Code.155
155. Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 404-19 KENHORST CODE § 404-19
1:306
H. Straight curb shall be constructed in all areas where new curbing
construction is required.
I. All curbs, gutters, combination curbs and gutters, sidewalks, and front
or rear retaining walls, shall be constructed only on the grades and
upon the lines furnished by the Borough Engineer. All separate curbs
shall be not less than seven inches thick at the top and not less than
eight inches thick at the bottom and shall not extend less than 20 inches
in depth from the top of the finished curb. All separate gutters shall be
not less than 24 inches wide and eight inches thick. In all cases, the
depth of the gutter from the top of the curb to the flow line of the gutter
shall be eight inches. The outside edge of all sidewalks shall be set back
three feet from the inside of the curb and all sidewalks shall be not less
than five inches in thickness. Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of
four feet. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this
article, all sidewalks, curbs and gutters must conform as to size with
previously constructed sidewalks, curbs and gutters on the same block.
The outside edge of all other retaining walls shall be two feet or more in
the back of the alley line as established on the topographical survey of
the Borough of Kenhorst and shall be constructed of such height and
thickness as shall be approved by the Borough Engineer. All curbs,
gutters, combination curbs and gutters, and sidewalks shall be
constructed of concrete with a minimum strength of 3,000 PSI. All
sidewalk areas shall have a one-fourth-inch pitch per foot. [Amended
6-1-2017 by Ord. No. 584]
J. Sidewalk areas not graded, or sidewalks, curbs, and driveway
entrances not hereafter laid in conformity with the provisions of this
article and with the established grades and lines shown on the
topographical survey of the Borough, on recorded subdivision plan, or
as set forth by ordinance are hereby declared to be nuisances and must
be taken up and regraded and/or relaid according to the provisions of
this article within 60 days after notice to the owner or owners so to do
by Borough Council. Upon failure of said owner or owners thereof to
regrade grade said sidewalk area and/or relay said sidewalk, curb, or
driveway entrance within the time stipulated, Borough Council shall
cause the same to be done in the manner herein provided, and Borough
Council shall collect the cost thereof from the owner or owners of the
lot or lots as provided in the Borough Code.
K. Sidewalks, curbs, and driveway entrances which do not comply with the
most recently adopted details and specifications shall not be permitted
to be repaired if:
(1) In the case of curbings, more than 20% of any scored section must
be replaced, then the curb shall be sawed and the entire section
replaced, with expansion joints placed at both ends of the section.
The type of curbing to be used in replacement shall be straight
unless a curb and gutter combination is authorized by the
Inspecting Officer.
§ 404-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404-19
1:307
(2) In case of concrete sidewalks, more than 20% of the area of any
scored block requires replacement, then said concrete block shall
be replaced in its entirety; provided, however, where a portion of
such a concrete block is removed for installation or repairs to
utilities, then said block shall be replaced in its entirety.
(3) In the case of concrete driveway entrances, more than 20% of the
total area requires replacement, then the entire area shall be
replaced.
L. Should a sidewalk, curb, or driveway entrance become, in the opinion of
Borough Council, a dangerous condition, notice shall be given to the
owner or owners of the lot or lots abutting thereon to replace the
sidewalk, curb and/or driveway entrance with the material prescribed
in the then-applicable details and specifications. Upon his, her, its, or
their failure so to do within 60 days or longer time as established by the
Council after notice from Borough, Council shall cause the same to be
done in the manner herein provided and shall collect the costs thereof
from the owner or owners of the lot or lots as provided in the Borough
Code.
M. No surface gutters are permitted on newly constructed sidewalks
unless authorized by the Inspecting Officer. All drains shall be installed
under sidewalk areas in conformance with the details and specifications
adopted by Council.
N. No material shall be placed in the cartway area adjacent to curb or
driveway entrances which shall, in any way, impede the flow of
stormwater runoff in the cartway area of the street.
O. When curb or driveway entrances are constructed or repaired and
where no cartway paving exists, all areas of excavation within the
cartway area shall be backfilled with Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation No. 2RC aggregate material to the grade of the existing
adjacent roadway. Where the cartway was paved, the excavated area
shall be backfilled with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation No.
2RC aggregate material and the base course and surface course of
paving restored in kind.
P. Curbs and sidewalks shall be constructed in any area where, in the
opinion of Borough Council, pedestrian traffic, inadequate sight
distances or other potentially hazardous conditions indicate the need,
for public safety reasons.
Q. Where curb grades meet at an intersection, sidewalk slope may vary
between a minimum of 0.005 feet per foot and maximum of 0.04 feet
per foot. Change in slope back to the standard 0.02 feet per foot shall be
accomplished in a distance equal to three times the sidewalk width
during any construction, design or repair. [Added 6-1-2017 by Ord.
No. 584]
§ 404-19 KENHORST CODE § 404-19.1
1:308
§ 404-19.1. Maintenance and construction. [Added 6-1-2017 by Ord.
No. 584]
The Borough Council requires that any and all property owners that front on
or touch sidewalks or curbs, regardless of whether such sidewalks or curbs
lie with Borough or Commonwealth right-of-way, to care for and maintain
such sidewalks to the standards set forth in this Article IV of the Code
of Ordinances in perpetuity and failure to maintain the same shall subject
such property owner to the penalty provisions of § 404-22 of the Kenhorst
Borough Code of Ordinances or any other remedy available in law or in
equity. Attached hereto are all sidewalk repair criteria and depictions of
the same. In the case of all such repairs, the property owner shall obtain
a permit from the Borough and make all such repairs according to the
requirements set forth on Exhibit "A,"156 which is incorporated herein as if
more fully set forth.
§ 404-20. Additional regulations.
§ 404-21. Indemnification of Borough.
Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity applying for any permit under
this article shall indemnify the Borough against all liability of whatever
nature, excepting only that of the Borough, arising during the performance
of work for which a permit is granted whether or not the said liability arises
as a result of the negligence of the person, firm, corporation, or other entity
to whom the permit was issued.
§ 404-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-2016 by Ord. No.
582]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.
A. All subsurface rain water conductors shall be placed in such a manner
that the top of the pipe will be four inches from the top of curb and
scored vertically to the center line of pipe.
B. All utility lines affected by the work shall be raised and/or lowered to
proper elevation. All legal requirements of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for notification to utility owners shall be complied with.
C. All traffic signs and street name signs removed during construction of
concrete curb, sidewalk, and/or driveway entrances shall be replaced
by the person, firm, corporation, or other entity performing the
construction.
156. Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 404-19.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404-23
1:309
§ 404-23. Conflict with other laws.
Notwithstanding anything hereinabove set forth in this article, whenever
the provisions of this article shall be inconsistent with the provisions of
Chapter 410, Subdivision and Land Development, as from time to time
are in effect, then in such event the provisions of the more restrictive or
stringent ordinance shall prevail and be applicable.
§ 404-23 KENHORST CODE § 404-23
1:310
ARTICLE V
Obstructions and Encumbrances
[Adopted 6-4-1998 by Ord. No. 447 (Ch. 19, Part 6, of the 1973 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 404-24. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:157
PUBLIC ROAD AND FOOTWALK — Public thoroughfares which afford the
principal means of vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting properties,
containing, in addition to the cartway, the gutter and/or curb, the planting
strip between the curb and sidewalk and the sidewalk.
§ 404-25. Restrictions on obstructions within the street or road.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm, corporation or other
entity to permanently erect, construct and/or maintain any obstruction to
the convenient use of any public street or road in the Borough; provided,
however, that traffic signs, traffic signals, fire hydrants, utility poles,
lighting fixtures, sanitary sewer vent pipes and mailboxes may be erected
and constructed within and upon that portion of any public street or road
in the Borough, excluding the cartway thereof, unless approved by the
Borough.
§ 404-26. Authority to remove obstructions.
In addition to the penalties imposed by this article for the violation of
any provision thereof, the person, firm, corporation or other entity, upon
notice of the violation, shall immediately cause the removal of the offending
obstruction and, upon failure to do so, the Borough may cause the removal
of the same at the expense of the owner, owners or lessees of such
obstruction and collect the cost thereof in any manner provided by law.
§ 404-27. Violations and penalties.158
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.
157. Editor's Note: Original Section 81, Findings and purpose, which immediately preceded
this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 404-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404-27
1:311

ARTICLE VI
Maintenance of Alleyways Used by Emergency Vehicles
[Adopted 2-2-2012 by Ord. No. 540]
§ 404-28. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, terms are defined as follows:
ALLEYWAYS — A narrow street or passageway between or behind a
building.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — A motorized piece of equipment to transport
emergency personnel such as police, firefighters, or medical technicians.
§ 404-29. Maintenance requirements.159
The owner, occupant or tenant of any real estate fronting upon or alongside
any alleyway located within the Borough of Kenhorst which is provided for
the ingress and egress of responding emergency personnel, local residents
and the traveling public shall, at the expense of the property owner or
occupier, maintain all alleyways in direct connection with said properties
as referenced below. Maintenance shall include the repairing of alleyway
surfaces which would impede the ingress and egress of emergency response
vehicles and personnel; cutting of grasses, weeds and shrubs; the trimming
of trees; and parking within alleyways. The specifics of this article are as
follows:
§ 404-30. Violations and penalties.160
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code.161
A. All alleyway surface areas shall be kept in good repair and free of
indents and potholes greater than four inches in depth.
B. All alleyways shall be maintained free of weeds or plant growth in
excess of 10 inches in height. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited.
C. All branches of trees shall be maintained to a clearance of no less than
13 feet above the grade of the street or alleyway for the entire distance
of the alleyway; and 10 feet from the center line of any alleyway that is
20 feet in width or 7.5 feet from the center line for any alleyway that is
15 feet in width. Alleyways must be free of all obstructions such as
fences, sheds, retaining walls and garages located within these
distances. Borough Council may designate a higher clearance where
conditions or circumstances warrant.
159. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 404-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404-30
1:313
161. Editor's Note: Original Section 4, Effective date, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 404-30 KENHORST CODE § 404-30
1:314
ARTICLE VII
Repair and Maintenance of Alleyways
[Adopted 11-5-2015 by Ord. No. 571]
§ 404-31. Relationship to other ordinances.
This article pertaining to the maintenance, care, custody and control of
alleys within the Borough is not intended to supersede general parking
regulations, emergency services ordinance, stormwater ordinances,
property maintenance requirements, or construction standards within the
Borough. To the extent that this article conflicts with any provision of any
other ordinance, then the stricter requirements shall apply. Further, all
alleys within the Borough, unless vacated by specific ordinance or court
order, shall remain public thoroughfares open to the public.
§ 404-32. Borough utilities.
Certain alleys contain utilities owned and operated by the Borough for the
health, safety and welfare of all residents within the Borough, including
but not limited to sewage conveyance lines and stormwater facilities. The
location of such alleys is attached hereto on a map of the alleys within the
Borough as Exhibit "A."162
§ 404-33. Borough maintenance responsibility.
§ 404-34. Snow removal.
Due to the width, existing conditions and design of alleys the Borough does
not perform winter maintenance on unimproved private alleys.
§ 404-35. Property owner requirements.
A. The Borough shall take responsibility for repair and maintenance of
alleyways that include Borough utilities such as water, sewer or storm
sewer systems as depicted on Exhibit "A." Such maintenance
obligations include maintaining of Borough utilities lying within said
alleyways, repairs of the surface of said alleys and general maintenance
of the same. Such repair and maintenance obligations shall be limited
to structural changes and may not include snow removal in said alleys
during snow events.
B. The Borough shall not take any responsibility for maintenance and
repair of alleyways that do not include any Borough utilities such as
water, sewer or storm sewer unless such repair and/or maintenance
takes place pursuant to the emergency provisions of this article.
A. Property owners, either individually or as a group, on either side of the
alleys within the Borough, except those described in § 404-34 above,
shall be charged with full maintenance and repair responsibilities of
162. Editor's Note: Exhibit "A" is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 404-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404-35
1:315
§ 404-36. Eminent domain.
At any time the Borough may enter into any alley set forth on the Borough's
Official Alley Map to install and/or maintain borough improvements and/or
utilities without the need to acquire such property or file an eminent domain
action.
§ 404-37. Permit and construction requirements.
adjoining alleys. At no time shall any property owner block, or cause
to be blocked, alleyways from neighbors, the Borough or emergency
providers. Blocking of alleys may include the parking of vehicles or
property or poor maintenance that results in the inability to pass onto
said alleyway.
B. In the event that an alley falls into disrepair so as to cause a nuisance or
hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Borough
of Kenhorst, or its emergency providers, the Borough shall provide
notice to perform such repairs in the same manner as set forth by the
Borough's Property Maintenance Code Ordinance.163
C. In the event that property owners do not perform the necessary repairs
as set forth in the notice described in Subsection B of this section, then
the enforcement and penalty provisions set forth in the Property
Maintenance Code shall be followed by the Borough.
A. Property owners on either side of the alley may undertake maintenance
and repair of alleys upon the issuance of a permit for such repair by the
Borough. Such permit may include a requirement to demonstrate the
nature of the repairs and to ensure that such repairs do not impact
stormwater flows within the Borough. Such permit may be acquired
from the Borough and shall set forth the nature and extent of repairs
anticipated by private property owners within alleyways.
B. Such repairs shall at all times comply with Chapter 398, Stormwater
Management, and shall not be designed to cause flooding or the
alteration of water courses from alleys.
C. Such alley repairs must comply with grades and construction
requirements for private roadways not to be dedicated to the Borough,
including grade and construction materials. All repairs and/or
maintenance shall be for the entire width of the alleyway as set forth on
the Borough's alley map and/or officially recorded alley describing in
and for the office of recorder of deeds for Berks County based upon
Borough approval or bona fide and unappealed quiet title action.
D. Alley repairs and/or maintenance shall not be undertaken which
adversely affects the quality of life of neighbors or a permanent and
ongoing nuisance.
163. Editor's Note: See Ch. 341, Property Maintenance, Art. III, Adoption of Standards.
§ 404-35 KENHORST CODE § 404-37
1:316
§ 404-38. Emergency repairs.
In the event that an emergency repair that impacts the health safety and
welfare of neighboring property owners or presents a dangerous situation,
the Borough has the right, but not the obligation, to perform such repairs or
contract for the performance of such repairs. In the event that the Borough
undertakes such obligation in alleys where no public utilities are located,
the affected property owners shall be invoiced for such repairs. In the event
that such invoices are not paid within 30 days of the mailing of such invoice,
the Borough may file a municipal lien against those property owners who
have not paid such invoices which shall include any charges permitted by
law.
§ 404-39. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
In the event that a property owner, or group of property owners, fails
to perform alley repairs or fails to obtain the appropriate permit, or fails
to comply with permits issued under this article, that property owner/
owners, shall receive enforcement notices, citations, fines and or penalties
as established in the Borough's Property Maintenance Code Ordinance.165
E. At no time shall any person perform repairs on such alleys that impede
another property owner's driveway or access.
F. Drainage ditches located within any Borough alley shall be maintained
so as not to impede the flow of stormwater.
G. The Borough shall have up to 30 days to administratively review
permits for the construction, maintenance or alteration of alleyways.
Such review shall include review by any necessary professional staff
member of the Borough including the Borough's engineer, solicitor,
code officer or road foreman. The permit applicant shall reimburse the
Borough for all professional fees and administrative expenses
associated with the review of such permit in the manner set forth by the
Municipalities Planning Code164 as it pertains to land development plan
review fees and appeals processes. At the conclusion of the
administrative review, such permits shall be approved or denied and
executed by the Borough Manager.
H. Such permit review shall include a review for the compliance with the
ordinances of the Borough of Kenhorst and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
I. From time to time the Borough shall prescribe permit and/or permit
application fees by resolution of the Borough Council.
J. Repairs and/or maintenance of alleys within the Borough shall not
constitute a hazard or danger to any other property owner within the
Borough.
164. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 404-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404-39
1:317
All notice provisions set forth in said ordinance, including penalties,
enforcement requirements, condemnation requirements and notice
provisions of the Borough's Property Maintenance Code Ordinance shall be
incorporated herein as if more fully set forth.
165. Editor's Note: See Ch. 341, Property Maintenance, Art. III, Adoption of Standards.
§ 404-39 KENHORST CODE § 404-39
1:318
Chapter 410
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 190.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 241.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 398.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 404.
Zoning — See Ch. 475.
§ 404-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404-39
1:319

ARTICLE I
Authority, Title and Purpose
§ 410-1. Authority.166
Under the authority of Article V of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act No. 247 of 1968, as amended,167 this chapter provides for the
control of the subdivision and development of land and the approval of
plats and replats of land within the jurisdiction of the Borough Council
of the Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania, as a part of the
Comprehensive Plan of the Borough of Kenhorst.
§ 410-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations of the Borough of Kenhorst."
§ 410-3. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide uniform standards to
guide the subdivision and resubdivision of land of the Borough of
Kenhorst in order to promote the public health, safety, convenience and
general welfare of the Borough. It shall be administered to insure
orderly growth and development; the conservation, protection and
proper use of land; the proper distribution of population; and to provide
adequate provisions for traffic circulation, recreation, light and air,
utilities and services.
B. It is not intended by this chapter to in any way impair or interfere with
existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, or with private
restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant or other private
agreement.
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
167. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-3
1:321

ARTICLE II
Jurisdiction and Application
§ 410-4. Compliance required.
After the effective date of this chapter, no subdivision or land development
or any lot, sewer, water main, or other improvements in connection
therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened, or dedicated for public use
or travel or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon,
except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 410-5. Recorded plans.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a subdivision recorded prior
to the effective date of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall
apply to and control all other land subdivisions within Kenhorst Borough,
except as provided for in §§ 410-6 and 410-7.
§ 410-6. Replatting or resubdivision.
Any replatting or resubdivision of land, including a change of a recorded
plan, shall be considered a new subdivision and shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 410-7. Pending plans.
If an application for approval of a plan, whether preliminary or final, is
pending approval or disapproval at the time of the effective date of this
chapter, no provision of this chapter shall affect the decision on such
application adversely to the applicant, and the applicant shall be entitled to
a decision in accordance with the governing ordinances as they stood at the
time the application was filed.
§ 410-8. Approved plans.
A. When a subdivider has had an application for approval of a preliminary
or final plan approved prior to the effective date of this chapter, no
provision in this chapter shall be applied to affect adversely the right of
the subdivider to commence and complete any aspect of the approved
preliminary or final plan in accordance with the terms of such approval
within five years from the date of such approval. When approval of a
final plan has been preceded by approval of a preliminary plan, the fiveyear
period shall be counted from the date of preliminary approval. If
there is any doubt as to the terms of approval, the terms shall be
construed in light of the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans
as they stood at the time when approval was given.
B. A preliminary or final plan approved before the effective date of this
chapter which is not recorded within five years after the date of
approval of the application for review of the preliminary plan (or if a
final plan was approved without the prior approval of a preliminary
§ 410-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-8
1:323
plan, within five years after the effective date of approval of the final
plan) shall comply with all the provisions of this chapter.
§ 410-8 KENHORST CODE § 410-8
1:324
ARTICLE III
Procedures
§ 410-9. Intent.
§ 410-10. Sketch plan.
A. Hereafter, subdivision and land development plans shall be reviewed by
the Borough Planning Commission, the County Planning Commission
and other Borough, state, or county officials as deemed necessary, and
shall be approved or disapproved by the Borough Council in accordance
with the procedures specified in this article and in other sections of this
chapter.
B. For all subdivisions, except those exempted from standard procedures,
a sketch plan, preliminary plan, and a final plan must be submitted.
Those subdivisions exempted from this procedure and the procedures
to follow in the case of exempted subdivisions are to be found in
§ 410-14 of this chapter.
A. A sketch plan for any proposed subdivision of land located within the
Borough may be submitted to the Borough Planning Commission for
review. Sketch plans for minor subdivisions shall comply with the
requirements of § 410-15.
B. Sketch plans are submitted as a basis for informal discussion between
the Borough Planning Commission and the subdivider and submission
of a sketch plan shall not constitute official submission of a plan except
in the case of minor subdivisions.
C. Submission. The subdivider shall submit six black-on-white prints on
paper of the sketch plan to the Borough Secretary. The Borough
Secretary will distribute the copies as follows:
(1) Two copies to the Secretary of the Borough Planning Commission.
(2) Two copies to the County Planning Commission.
(3) One copy to the Borough Engineer.
(4) One copy retained for the permanent files and use of the Borough
Council.
D. Review. After a sketch plan has been submitted, the plan shall be
reviewed by the Borough Planning Commission at the Commission's
next regularly scheduled meeting, provided that:
(1) The sketch plan shall be submitted no less than 14 calendar days
prior to the scheduled meeting. If the plan is not submitted at least
14 days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting, the Planning
Commission may decline to review the plan at the next regularly
scheduled meeting and review the plan at the following regularly
§ 410-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-10
1:325
§ 410-11. Preliminary plan.
scheduled or a special meeting, subject to time limitations of Act
247, as amended.168
(2) A written report of the Berks County Planning Commission
regarding the sketch plan has been received by the Borough
Planning Commission prior to the scheduled meeting. If such a
report has not been received, the Borough Planning Commission
may decline to review the plan at its next regularly scheduled
meeting and review the plan at the following regularly scheduled
meeting or at a special meeting. If no report is received from the
County Planning Commission within 30 days after it received a
request to review the sketch plan, the Borough Planning
Commission should proceed to take official action on the plan in
question.
E. At a regular or special meeting, the Borough Planning Commission shall
review the sketch plan to determine its conformance to the
requirements of this chapter and suggest any modifications of the plan
which are deemed advisable and necessary to secure conformance to
the applicable regulations of this chapter.
A. Submission. Preliminary plans and required supplementary data for all
proposed subdivisions, except minor subdivisions, shall be submitted by
the subdivider or his agent to the Borough Secretary. Such submission
shall occur no less than 14 days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting
of the Borough Planning Commission. The Borough Secretary shall not
accept a plan from the subdivider or his agent if the plan is not
submitted in compliance with this provision.
(1) All applications for approval of a plan shall be acted upon and the
decision communicated to the applicant by the Borough not later
than 90 days following the date of the regular meeting of the
governing body or the planning agency (whichever first reviews the
application) next following the date the application is filed, or after
a final order of the court remanding an application, provided that
should the said next regular meeting occur more than 30 days
following the filing of the application, or the final order of the court,
said ninety-day period shall be measured from the 30th day
following the day the application has been filed.
(2) The application for review of the preliminary plan shall not be
considered as officially accepted for review, nor officially submitted
to the Borough until the date that the Borough Engineer notes its
compliance with the submission requirements.
(3) The Borough Engineer shall determine whether all the
requirements of § 410-11B, Official submission of a preliminary
168. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-10 KENHORST CODE § 410-11
1:326
plan, and § 410-16, Preliminary plans, are met. If the requirements
of these two sections are not met, the Borough Engineer may
indicate in writing to the subdivider or his agent that the plan shall
be resubmitted to comply with the requirements of §§ 410-11B and
410-16. The Borough Engineer shall indicate in what ways the plan
did not comply with the requirements of these sections.
(4) A preliminary plan receipt or a letter indicating the Borough's
refusal to review a plan shall be sent to the subdivider or his agent
after the Borough Secretary has received a plan from the
subdivider or his agent and before the first regularly scheduled
meeting of the Borough Planning Commission held after the
Borough Secretary has received a plan.
B. Official submission of a preliminary plan shall be comprised of:
(1) Submission of five completed copies of application for review of
preliminary subdivision plan.
(2) Submission of 12 black-on-white prints on paper of the preliminary
plan. If a subdivision is located in or is adjacent to another
municipality, one additional print shall be submitted for each
additional municipality involved.
(3) Five copies of all other information and plans which are required.
(4) Payment of the filing fee, which shall be charged in order to cover
the cost of reviewing the subdivision plan.
(5) An affidavit that the applicant is the owner or equitable owner of
the land proposed to be subdivided.
C. Distribution. The Borough Secretary shall distribute submitted
information as follows:
(1) To the County Planning Commission:
(a) Two prints of the preliminary plan plus one additional print of
the preliminary plan in each of the following circumstances:
[1] Whenever the property being subdivided abuts a state
legislative route.
[2] Whenever a proposed subdivision is located in or adjacent
to more than one municipality, in which case, one
additional print shall be submitted for each additional
municipality involved.
(b) One copy of application for review of preliminary subdivision
plan.
(c) One copy of all other required information and plans.
(2) To the Borough Planning Commission:
§ 410-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-11
1:327
(a) Two copies of the plan.
(b) One copy of application for review of preliminary subdivision
plan.
(c) One copy of all other required information and plans.
(3) To the Borough Engineer:
(a) One copy of the plan.
(b) One copy of application for review of preliminary subdivision
plan.
(c) One copy of all other required information and plans.
(4) To the Borough Zoning Officer:
(a) One copy of the plan.
(5) To the President of the Borough Council:
(a) Two copies of the plan.
(b) One copy of application for review of preliminary subdivision
plan.
(c) One copy of all other required information and plans.
(6) To be retained by the Borough Secretary:
(a) One copy of the plan.
(b) One copy of application for review of preliminary subdivision
plan.
(c) One copy of all other required information and plans.
D. Review. When a preliminary plan has been officially accepted for review
by the Borough, it shall be reviewed by the Borough Planning
Commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting, provided that the
written report of the County Planning Commission regarding the Plan
in question has been received prior to that regularly scheduled meeting
and the Borough Planning Commission determines that it will be able to
adequately study the preliminary plan before the regularly scheduled
meeting.
(1) If the Borough Planning Commission has not received such written
report from the County Planning Commission, the Borough
Planning Commission may decline to review the plan at its
regularly scheduled meeting and review the plan at a special
meeting or at another regularly scheduled meeting.
(2) No official action should be taken by the Borough Planning
Commission with respect to a preliminary plan until the
§ 410-11 KENHORST CODE § 410-11
1:328
Commission has received written reports regarding the plan in
question from the County Planning Commission and, where
applicable, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and the
Berks County Conservation District. If no report is received from
the County Planning Commission within 30 days after it received
a request to review the preliminary plan, the Borough Planning
Commission should proceed to take official action on the plan in
question.
(3) At a regularly scheduled or special meeting, the Borough Planning
Commission shall review the preliminary plan to determine its
conformance to the standards contained in these regulations and
shall recommend such changes and modifications as it shall deem
necessary or advisable to assure compliance with this chapter.
(4) The Borough Engineer and the Borough Zoning Officer shall review
each plan to ascertain whether the plan meets the requirements of
this chapter and if the plan does not meet these requirements,
recommend what modifications in the plan are required to secure
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(5) When reviewing a plan at a regularly scheduled or special meeting,
the Borough Planning Commission should consider, in addition to
its own comments, written reports regarding the subdivision in
question from the following:
(a) The Borough Engineer.
(b) The Borough Zoning Officer.
(c) The County Planning Commission.
(d) When the property being subdivided abuts a state legislative
route or when preliminary highway design would affect the
property, the report of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation on the effect of the proposed subdivision on
existing or proposed state highway facilities.
(e) Whenever sediment controls may be needed the report of the
Berks County Conservation District.
(6) The Borough Planning Commission shall notify the following of any
action taken by the Borough Planning Commission in accordance
with the requirements of the Municipalities Planning Code.169
(a) The Borough Secretary.
(b) The President of the Borough Council.
(c) The Borough Engineer.
169. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-11
1:329
(d) The Borough Zoning Officer.
(e) The County Planning Commission.
(f) The subdivider or his agent.
E. Report to Borough Council.
(1) If all the requirements of this chapter are met and the review of the
plan is favorable, the Chairman of the Borough Planning
Commission shall note such fact on one copy of the preliminary
plan and one copy of all supporting data and forward these to the
Borough Council, together with a recommendation for approval of
the plan.
(2) If the review of the Borough Planning Commission is unfavorable
because the requirements of this chapter have not been met or
because the Commission deems modifications of the plan as
submitted desirable or necessary, the recommended modifications
in the plan and/or the specific provisions of this chapter which have
not been met shall be noted on one copy of the preliminary plan and
one copy of all supporting data and these shall be forwarded to the
Borough Council together with a recommendation that the plan not
be approved.
F. Review by Borough Council. When a preliminary plan has been
submitted to the Borough Council by the Borough Planning
Commission, the plan shall be reviewed at a regularly scheduled
meeting of the Council or at a special meeting.
(1) At a regularly scheduled or special meeting, the Borough Council
shall review the preliminary plan and the written reports of the
Borough Planning Commission, the Borough Engineer, the Borough
Zoning Officer, and all other reports which may have been received
from county and state agencies. The Borough Council shall either
approve or disapprove the plan. No official action shall be taken by
the Borough Council with respect to a preliminary plan until the
Borough has received the written report of the County Planning
Commission, the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, and
the Berks County Conservation District, provided that such reports
are received within 30 days after the County Planning Commission
received a request to review the preliminary plan. Failure of the
County Planning Commission to act within 30 days shall constitute
approval of the plan as submitted, and the Borough Council may
officially act on the basis of such approval. Within five days after
the meeting at which the plan is reviewed, the Borough Secretary
shall notify in writing the following of the action taken by the
Borough Council regarding the preliminary plan.
(a) Borough Planning Commission.
(b) Borough Engineer.
§ 410-11 KENHORST CODE § 410-11
1:330
(c) Borough Zoning Officer.
(d) County Planning Commission.
(e) Subdivider or his agent.
(2) The Borough Council shall within 90 days after the date the
Borough accepted a preliminary plan for review notify the
subdivider or his agent of the action taken by the Council.
(a) If a special meeting of the Borough Council prior to a regularly
scheduled meeting is required in order to comply with the
requirements of § 410-11F(2), such a special meeting shall be
scheduled.
(b) Before acting on a preliminary plan, the Council may arrange
for a public hearing on the plan, giving public notice as defined
in Act 247 of 1968, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.170
(3) The action of the Council may be favorable, approving the plan, or
unfavorable, disapproving the application of which the plan forms a
part. The findings and reasons upon which the Council's action is
based shall be given in writing to the individuals and groups listed
in § 410-11F(1) and stated in the minutes of the meeting at which
the Council reviews the plan. When the plan as submitted is not
approved, the report shall specify the requirements of this chapter
which have not been met and recommend changes which should be
made in the plan to secure approval.
(4) The approval of a preliminary plan does not authorize the recording
of the subdivision plan nor the sale or transfer of lots.
(5) When a preliminary plan has been approved, no subsequent change
in the zoning, subdivision, or other governing ordinance or plan
shall be applied to affect adversely the right of the applicant to
commence and to complete any aspect of the approved
development in accordance with the terms of such approval within
five years from the date of such approval. The terms of such
approval shall be construed in light of the provisions of the
governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time approval
was given.
(6) Approval stipulations. The approval of a preliminary plan shall
assure a subdivider that:
(a) The general layout of streets, lots and other features shown on
the preliminary plan is approved and shall be the basis for the
preparation of final detailed improvement plans and the final
plan, provided that the final plan is submitted within one year
170. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-11
1:331
§ 410-12. Final plan.
of the date of the approval of the preliminary plan or submitted
within an extended period of time if such an extension is
approved by the Borough Council.
(b) The general terms and any special conditions under which the
approval of the preliminary plan was granted will not be
changed. The subdivider should note that a final plan not
submitted within one year of the date of approval of a
preliminary plan, or within an extended period of time if such
an extension is granted by the Borough Council, may be
considered a new preliminary plan.
A. Submission. Within 12 months after approval of the preliminary plan, a
final plan with all necessary supplementary data shall be submitted to
the Borough Secretary. An extension of time may be granted by the
Borough Council upon written request, provided that the extension of
time shall not exceed one year. Failure to meet this time limitation may
result in a determination by the Commission that it will consider any
plan submitted after 12 months as a new preliminary plan.
(1) Final plans and required supplementary data for all proposed
subdivisions, except minor subdivisions, shall be submitted in
person by the subdivider or his agent to the Borough Secretary.
Such submission shall occur no less than 14 days prior to a
regularly scheduled meeting of the Borough Planning Commission.
(2) All applications for approval of a plan shall be acted upon and the
decision communicated to the applicant by the Borough not later
than 90 days following the date of the regular meeting of the
governing body or the planning agency (whichever first reviews the
application) next following the date the application is filed, or after
a final order of the court remanding an application, provided that
should the said next regular meeting occur more than 30 days
following the filing of the application, or the final order of the court,
said ninety-day period shall be measured from the 30th day
following the day the application has been filed.
(3) The application for review of the final plan shall not be considered
as officially accepted for review, nor officially submitted to the
Borough until the date that the Borough Engineer notes its
compliance with the submission requirements.
(4) A final plan receipt or a letter indicating the Borough's refusal to
review a plan shall be sent to the subdivider or his agent after the
Borough Secretary has received a plan from the subdivider or his
agent and before the first regularly scheduled meeting of the
Borough Planning Commission held after the Borough Secretary
received a plan.
§ 410-11 KENHORST CODE § 410-12
1:332
B. Official submission of a final plan to the Borough shall be comprised of:
(1) Submission of six completed application for review of final
subdivision plan.
(2) Submission of 15 black-on-white prints on paper of the final plan,
which shall fully comply with § 410-17 of these regulations.
(3) Whenever a proposed subdivision is located in or adjacent to more
than one municipality one additional print shall be submitted for
each additional municipality involved.
(4) Submission of five copies of all other supplementary data and plans
as outlined in § 410-17.
(5) Submission of six copies of all written agreements, including but
not limited to homeowners' association declarations or bylaws,
condominium declarations or bylaws, stormwater agreements,
easements, etc.
(6) Any additional fees, if required, to cover the cost of reviewing the
subdivision plan.
C. The Borough Planning Commission may permit submission of the final
plan in sections, each section covering a reasonable portion of the
entire proposed subdivision as shown on the approved preliminary plan.
D. The final plan shall conform in all important respects to the approved
preliminary plan and shall incorporate all modifications required by the
Borough Council in their approval of the preliminary plan. Failure to
comply with past reviews shall constitute grounds for the Planning
Commission to refuse to accept the plan for review. The Commission
may accept a final plan modified to reflect any substantial changes on
the site of the proposed subdivision or in its surroundings which
occurred after the preliminary plan review. If substantial changes on
the site do occur, the Borough Council shall determine whether a
modified final plan will be accepted or whether a new preliminary plan
shall be submitted.
E. Distribution. Distribution of final plans and supporting data submitted
to the Borough Secretary shall be made as follows:
(1) To the County Planning Commission, if the Borough Planning
Commission determines that the County Planning Commission
should be asked to review the final plan.
(a) One copy of application for review of final subdivision plan.
(b) One copy of all required supplementary data and plans.
(c) One copy of all written agreements.
(d) Two copies of the plan.
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:333
(e) When the property being subdivided is in or adjacent to more
than one municipality, one additional copy of the plan for each
additional municipality involved.
(f) When the property being subdivided abuts a state legislative
route, one additional copy of the plan.
(2) To the Borough Engineer:
(a) One copy of application for review of final subdivision plan.
(b) One copy of the plan.
(c) One copy of all supplementary data and plans.
(d) One copy of all written agreements.
(3) To the Borough Zoning Officer:
(a) One copy of the plan.
(4) To the Borough Solicitor:
(a) One copy of the application for review of final subdivision plan.
(b) One copy of the plan.
(c) One copy of all written agreements.
(5) To the Borough Planning Commission:
(a) One copy of application for review of final subdivision plan.
(b) Two copies of the plan.
(c) One copy of all supplementary data and plans.
(d) One copy of all written agreements.
(6) To the President of Borough Council:
(a) One copy of application for review of final subdivision plan.
(b) Six copies of the plan.
(c) One copy of all supplementary data and plans.
(d) One copy of all written agreements.
(7) To be retained by the Borough Secretary:
(a) One copy of application for review of final subdivision plan.
(b) One copy of all supplementary data and plans.
(c) One copy of the plan.
(d) One copy of all written agreements.
§ 410-12 KENHORST CODE § 410-12
1:334
F. Review of final plan. When a final plan has been officially accepted for
review by the Borough, it may be reviewed by the Planning Commission
at its next regularly scheduled meeting, provided that if the County
Planning Commission has been asked to review the final plan, the
written report of the County Planning Commission regarding the plan in
question has been received prior to that regularly scheduled meeting
and that the Borough Planning Commission determines that it will be
able to adequately study the final plan before the regularly scheduled
meeting.
(1) If the Borough Planning Commission has requested and not
received such a written report from the County Planning
Commission, the Borough Planning Commission may decline to
review the plan at its regularly scheduled meeting and review the
plan at a special meeting or at another regularly scheduled
meeting.
(2) At the meeting at which the final plan is reviewed, the Borough
Planning Commission shall review the plan to determine its
conformance with the requirements of this chapter. At this
meeting, written reports regarding the subdivision in question from
the Borough Zoning Officer and the Borough Engineer shall be
reviewed. If any reports regarding the subdivision in question from
the County Planning Commission or other county or state agencies
have been received prior to the meeting, these reports shall also be
reviewed at the meeting.
(3) If the County Planning Commission has been asked to review a final
plan, no official action should be taken by the Borough Planning
Commission with respect to a final plan until the Commission has
received a written report regarding the plan in question from the
County Planning Commission and, where applicable, the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, provided such reports
are received within 30 days after the County Planning Commission
received a request to review the final plan.
(4) After the final plan is reviewed by the Borough Planning
Commission, the Borough Secretary shall notify the applicant in
writing of the action taken by the Council in accordance with the
Municipalities Planning Code requirements.171
(5) If all the requirements of this chapter are met and the review is
favorable, the Planning Commission shall authorize its Chairman to
place on the plan "Reviewed and Approved by the Borough
Planning Commission," together with the date of such action, and
forward the plan to the Borough Council.
(6) If the review of the Borough Planning Commission is not favorable,
the Planning Commission shall recommend that the plan not be
171. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:335
approved and explicitly state the reasons for such action. Any
modifications in the plan which the Planning Commission feels
should be prerequisites to approval of the final plan shall also
be noted. Copies of these statements shall be distributed to the
persons listed under § 410-12F(4) of this chapter.
G. Review by Borough Council. When a final plan has been submitted to
the Borough Council by the Planning Commission, the plan may be
reviewed by the Council at a regularly scheduled meeting or at a special
meeting.
(1) At a regularly scheduled or a special meeting, the Borough Council
may review the final plan and any written reports regarding the
plan from the Borough Planning Commission, the County Planning
Commission, the Borough Engineer, the Borough Zoning Officer.
and where applicable, the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation or any other reports which may be required.
(2) If the County Planning Commission has been asked to review a final
plan, no official action shall be taken by the Borough Council with
respect to a final plan until the Borough has received the written
report of the County Planning Commission and, where applicable,
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, provided that such
reports are received within 30 days after the County Planning
Commission received a request to review the final plan. Failure of
the County Planning Commission to act within 30 days shall
constitute approval of the plan as submitted and the Borough
Council may officially act on the basis of such approval.
(3) Before acting on a final plan, the Council may arrange for a public
hearing on the plan, giving public notice as defined in Act 247 of
1968, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended.172
(4) After the final plan is reviewed by the Council, the Borough
Secretary shall notify the applicant in writing of the action taken by
the Council in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code
requirements.
(5) Action by the Council may be favorable, giving preliminary
approval to the final plan, or the action may be unfavorable, giving
disapproval to the application of which the plan forms a part. The
findings and reasons upon which the Council's action is based shall
be given in writing to the persons listed under § 410-12G(4) and
also stated in the minutes of the Borough Council. Any
modifications in the plan required as prerequisites to approval of
the final plan shall be stated.
172. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-12 KENHORST CODE § 410-12
1:336
§ 410-13. Performance guarantees; recording of final plan.
(6) The Borough Council shall, within 90 days after the date the
Borough accepts a final plan for review, notify the subdivider or his
agent of the action taken by the Council.
(7) A plan which has been preliminarily approved shall not be recorded
until the requirements of § 410-13, Performance guarantees;
recording of final plan, have been met.
A. Within 30 days after a final plan has received preliminary approval and
before a plan may be recorded and before the issuance of any building
permits, the subdivider shall deliver to the Borough Council a
performance guarantee in the form of a corporate bond or other
acceptable security in an amount of 110% of the cost of all
improvements required by this chapter and Chapter 475, Zoning, and
the approved improvement plans and as estimated by the Borough
Engineer. The performance guarantee shall guarantee the construction
and installation, within one year from the deliverance of the guarantee,
of those improvements to be located within that portion of the final plan
which has been approved by the Borough Council. Upon written
application, the Council may, at its discretion, extend the one-year
period by not more than two additional years by formal resolution.173
B. After a final plan has received preliminary approval, improvements
required by this chapter and indicated as being provided by the
subdivider may be installed. Upon written application, the Council may
by formal resolution reduce the amount of the performance guarantee
when the improvements have been completed in part and the
completed improvements have been approved by the Borough. If the
performance guarantee is reduced, it shall be reduced by the amount
which was expended for the completed improvements.
(1) Remedies to effect completion of improvements. In the event of
default under a performance guarantee, the Borough may enforce
any security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. The
proceeds of the performance guarantee received by the Borough
may be used to construct and install the improvements. If the cost
of the improvements exceeds the amount of the performance
guarantee, the subdivider shall be liable for the amount in excess of
the amount which the Borough has expended for such
improvements. In the case that the amount of the performance
guarantee exceeds the actual cost of improvements made, the
Borough shall return the unused sum to the surety or the person
who has paid or deposited the performance guarantee.
(2) Release of performance guarantee. When the developer has
completed all of the necessary and appropriate improvements, the
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-13
1:337
developer shall notify the Borough, in writing, by certified or
registered mail, of the completion of the aforesaid improvements
and shall send a copy thereof to the Borough Engineer. Upon
receipt of such notice, the Borough Engineer shall inspect all of the
aforesaid improvements. The Borough Engineer shall thereupon
file a report, in writing, with the Borough Council, and shall
promptly mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or
registered mail. Said report shall be detailed and shall indicate
approval or rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in
part, and if said improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not
be approved or shall be rejected by the Borough Engineer, said
report shall contain a statement of reasons for such nonapproval or
rejection. The Borough Council shall notify the developer in writing
within the time allotted by the Municipalities Planning Code by
certified or registered mail of its action. If any portion of the
said improvements shall not be approved or shall be rejected by
the Borough Council, the developer shall proceed to complete the
same and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification, as
outlined herein, shall be followed.
C. Within 30 days after preliminary approval of the final plan by the
Council and before the issuance of any building permit, the subdivider
shall deliver to the Borough Council Secretary a maintenance
guarantee in an amount not less than 10% of the Borough Engineer's
estimate of the cost of all improvements required by this chapter. The
guarantee shall guarantee that the subdivider shall maintain all such
improvements in good condition for a period of 18 months after
completion of construction and installation of all such improvements. If
the maintenance guarantee is not so delivered, the preliminary
approval of the final plan shall expire 30 days after the date of that
approval.
D. After preliminary favorable action by the Borough Council and the
Borough Planning Commission and after the completion of the
procedures required by these regulations the Council and the Planning
Commission shall place their endorsements on the record plan and on
as many other copies of the final plan as may be desired. The record
plan of the subdivision which has secured final approval shall be signed
by the President of the Borough Council and the Borough Seal shall be
affixed to the plan. No subdivision plan may be legally recorded unless
it bears Borough approval indicated by the signature of the President of
the Borough Council and the Borough Seal.
E. The Record Plan shall be a clear and legible plan prepared in
accordance with the Recorder of Deeds standards.
F. No subdivision plan may legally be recorded unless it has been
endorsed by the County Planning Commission and bears the County
Planning Commission stamp "Reviewed." Such endorsement shall be
indicated on the record plan. As a prerequisite for endorsement, the
County Planning Commission will require a minimum of two paper
§ 410-13 KENHORST CODE § 410-13
1:338
§ 410-14. Plans exempted from standard procedures.
prints bearing the Borough Seal and the endorsement by the Borough
Planning Commission and the Borough Council. The County Planning
Commission will accept additional prints if they are submitted for our
"Reviewed" stamp. In addition, the County Planning Commission
requires a letter from PennDOT indicating approval of the intersection
as proposed prior to plan endorsement and the developer will also
be required to obtain a letter from the appropriate utility company
indicating that it has received final plans for the design of an
underground electric system. After the plan has been given final
approval by the Borough, the plan shall be submitted to the County
Planning Commission for endorsement.
G. The subdivider shall file the record plan with the County Recorder of
Deeds within 90 days of the date of the meeting at which Borough
Council gave approval to the final plan. If the subdivider fails to record
the final plan within such period, the action of the Borough shall be null
and void. The subdivider shall provide the Borough with satisfactory
evidence that he has filed the record plan with the County Recorder of
Deeds prior to issuance of any zoning or building permits.
H. The Borough shall receive one reproducible plan on Mylar of the final
plan as approved.
I. All streets, parks, or other improvements shown on the subdivision plan
shall be deemed to be private until such time as the same have been
offered for dedication to the Borough and accepted by resolution of the
Borough Council. If any improvement is to be dedicated to the Borough,
such offer of dedication shall be submitted to the Borough for
acceptance prior to the recording of the final plan. The acceptance of
any improvement shall be by a separate action of the Borough Council.
A. Auction sale. In the case of the proposed subdivision of land by process
of auction sale, the following procedure may be used by the subdivider:
(1) The subdivider shall prepare and submit a preliminary plan in
accordance with these regulations.
(2) The preliminary plan shall comply with the requirements of
§ 410-16 of this chapter and in addition contain the following
notation:
"This property is intended to be sold by auction on or about
__________, 20_____, in whole or in part, according to this plan.
Sale of lots at such auction shall be in the form of agreement
to purchase, and no actual transfer of ownership or interest in
such lots shall proceed until a final plan showing such division
of property shall have been approved by the Borough Council, in
accordance with its regulations, and recorded in the office of the
County Recorder of Deeds."
§ 410-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-14
1:339
(3) The auction sale may then proceed in accordance with the above
notation, after which the subdivider shall prepare and submit a
final plan in accordance with these regulations.
B. Minor subdivisions. Where the intent of the subdivider so expressed in
writing is to create no more than two parcels, lots, or tracts of land from
the original tract and the land fronts on an existing improved Borough
or state road, the Borough Planning Commission may require the
subdivider to prepare a sketch plan for record. This plan shall show the
simple subdivision accompanied by the required data outlined in
§ 410-15 of this chapter. Further subdivisions from a tract recorded
under this section will require a review of plans in accordance with the
standard procedures of this chapter.
C. Resubdivision. Any replating or resubdivision of land, including
changes to recorded plans, shall be considered a subdivision, and shall
comply with these regulations, except that:
(1) Lot lines may be changed from those shown on a recorded plan,
provided that in making such changes:
(a) No lot or tract of land shall be created or sold that is smaller
than the minimum dimensions required by Chapter 475,
Zoning;
(b) Easements or rights-of-way reserved for drainage shall not be
changed;
(c) Street locations and block sizes shall not be changed;
(d) No lot shall be created which does not abut a street; and
(e) The character of the area shall be maintained, keeping lot sizes
and land uses, dimensions and proportions relatively close to
those of contiguous developments.
(2) In every case wherein lot lines are changed as permitted above, at
the completion of each section, the subdivider shall:
(a) Submit to the Borough and County Planning Commissions
copies of the final plan revised to show such changes. After this
submission, the Borough Planning Commission will, in writing,
advise the subdivider and the Borough Secretary if the revised
plan complies with § 410-14C(1).
(b) When the plan does comply with § 410-14C(1), the subdivider
shall submit the record plan to the Borough for the
endorsements of the Borough Planning Commission and the
Borough Council. The subdivider shall also submit the record
plan to the County Planning Commission for its endorsement
(which shall specifically identify the previous record plan thus
superseded) and then record the plan if endorsement is
secured.
§ 410-14 KENHORST CODE § 410-14
1:340
(c) The record plan shall be a clear and legible black-on-white
print on paper.
§ 410-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-14
1:341

ARTICLE IV
Plan Requirements
§ 410-15. Sketch plans.
A. The scale and sheet size of the sketch plan shall be as required in
§ 410-16A for preliminary plans. The sketch plan shall contain at least
the following data, legibly drawn to scale:
(1) Name and address of the subdivider and record owner.
(2) Name of the subdivision or land development, the date of the plans
and plan status.
(3) Tract boundaries, accurately labeled and a statement of the total
acreage of the tract.
(4) North point and graphic and written scales.
(5) The name of the person or firm responsible for the design of the
subdivision or land development.
(6) The names of owners of adjoining properties and the names of
adjoining subdivisions and land developments.
(7) A key map for the purpose of locating the property being
subdivided, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 800 feet and
showing the relation of the property, differentiated by tone or
pattern, to adjoining property and to all streets, roads and
municipal boundaries within 1,000 feet of the proposed
subdivision.
(8) Significant topographical and physical features (i.e., water bodies,
quarries, floodplains, tree masses, railroad tracks, existing
buildings, existing water supply and sewage disposal systems, etc.)
on the tract.
(9) Proposed general street and lot layout. When apartments and/or
townhouses are proposed, the general building, street, recreation
and parking layout shall be shown. When commercial or industrial
buildings are proposed, the general building, street, parking and
loading layout shall be shown. Proposed street cartway and rightof-
way widths shall be indicated.
(10) A statement telling what methods of water supply and sewage
disposal will be used.
(11) A statement telling the proposed use of each lot, parcel and
building indicated on the plan and approximate lot sizes.
(12) Soils types throughout the tract.
(13) Name of municipality subdivision is located in.
§ 410-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-15
1:343
(14) Where a sketch plan shows the proposed subdivision of only a part
of the subdivider's total property, the plan shall be accompanied by
a plan of the proposed street system for the remainder of the
property so that the street system in the submitted portion can be
considered in relation to future connections with the unsubmitted
portion. In the case of extremely large properties, the Borough
Planning Commission may delimit the area for which a prospective
street system on adjacent property must be shown. The subdivider
shall also include a statement indicating proposed future land use
for the unsubmitted portion of his property.
(15) Contour lines at intervals of no more than 10 feet taken from USGS
maps, aerial survey or field survey with source of datum.
(16) Existing rights-of-way, easements and utilities on or adjacent to the
tract.
(17) Zoning district lines within the property and zoning district
designations and area, yard and height requirements applicable to
the property.
B. In the case of a sketch plan for record, the following additional
information shall be shown:
(1) A signed and notarized certification of ownership and
acknowledgment of plan.
(2) Submission of one completed application for review of minor
subdivision plan.
(3) Certificates for approval by the Borough Planning Commission and
Borough Council.
(4) The seal of the surveyor or engineer responsible for the plan.
(5) Precise bearings and distances for all parcels to be conveyed
(which shall be field surveyed).
(6) Base flood elevations for the special flood hazard areas.
(7) Building setback lines and all proposed structures.
(8) Existing street cartway and right-of-way lines and widths for
streets within and adjacent to the tract.
(9) An erosion and sediment control plan, which shall be reviewed by
the County Conservation District and approved by the Borough
Council. The Borough may permit, at its discretion, a statement
that individual lot purchasers will be responsible for the
preparation of erosion and sediment control plans prior to any
earthmoving activities.
(10) If the subdivision proposes a new driveway intersection with a
state route, a copy of the highway occupancy permit for such
§ 410-15 KENHORST CODE § 410-15
1:344
§ 410-16. Preliminary plans.
intersection. Any conditions listed in a permit shall be noted on the
plan. In lieu of a permit for a driveway intersection, the Borough
Council may permit the following note to be placed on the plan:
(a) A highway occupancy permit is required pursuant to Section
420 of the Act of June 1, 1945, as amended, known as the
"State Highway Law,"174 before a driveway access to a state
highway is permitted. Access to the state highway shall only be
as authorized by a highway occupancy permit.
(b) The approval of this subdivision/land development plan shall in
no way imply that a state highway permit can be acquired or
that this municipality will support, encourage or not oppose
the granting of such a permit. It is possible that access to the
property from a state highway will not be permitted by the
commonwealth and the property therefore cannot be used for
the purpose intended by any purchaser. Purchasers are
accordingly warned and should govern themselves accordingly,
acquiring state and local highway occupancy permits before
purchasing any premises.
(11) The source of title to the land.
(12) A blank space measuring 3 1/2 inches by six inches shall be left,
preferably adjacent to the Borough certification, in which the
appropriate stamp of the County Planning Commission may be
applied.
A. The preliminary plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of one
inch equals 50 feet with all dimensions shown in feet and hundredths of
a foot, except that:
(1) If the average size of the proposed lots in the subdivision is five
acres or larger, the plan may be drawn to a scale of one inch equals
100 feet;
(2) If the subdivision proposes lots with an average frontage of less
than 50 feet, the plan may be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 20
feet; or
(3) If the subdivision contains more than 200 acres, the plan may be
drawn to a scale of one inch equals 200 feet.
B. The original drawing, and all submitted prints thereof, shall be made on
sheets either:
(1) Seventeen inches to 18 inches by 22 inches to 24 inches;
(2) Twenty-two inches to 24 inches by 34 inches to 36 inches; or
174. Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-420.
§ 410-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-16
1:345
(3) Thirty-four inches to 36 inches by 48 inches.
C. If the preliminary plan requires more than one sheet, a key diagram
showing relative location of the several sections shall be drawn on each
sheet.
D. The preliminary plan shall show:
(1) Name of the proposed subdivision or other identifying title other
than the name of the property owner and of the Borough.
(2) North point, graphic scale, written scale, and date, including the
month, day and year that the original drawing was completed, and
the month, day and year that the original drawing was revised, for
each revision.
(3) Name, address and seal of registered engineer or surveyor
responsible for the plan.
(4) Name and seal of registered engineer, surveyor or land planner
responsible for the subdivision plan, or any part thereof.
(5) Names of all abutting subdivisions, if any, with the book and page
numbers where recorded and the names of the owners of all
adjacent unplatted land, if any, and the book and page numbers
where recorded.
(6) A key map for the purpose of locating the property being
subdivided, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 800 feet and
showing the relation of the property, differentiated by tone or
pattern, to adjoining property and to all streets, roads and
municipal boundaries within 1,000 feet of the proposed
subdivision.
(7) Total tract boundaries of the property being subdivided, showing
bearings, distances, and a statement of total acreage of the
property.
(8) Zoning data, including the following:
(a) Zoning district lines, existing and proposed, shall be provided.
A separate print of the plan shall be submitted showing this
information. Bulk and use regulations shall be provided.
(9) Contour lines at vertical intervals of no more than two feet for land
with average natural slope of 4% or less and at intervals of no more
than five feet for land with average natural slope exceeding 4%.
(10) Location and elevation of the datum to which contour elevations
refer; where reasonably practicable, datum used shall be a known,
established bench mark.
(11) All existing sewer lines, water lines, fire hydrants, utility
transmission lines, culverts, bridges, railroad, watercourses,
§ 410-16 KENHORST CODE § 410-16
1:346
floodplain areas based on a thirty-year storm and other significant
man-made or natural features within the proposed subdivision and
within 50 feet from the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
(12) All existing buildings or other structures, and the approximate
location of all existing tree masses and large individual trees within
the proposed subdivision.
(13) All existing streets, including streets of record (recorded but not
constructed), on or abutting the tract, including names, right-ofway
widths, cartway (pavement) widths and approximate grades.
(14) All existing soils types, soils characteristics for detention and
retention pond areas, natural drainage channels, water bodies and
courses, tree masses, quarries, rock outcroppings, wetlands,
significant specimen trees and other significant natural features
within the proposed subdivision or land development.
(15) Special flood hazard areas (SFHAs), also known as the "base flood,"
including delineation of floodway and flood fringe, established by
study of FEMA, with base flood elevations for the one-hundred-year
storm. For those watercourses for which studies have not been
performed by FEMA, calculated one-hundred-year floodplains shall
be established by the developer in accordance with Appendix IV of
this chapter. When a subdivision or land development contains a
floodplain, the elevation of roads, building sites, fills, flood and
erosion protection facilities and public utilities included within the
floodplain and within 100 feet of the floodplain shall be given. In
the case of a proposed revision of a FEMA-mapped floodplain,
approval of such revisions from FEMA shall be submitted.
(16) All existing easements and rights-of-way and the purposes for
which the easements or rights-of-way have been established.
(17) The full plan of proposed development, including:
(a) For all proposed streets, their location, suggested name, rightof-
way and cartway widths, a statement of any conditions
governing their use and suggested type. The designation of
type is subject to the approval of the Borough. Streets to be
dedicated shall be indicated. For streets which will not be
dedicated, the arrangements to be made for the ownership and
maintenance of those streets shall be given.
(b) Location, width and purpose of all easements and rights-ofway,
including letters of approval from the appropriate utility.
(c) Suggested street names and all public utility and private
easement locations.
(d) Building reserve (setback) lines along each street and the
proposed placement of each building.
§ 410-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-16
1:347
(e) Lot lines, with approximate dimensions, lot numbers, a
statement of the total number of lots and parcels and
approximate lot areas.
(f) A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots and
parcels.
(g) The location of all common parking areas and access drives to
the parking areas, the size and number of parking stalls, width
of aisles and access drives and tentative grades of parking
areas and access drive. The location, number and dimensions
of off-street loading areas shall also be indicated.
(h) Lot numbers and a statement of the total number of lots and
parcels.
(i) Water mains and sanitary and/or storm sewer (and other
drainage facilities) with the size and material of each indicated
and any proposed connections with existing facilities.
(j) Parks, playgrounds, and other areas to be dedicated to the
Borough shall be noted. Areas to be reserved for public use,
but not to be dedicated, shall be noted, and any conditions
governing such use and the arrangements to be made for the
maintenance of these areas shall also be noted.
(k) Provisions for pedestrian and other nonvehicular circulation
throughout the tract, when provided by means other than
sidewalks.
E. The preliminary plan shall be accompanied by the following
supplementary data, as applicable:
(1) Typical street cross-section drawing(s) for all proposed streets.
Cross-section drawings may be shown on either the preliminary
plan or on the profile sheets required by § 410-16E(2) or (3).
(2) Tentative profiles along top of cartway (pavement) edges or along
the top of curb for both sides of each proposed street shown on the
preliminary plan. Such profiles shall show natural and finished
grades at one of the following sets of scales or any combination
thereof:
(a) One inch equals 10 feet horizontal and one inch equals one foot
vertical;
(b) One inch equals 20 feet horizontal and one inch equals two feet
vertical;
(c) One inch equals 40 feet horizontal and one inch equals four
feet vertical; or
§ 410-16 KENHORST CODE § 410-16
1:348
(d) One inch equals 50 feet horizontal and one inch equals five feet
vertical.
(3) In lieu of the separate profile sheets required by § 410-16E(2)
above, the tentative finished cartway (pavement) edge or top of
curb grades for both sides of each street may be labeled on the
preliminary plan.
(4) Where deemed necessary by the Borough Engineer or the Borough
Planning Commission, a plan for the surface drainage of the tract to
be subdivided. Such plan shall include stormwater runoff
calculations for the entire property being subdivided and all
property at a higher elevation in the same watershed when fully
developed and shall show the proposed method of accommodating
the anticipated runoff.
(5) Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts which may be
required. Such designs shall meet all applicable requirements of
the Department of Environmental Protection and/or the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.175
(6) In the case of land development plans, a landscaping plan showing
the proposed type, size and location of trees, shrubs and other
plantings, lighting plan and the location of refuse collection areas
shall be shown. A table showing extent of compliance with the area,
yard and height regulations of Chapter 475, Zoning, shall be
provided.
(7) Where a preliminary plan shows the proposed subdivision of only a
part of the subdivider's total property, the plan shall be
accompanied by a plan of the proposed street system for the
remainder of the property so that the street system in the
submitted portion can be considered in relation to future
connections with the unsubmitted portion. In the case of extremely
large properties, the Borough Planning Commission may delimit
the area for which a prospective street system on adjacent property
needs to be shown. The subdivider shall also include a statement
indicating the proposed future land use for the unsubmitted portion
of his property.
(8) The location and types of erosion and sediment control measures as
outlined in § 410-25E.
(9) Where the subdivider proposes to locate a street or other
improvement within a portion of a utility right-of-way, a letter from
the appropriate utility company giving permission to locate within
the right-of-way.
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 410-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-16
1:349
(10) A plan for the preservation of existing natural features of the site or
a narrative statement indicating how such features will be
preserved.
(11) Sight distance calculations for vertical curves in streets:
(a) Horizontal curve radii of cartway and right-of-way lines at
street intersections. The proposed cartway tie-in to existing
street cartways shall be indicated.
(b) On the subdivision plan or a plan view drawings of streets,
station numbers corresponding to the street profile.
(c) Guide rail locations and construction details.
(d) Clear sight triangles at street intersection.
(e) A typical treatment of the construction of driveways and the
handling of storm drainage where driveways will intersect
streets. The Borough may require driveway culverts to be sized
and such size noted on the plan.
(f) Proposed location and type of traffic control devices.
(12) Areas of 10% to 15% slopes, 15% to 25% slopes and areas of over
25% slope.
(13) The applicant shall identify on-site properties, sites or structures
listed on or eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic
Places, the Pennsylvania Register of Historic Places and/or the
Berks County Register of Historical Places. Applicant shall also
identify such other properties and structures as may be of local
historic significance by means of a field survey by the Berks County
Conservancy, Historic Preservation Trust of Berks County or such
other individual or organization of equivalent expertise. Properties
or structures that are identifiable links to past ownership, such as
markers or cemeteries, shall be identified. The applicant shall
describe the ways in which the applicant intends to preserve,
protect and maintain such historic properties or structures and
other man-made resources.
(14) In the case of subdivision or land development plans proposed to be
submitted in stages at final plan, a drawing delineating the
proposed stages and indicating the order of submittal and schedule
of submittal of the stages. Staging of sanitary sewer, water and
storm drainage facilities and the location of any temporary street
turnarounds shall also be indicated.
(15) Schematic architectural drawings of proposed townhouses,
apartment buildings and commercial and industrial buildings,
including building orientation.
§ 410-16 KENHORST CODE § 410-16
1:350
§ 410-17. Final plans.
(16) Proposed driveway locations and evidence that the standard for
driveways established in § 410-21D can be met.
(17) The location of all trees and/or woodlands to be removed or
otherwise affected by this development along with the location of
trees and/or woodlands to remain.
(18) Proposal for fire protection, which shall be reviewed by the
Borough Fire Marshal.
A. The final plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of one inch
equals 50 feet with dimensions shown in feet or hundredths of a foot;
except that:
(1) If the average size of the proposed lots in the subdivision is five
acres or larger, the plan may be drawn to a scale of one inch equals
100 feet; or
(2) If the subdivision proposes lots with an average frontage of less
than 50 feet, the plan may be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 20
feet.
B. The original drawing, and all submitted prints thereof, shall be made on
sheets either:
(1) Seventeen inches to 18 inches by 22 inches to 24 inches;
(2) Twenty-two inches to 24 inches by 34 inches to 36 inches; or
(3) Thirty-four inches to 36 inches by 48 inches.
C. If the final plan requires more than one sheet, a key diagram showing
the relative location of the several sections shall be drawn on each
sheet.
D. The final plan shall show:
(1) Name of proposed subdivision or other identifying title, and of the
Borough.
(2) North point, graphic scale, written scale, and date, including the
month, day and year that the original drawing of the final plan was
completed and the month, day and year that the original drawing
was revised, for each revision.
(3) Name of the record owner (and subdivider) of the tract, and the
source(s) of title to the land being subdivided, as shown by the
records of the County Recorder of Deeds.
(4) The name, address and seal of the registered professional engineer
or surveyor responsible for the plan.
§ 410-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-17
1:351
(5) The names of all abutting subdivisions, if any, with the book and
page numbers where recorded, and the names of the owners of all
adjacent unplatted land, if any, and the book and page number
where recorded.
(6) A key map for the purpose of locating the property being
subdivided, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 800 feet and
showing the relation of the property, differentiated by tone or
pattern, to adjoining property and to all streets, roads and
municipal boundaries within 1,000 feet of the proposed
subdivision. In addition, a scale and North point shall be indicated.
(7) The total tract boundary lines of the area being subdivided with
accurate distances to hundredths of a foot and bearings to 1/4 of a
minute. These boundaries shall be determined by accurate survey
in the field which shall be balanced and closed with an error of
closure not to exceed one foot in 10,000 feet; provided, however,
that the boundary(ies) adjoining additional unplatted land of the
subdivider (example, between separately submitted final plan
sections) are not required to be based upon field survey, and may
be calculated. The location and elevation, if established, of all
boundary line (perimeter) monuments shall be indicated, along
with a statement of the total area of the property being subdivided.
(8) Zoning data, including all of the following:
(a) Zoning district lines, existing and proposed shall be provided.
A separate print of the plan shall be submitted showing this
information. Bulk and use regulations shall be provided.
(9) The location, name (and/or number) and right-of-way, cartway and
ultimate right-of-way widths and lines of all roads within the
subdivision or land development.
(a) Center-line radii of horizontal curves, intended ownership and
a statement of any conditions governing the use of streets shall
be indicated.
(b) Streets to be dedicated shall be indicated. For streets which
will not be dedicated, the arrangements to be made for the
ownership and maintenance of those streets shall be given.
(c) The applicant shall submit letters from the Borough, the
postmaster of the area and the Berks County Department of
Emergency Services 911 Coordinator having jurisdiction in the
area in which the subdivision or land development is located,
stating that the proposed street names are acceptable.
(10) The name (or number) and cartway and right-of-way widths and
lines of all existing public streets and the name and location of all
other roads within the property.
§ 410-17 KENHORST CODE § 410-17
1:352
(11) The following data for the cartway edges (curblines) and right-ofway
lines of all recorded (except those which are to be vacated)
and/or proposed streets and for the right-of-way lines of all existing
streets within the property.
(a) The length (in feet to the second decimal point) of all straight
lines and any two functions of a chord of all curved lines; and
(b) The width (in feet) of the cartway, right-of-way and, if required,
of the ultimate right-of-way, and (in degrees, minutes and
seconds) of the delta angle of all curved lines, including curved
lot lines.
(12) All lot lines shall be completely dimensioned in feet to the second
decimal point, if straight, and if curved, with central angle in
degrees, minutes and seconds and length of arc and radius. All
angles of each lot shall be shown in degrees, minutes and seconds.
Each lot shall be balanced to an accuracy of 1:10,000. All internal
angles within the lots shall be designated to the closest second.
(13) Lot numbers (numbered consecutively) and a statement of the total
number of lots (and parcels). In single-family or townhouse
development list, the lot size in square feet for the smallest lot.
(14) Location, size and proposed use and design of all parks,
playgrounds, landscaped areas, recreation areas, public buildings
and other public uses. Areas to be dedicated to the Borough shall
be noted. Areas not to be dedicated shall be noted, conditions
governing such areas shall be listed and the arrangements to be
made for the ownership, administration and maintenance for these
areas shall be given, including applicable agreements and deed
restrictions. A note indicating the Borough is not responsible for
construction or maintenance of any area, park improvement,
plantings, street or alley not dedicated for public use shall be
placed on the plan. Bearings and distances and areas shall be
provided for existing public lands; property to be dedicated or
reserved for public, semipublic or community use, including
streets; and areas to which title is reserved by the landowner.
(15) A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots, with
reference to restrictions of any type which exist or will exist as
covenants in the deed for the lots contained in the subdivision and,
if recorded, including the book and page number of the County
Deed Book.
(16) The proposed building reserve (setback) line for each lot, or the
proposed placement of each building in other than single-family lot
developments, in accordance with Chapter 475, Zoning,
requirements.
(17) Clear sight triangles as required by § 410-19I.
§ 410-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-17
1:353
(18) The location (and elevation, if established) of all existing and
proposed street monuments as required by § 410-27I.
(19) All easements or rights-of-way where provided for or owned by
public services and any limitations on such easements or rights-ofway.
Rights-of-way shall be shown and accurately identified on the
plan, and easements shall either be shown or specifically described
on the plan. Easements should be located in cooperation with the
appropriate public utilities.
(20) Location, size and invert elevation of all sanitary, and/or storm
sewers and location of all manholes, inlets and culverts (this data
may be submitted as a separate plan). All manholes, inlets and
culverts shall be separately numbered in consecutive order. The
location and size of all water mains shall also be shown.
(21) Provisions for pedestrian and other non-vehicular circulation
throughout the tract, when provided by means other than
sidewalks.
(22) The location of all common parking areas and access drives to the
parking areas, the size, number of parking stalls, the width of aisles
and access drives and proposed grades of parking areas and access
drives. Location, number and dimensions of off-street loading areas
shall be indicated.
(23) If the subdivision proposes a new street intersection with a state
legislative route, the intersection occupancy permit number(s)
shall be indicated for all such intersections. A letter from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation approving the
proposed intersection is required.
(24) A certificate of ownership, acknowledgement of plan and offer of
dedication shall be lettered on the plan, using the form specified in
Appendix I176 and shall be duly acknowledged and signed by the
owner(s) of the property before an officer authorized to take
acknowledgement of deeds.
(25) Certificate for approval of the plan by the Borough Council, and,
where applicable, by the Borough Planning Commission and the
Borough Engineer.
(26) A blank space measuring 3 1/2 inches by six inches shall be left,
preferably adjacent to the Borough certification in which the
appropriate stamp of the County Planning Commission may be
applied.
(27) Special flood hazard areas, including delineation of floodway and
flood fringe, established by study of FEMA, with base flood
elevations for the one-hundred-year storm.
176. Editor's Note: Appendix I is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 410-17 KENHORST CODE § 410-17
1:354
(a) When a subdivision or land development contains a floodplain,
the elevation of roads, building sites, fills, flood and erosion
protection facility and public utilities included within the
floodplain and within 100 feet of the floodplain shall be given.
(b) In the case of a proposed revision to a FEMA-mapped
floodplain, a letter of approval of such revision from FEMA.
(28) In the case of any residential subdivision of five lots or more, a note
advising potential purchaser(s) of any lot(s) shown thereon to
contact the local utility company regarding costs of underground
utilities.
(29) Location and elevation of the datum to which elevations refer.
Datum used shall be a known, established bench mark.
(30)Wetlands shall be delineated by a certified professional and a
buffer shall be provided around the wetlands.
E. The final plan shall be accompanied by the following supplementary
data, where applicable:
(1) Typical street cross-section drawing(s) for all proposed streets.
Cross-section drawings may be shown either on the final plan or on
the profile sheets required by § 410-16E(2).
(2) Profile sheets for all proposed streets within the tract. Such profiles
shall show at least the following information, properly labeled:
(a) Existing (natural) profile along both cartway edges of each
street.
(b) Proposed finished grade at the top of both curbs or proposed
finished grade at both cartway edges.
(c) The length of all vertical curves.
(d) Existing and proposed sanitary sewer mains and manholes.
(e) Existing and proposed storm sewer mains, inlets, manholes,
and culverts.
(f) Existing and proposed water mains.
(3) The profile sheets required by § 410-17E(2) shall be legibly drawn
at one of the following sets of scales or any combination thereof:
(a) One inch equals 10 feet horizontal and one inch equals one foot
vertical;
(b) One inch equals 20 feet horizontal and one inch equals two feet
vertical;
(c) One inch equals 40 feet horizontal and one inch equals four
feet vertical; or
§ 410-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-17
1:355
(d) One inch equals 50 feet horizontal and one inch equals five feet
vertical.
(4) All offers of dedication, and covenants governing the reservation
and maintenance of undedicated open space, which shall bear the
certificate of approval of the Borough Solicitor as to their legal
sufficiency.
(5) Such private deed restrictions, including building setback lines, as
may be imposed upon the property as a condition to sale, together
with a statement of any restrictions previously imposed which may
affect the title to the land being submitted.
(6) Whenever a subdivider proposes to establish a street which is not
offered for dedication to public use, the Borough Planning
Commission may require the subdivider to submit, and also to
record with the plan, a copy of an agreement made with the
Borough on behalf of his heirs and assigns, and signed by the
Borough Solicitor, and which shall establish the conditions under
which the street may later be offered for dedication, and shall
stipulate, among other things:
(a) That the street shall conform to the Borough specifications or
that the owners of the abutting lots shall include with the offer
of dedication sufficient money, as estimated by the Borough
Engineer, to restore the street to conformance with the
Borough specifications.
(b) That an offer to dedicate the street shall be made only for the
street as a whole;
(c) That the method of assessing repair costs be as stipulated; and
(d) That agreement by the owners of 51% of the front footage
thereon shall be binding on the owners of the remaining lots.
(7) A plan for the surface drainage of the tract, including stormwater
runoff calculations and the proposed method of accommodating the
anticipated runoff.
(8) Design of any bridges or culverts. Such designs shall meet all
applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection. Capacity/loading calculations shall be submitted.
(9) With a proposal to change or diminish the course, current or cross
section of any stream or body of water or to construct or change
any water obstruction, wetlands or stream bank, approval and a
permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and/or Army Corps of Engineers, when required or
applicable.
§ 410-17 KENHORST CODE § 410-17
1:356
(10) A plan for the preservation of existing natural features on the site
or a narrative statement indicating how such features will be
preserved.
(11) The location and types of erosion and sediment control measures as
outlined in § 410-25E.
(12) Sets of final improvement plans and improvements agreement.
(13)With a proposal to change or diminish the course, current or cross
section of any stream or body of water or to construct or change
any water obstruction, approval and a permit from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. This
requirement applies to all lands having a drainage area (basin)
exceeding 320 acres.177
(14) A landscaping plan showing the number, location, size and species
of all plant material that will be planted within the subdivision.
(15) The Borough Council may require a subdivider to submit a separate
landscape plan showing the number, location, size and species of
all shrubbery that will be planted.
(16) A lighting plan showing the type and height of fixtures, the
brightness of fixtures and lighting levels throughout the site.
(17) A final grading plan shall be submitted at the time of final plan
submission.
(18) An erosion and sediment control plan for the tract. The Planning
Commission must be in written receipt, from the Berks County
Conservation District, of the approval of the sediment and erosion
control measures for the proposed subdivision. In the event the
subdivision has not received the District's approval and the intent
of the subdivision is to create only single-family detached lots along
existing roads, the Borough may permit developer to place the
following notation on the plans:
"Any and all lots contained within this subdivision are NOT for
development of any type until or unless the seller of the lot or
purchaser of the lot has submitted and obtained sediment and
erosion control measure approval form the Berks County
Conversation District. Each individual lot must obtain this
approval prior to earthmoving activities."
(19) Copies of Planning Module for Land Development as mandated by
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection shall
accompany the final plan.
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 410-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-17
1:357
(20) Provisions for fire protection, which shall be reviewed by the
Borough Fire Marshal.
(21) Where the developer proposes to locate a street, driveway or other
improvement within a portion of a utility right-of-way or to relocate
within the right-of-way or relocate the existing line, a letter from
the appropriate utility company giving permission to locate or
relocate within the right-of-way or relocate the existing line.178
(22) Schematic architectural drawings of proposed buildings, including
building orientation.
(23) Provisions for traffic control.
(24) Lowest floor elevations for proposed building.
(25) A table showing extent of compliance with the area, yard and
height regulations of Chapter 475, Zoning.
(26) Horizontal curve radii of cartway and right-of-way lines at street
intersections. The cartway tie-in to existing street cartways shall be
indicated.
(27) A typical treatment for the construction of driveways and the
handling of storm drainage where driveway will intersect streets.
The Borough may require driveway culverts to be sized and such
size noted on the plans.
(28) Copies of all approvals required for sanitary sewer and water
systems shall be received prior to approval of the final plan,
including confirmation that the appropriate agencies can and will
serve the proposed development.
(29) When the tract contains wetlands, a copy of all required permits or
permit waivers from PADEP and/or Army Corps of Engineers.
178. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 410-17 KENHORST CODE § 410-17
1:358
ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 410-18. Application and general standards.
§ 410-19. Streets.
A. The standards and requirements contained in Articles V and VI are
intended as the minimum for the promotion of the public health, safety
and general welfare, and shall be applied as such by the Borough
Planning Commission and Borough Council in reviewing all subdivision
plans.
B. Whenever other Borough regulations impose more restrictive
standards and requirements than those contained herein, such other
regulations shall prevail; otherwise, the standards and requirements of
these regulations shall apply.
C. The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified
by the Borough Planning Commission if, in the judgment of the Borough
Planning Commission, the proposed plan achieves substantially the
objectives of these regulations and is further protected by such
covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to and
achievement of the subdivision plan.
D. Land subject to hazards to life, health, or property, such as may arise
from fire, floods, disease, or other causes, shall not be subdivided for
building purposes unless such hazards have been eliminated or unless
the subdivision plan shall show adequate safeguards against them,
which shall be approved by the appropriate regulatory agencies.
E. Subdivision plans shall give due recognition to the official plan of the
Borough or to parts of the official plans which have been adopted
pursuant to statute.
F. Land proposed for subdivision shall not be developed or changed by
grading, excavating, or by the removal or destruction of the natural
topsoil, trees, or other vegetative cover unless adequate provisions for
minimizing erosion and sediment are provided under Title 25, Chapter
102, Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection,179 and § 410-25E of these regulations.
A. General standards.
(1) The location and width of all streets shall conform to the official
plans or to such parts thereof as may have been adopted by the
Borough and/or the county.
(2) The proposed street system shall extend existing or recorded
streets at the same width as the existing or recorded streets if
179. Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Ch. 102, Erosion and Sediment Control.
§ 410-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-19
1:359
these streets meet the standards of § 410-19C. If the existing or
recorded streets do not meet the standards of § 410-19C, the
proposed street extensions shall meet the standards of § 410-19C.
(3) Where, in the opinion of the Borough Planning Commission, it is
desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property, streets
shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property.
(4) New minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through
traffic, but the subdivider shall give adequate consideration to
provision for the extension and continuation of major and collector
streets into and from adjoining properties.
(5) Where a subdivision abuts an existing street of improper width or
alignment, the Borough Planning Commission may require the
dedication of land sufficient to widen the street or correct the
alignment.
(6) Private streets (streets not to be offered for dedication) are
prohibited, unless they meet the design standards of these
regulations for public streets.
B. Partial and half streets. New half or partial streets will not be
permitted.
C. Street widths.
(1) Minimum street right-of-way and cartway (pavement) widths shall
be as shown on the Official Plans or Comprehensive Plan, or if not
shown on such plans, shall be as follows:
Street Type
Required Widths
(feet)
Minor street
Right-of-way 50
Cartway 30
Collector street
Right-of-way 60
Cartway 16
Major street
Right-of-way See Note (a)
Cartway See Note (b)
Permanent cul-de-sac
Right-of-way 50
Cartway 30
Marginal access street
§ 410-19 KENHORST CODE § 410-19
1:360
Street Type
Required Widths
(feet)
Right-of-way See Note (b)
Cartway 24
Service street
Right-of-way 34
Cartway 24
NOTES:
(a) As specified in the official plans, or Comprehensive Plan, or
as determined after consulting with the Borough, the County
Planning Commission, and the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(b) Variable, depending on the width of the adjacent right-of-way
but not less than 36 feet.
(2) Additional right-of-way and cartway widths may be required by the
Borough Planning Commission for the purpose of promoting the
public safety and convenience or to provide parking in commercial
and industrial areas and in areas of high-density residential
development.
D. Restriction of access.
(1) Whenever a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
street with an ultimate right-of-way of 80 feet or more, the Borough
Planning Commission may require restriction of access to the major
street by:
(a) Provision of reverse frontage lots;
(b) Provision of service streets along the rear of the abutting lots,
together with prohibition of private driveways intersecting the
major streets; or
(c) Provision of marginal access streets, provided that the reserve
strips establishing such marginal access streets shall be
definitely placed within the jurisdiction of the Borough under
an agreement meeting the approval of the Borough.
(2) Except as specified by § 410-19D(1)(c), reserve strips shall be
prohibited.
E. Street grades.
(1) There shall be a minimum center line grade of 3/4%.
(2) Center line grades shall not exceed the following:
§ 410-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-19
1:361
(a) Minor street: 10%.
(b) Collector street: 6%.
(c) Major street: 6%.
(d) Street intersection: 5%.
(3) Grades up to 15% may be permitted on a minor street where
secondary access to the street is possible over streets with grades
of 10% or less.
F. Horizontal curves.
(1) Whenever street lines are deflected in excess of two degrees,
connection shall be made by horizontal curves.
(2) To ensure adequate sight distance, minimum center-line radii for
horizontal curves shall be as follows:
(a) Minor streets: 150 feet.
(b) Collector streets: 300 feet.
(c) Major streets: 500 feet.
(3) A tangent of at least 100 feet shall be introduced between all
horizontal curves on collectors and major streets.
(4) To the greatest extent possible, combinations of the minimum
radius and maximum grade shall be avoided.
G. Vertical curves. At all changes in street grades where the algebraic
difference in grade exceeds 1%, vertical curves shall be provided to
permit the following minimum sight distances:
(1) Minor streets: 200 feet.
(2) Collector streets: 300 feet.
(3) Major streets: 400 feet.
H. Intersections.
(1) Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no
street shall intersect another at an angle of less than 60°, or more
than 120°.
(2) No more than two streets shall intersect at the same point.
(3) Streets intersecting another street shall either intersect directly
opposite to each other, or shall be separated by at least 150 feet
between center lines, measured along the center line of the street
being intersected.
§ 410-19 KENHORST CODE § 410-19
1:362
(4) Intersections shall be approached on all sides by a straight leveling
area, the grade of which shall not exceed 5% within 50 feet of the
intersection of the nearest right-of-way lines.
(5) Intersections with major streets shall be located not less than 1,000
feet apart, measured from center line to center line, along the
center line of the major street.
(6) Street curb intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with
a minimum radius of:
(a) Twenty feet for intersections involving only minor streets;
(b) Thirty feet for all intersections involving a collector street;
(c) Forty feet for all intersections involving a major street.
(7) Street right-of-way lines shall be parallel to (concentric with) curb
arcs at intersections.
I. Sight distances at intersections.
(1) Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all street intersections.
Within such triangles, no vision-obstructing object shall be
permitted which obscures vision above the height of 30 inches and
below 10 feet measured from the center-line grade of intersecting
streets. Such triangles shall be established from a distance of 75
feet from the point of intersection of the center lines, except that
clear sight triangles of 150 feet shall be provided for all
intersections with major streets.
(2) Wherever a portion of the line of such triangles occurs behind (i.e.,
from the street) the building setback line, such portion shall be
shown on the final plan of the subdivision and shall be considered a
building setback line.
J. Cul-de-sac streets.
(1) Dead-end streets are prohibited unless designed as cul-de-sac
streets or designed for future access to adjoining properties.
(2) Any street dead-ended for access to an adjoining property or
because of authorized stage development shall be provided with a
temporary, paved turnaround within the subdivision, and the use of
such turnaround shall be guaranteed to the public until such time
as the street is extended.
(3) Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall not exceed
500 feet in length and shall not furnish access to more than 20
dwelling units.
(4) Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the
turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to the tract
§ 410-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-19
1:363
boundary with sufficient additional width provided along the
boundary line to permit extension of the street at full width.
(5) All cul-de-sac streets, whether permanently or temporarily
designed as such, shall be provided at the closed end with a fully
paved turnaround: minimum radius to the pavement edge or
curbline shall be 50 feet, and minimum radius of the right-of-way
line shall be 60 feet. The sidewalk area within the right-of-way line
should conform to the straightway portion of the street and the
curvature of the street.
(6) Drainage of cul-de-sac streets shall preferably be towards the open
end. If drainage is toward the closed end, it shall be conducted
away in an underground storm sewer.
(7) The center line grade on a cul-de-sac street shall not exceed 8%
and the grade of the diameter of the turnaround shall not exceed
5%.
K. Street names.
(1) Proposed streets which obviously are in alignment with other
streets already existing and named, shall bear the names of the
existing streets.
(2) In no case shall the name of a proposed street duplicate an existing
street name in the Borough or postal district, irrespective of the
use of the suffix "street," "road," "avenue," "boulevard," "drive,"
"way," "place," "court," "lane," etc.
(3) All street names shall be subject to the approval of the Borough, the
postmaster having jurisdiction, and the Berks County Department
of Emergency Services 911 Coordinator having jurisdiction in the
area in which the subdivision or land development is located.
L. Service streets (alleys).
(1) Service streets are prohibited in subdivisions for single-family
detached residences, except where required to avoid direct
driveway access to major streets.
(2) Service streets may be permitted in other types of residential
development, provided that the subdivider produces evidence
satisfactory to the Borough Planning Commission or Borough
Council of the need for such service streets, provided such are not
the primary means of access.
(3) Where permitted, service streets in residential developments shall
have a minimum paved width of 24 feet except that, where service
streets serve dwellings on only one side, the Borough Planning
Commission may permit a paved surface of not less than 12 feet.
§ 410-19 KENHORST CODE § 410-19
1:364
§ 410-20. Blocks.
(4) No part of any dwelling garage or other structure shall be located
within 22 feet of the center line of a service street.
(5) Except where other adequate provisions are made for off-street
loading and parking consistent with the use proposed, service
streets shall be required in commercial and industrial districts and
shall have a minimum paved width of 24 feet.
(6) Dead-end service streets shall be avoided, but where this proves
impossible, dead-end service streets shall be terminated with a
paved circular turnaround with a minimum radius to the outer
pavement edge (curbline) of 50 feet.
(7) Service street intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall
be avoided, but where necessary, comers shall be rounded or cut
back sufficiently to permit safe vehicular circulation.
A. Layout. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with
due regard to:
(1) Provisions of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed;
(2) Zoning requirements;
(3) Topography;
(4) Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, including the reduction of intersections with major
streets.
B. Length.
(1) Blocks shall have a maximum length of 1,600 feet and a minimum
length of 500 feet; provided, however, that the Borough Planning
Commission or Borough Council may decrease the maximum and/
or minimum lengths of blocks if in the opinion of either body, the
topography of the land in question and/or surface water drainage
conditions warrant such a decrease.
(2) In the design of blocks longer than 1,000 feet, special consideration
shall be given to the requirements of satisfactory fire protection.
(3) Where practicable, blocks along major and collector streets shall
not be less than 1,000 feet long.
C. Crosswalks.
(1) Crosswalks may be required wherever necessary to facilitate
pedestrian circulation and to give access to community facilities. A
minimum of one crosswalk is required in blocks of over 1,000 feet
in length.
§ 410-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-20
1:365
§ 410-21. Lots and parcels.
(2) Such crosswalks shall have a width of not less than 10 feet and a
paved walk of not less than four feet.
(3) Curb cuts at crosswalks with ramps to the sidewalks should be
designed to meet applicable Americans With Disabilities Act
requirements.
D. Sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalk slope between curb and building line shall be 0.02 feet
per foot.
(2) (Reserved)180
(3) Curb cuts at crosswalks with ramps to the sidewalks should be
designed to meet applicable Americans With Disabilities Act
requirements.
E. Depth. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate
two tiers of lots, except:
(1) Where reverse frontage lots are required along a major traffic
street; or
(2) Where prevented by the size, topographical conditions or other
inherent conditions of property, in which case the Borough
Planning Commission may approve a single tier of lots.
F. Commercial and industrial blocks. Blocks in commercial and industrial
areas may vary from the elements of design detailed above if required
by the nature of the use. In all cases, however, adequate provision shall
be made for off-street parking and loading areas as well as for traffic
circulation and parking for employees and customers.
A. General standards.
(1) The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the
type of development and use contemplated, and in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 475, Zoning.
(2) Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
street lines or radial to curved street lines.
(3) Where feasible, lot lines shall follow municipal boundaries rather
than cross them, in order to avoid jurisdictional problems.
(4) Generally, the depth of residential lots shall be not less than one
nor more than 2 1/2 times their width.
180. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(2), which provided specifications for sidewalks slopes
where curb grades meet at an intersection, was repealed 6-1-2017 by Ord. No. 584. See
now § 404-19Q.
§ 410-20 KENHORST CODE § 410-21
1:366
(5) Depth and width of parcels intended for nonresidential uses shall
be adequate for the use proposed and sufficient to provide
satisfactory space for on-site parking, loading and unloading,
setbacks, landscaping, etc.
(6) If, after subdividing, there exists remnants of land, they shall be
either:
(a) Incorporated in existing or proposed lots; or
(b) Legally dedicated to public use, if acceptable to the Borough.
(7) Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing
streets, lots shall begin at such extra width line, and all setbacks
shall be measured from such line.
(8) Where access to land within a subdivision or land development will
be solely by proposed roads within an adjoining municipality, the
Borough Council may require assurance from the adjoining
municipality that adequate provisions have been made to ensure
construction of the proposed access roads.
(9) When the rear wall of a building will face a public street, the
Borough Council may require a landscape screen, fence, earth
mounding or similar screening device subject to the Borough
approval between the building and the public street.
B. Lot frontage.
(1) All lots shall have direct access to an existing or proposed public
street, or to a private street, if it meets the requirements of these
regulations.
(2) Double or reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where
required to provide separation of residential development from
major streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography
or orientation.
(3) All residential reverse frontage lots shall have a rear yard with a
minimum depth of 75 feet, measured in the shortest distance from
the proposed dwelling unit to the ultimate right-of-way and shall,
within such rear yard and immediately adjacent to the right-of-way,
have a planting screen easement of at least 10 feet in width, across
which there shall be no right of access.
(4) After consideration of street speeds, traffic volumes, projected
traffic generated at a proposed land use and the location and
arrangement of existing and proposed driveways and intersections,
the Borough Council may require the developer to install at his
expense an acceleration or deceleration lane, or both, to serve a
proposed driveway or street. If additional street right-of-way is
required to construct the acceleration or deceleration lane, the
additional right-of-way shall be provided by the developer. When
§ 410-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-21
1:367
required by the Borough Council, the developer shall furnish a
study to the Borough which will provide the information necessary
to permit the determination as to whether an acceleration or
deceleration lane is required.
(5) Subdivision and land developments shall be provided with internal
streets to which the lots will have driveway access in order to
minimize the number of driveway intersections with existing public
streets. This reduction in driveway intersection will lessen
interruptions to traffic flow and accident hazards and minimize
sedimentation and runoff problems onto existing public streets.
C. Building reserve (setback) lines.
(1) All building reserve (setback) lines shall be as required by Chapter
475, Zoning, or other regulations, and be measured from the
ultimate right-of-way line of all abutting streets.
(2) On any lot abutting a railroad, no dwelling shall be placed within 75
feet of any portion of the railroad right-of-way line.
D. Driveways and off-street parking.
(1) Each off street parking space shall contain a minimum of 200
square feet. This shall be in addition to adequate aisles for
maneuvering and movement of vehicles. The grade of such parking
areas shall not exceed 5%.
(2) Each proposed dwelling unit in a subdivision shall be provided with
at least two off-street parking spaces per family, or the
requirements of Chapter 475, Zoning, whichever is stricter.
(a) In the case of single-family or two-family dwelling buildings,
such off-street parking space(s) shall be provided behind the
street right-of-way line and may be as an attached or separate
garage(s), carport(s) or driveway(s).
(b) In the case of multiple-family dwelling buildings, such offstreet
parking space may be provided in the form of a parking
compound(s) located adjacent to or near the multifamily
building, providing at least two off street parking spaces per
unit.
(3) Commercial and industrial subdivisions shall meet the off-street
parking requirements of Chapter 475, Zoning.
(4) Private driveways on corner lots shall be located at least 40 feet
from the point of intersection of the nearest street curblines.
(5) In order to provide a safe and convenient means of access, grades
on private driveways should not exceed 15%. Driveways shall be
paved.
§ 410-21 KENHORST CODE § 410-21
1:368
§ 410-22. Sanitary sewage disposal.
(6) In order to provide safe and convenient ingress and egress, private
driveway entrances should be rounded at a minimum radius of
three feet, or should have a flare constructed that is equivalent to
this radius, at the point of intersection with the cartway edge
(curbline). Where necessary, a clear sight triangle shall be
established in accord with § 410-19I(1).
E. Lot size.
(1) The minimum lot size and width requirements are to be found in
Chapter 475, Zoning.
(2) Lot size shall be determined from the ultimate right-of-way line of
adjacent street; lot width to be in accordance with conditions of
Chapter 475, Zoning.
A. As part of all subdivision and land development plan applications, the
applicant shall develop a plan for the collection, conveyance and
treatment of wastewater considering the following criteria:
(1) Each property shall connect with the Borough sanitary sewer
system.
(2) The plan for sewage disposal shall be consistent with all pertinent
design requirements specified by the Borough, the City of Reading
and Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(3) The plan for sewage disposal shall be prepared to consider all
pertinent local, regional, state and federal permitting
requirements.
B. Unless otherwise permitted by the Borough, all proposed land uses
shall be required to connect to the City of Reading's sewage disposal
system, subject to the following provisions:
(1) The City of Reading shall review all such subdivision or land
development plan applications, which shall review the adequacy of
the proposed sanitary sewer improvements. The Borough Council
shall not approve a proposed subdivision or land development plan
until the City of Reading has issued a letter of adequacy for the
proposed sanitary sewer improvements.
(2) All proposed sanitary sewage disposal facilities shall be located,
designed, constructed and installed in accordance with the
standards and specifications of the City of Reading and Kenhorst
Borough Code.
(3) The applicant shall be responsible for any required off-site sanitary
sewage disposal improvements that may be necessary to
accommodate the wastewater flow from the development. All such
§ 410-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-22
1:369
§ 410-23. Water supply.
off-site improvements shall be coordinated with the City of
Reading.
(4) When required, the appropriate planning modules or exemption
requests shall be submitted to Kenhorst Borough and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for review
and consideration.
A. As part of all subdivision and land development plan applications, the
applicant shall develop a plan for water supply considering the
following criteria:
(1) Each property shall connect with the Borough water system.
(2) The water distribution system shall be designed to furnish an
adequate supply of water to each lot, with adequate main sizes and
fire hydrants locations to meet the specifications of the Middle
Department Association of Fire Underwriters. A copy of approval of
such system by the appropriate public agency or utility company
shall be submitted with the final plan. Suitable agreement shall also
be established for the ownership and maintenance of such
distribution system.
(3) The plan for water supply shall be consistent with all pertinent
design requirements specified by the Reading Area Water Authority
or PA American Water Company and Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
(4) The plan for water supply shall be prepared to consider all
pertinent local, regional, state and federal permitting
requirements.
(5) A fire hydrant shall be located within 400 feet of all new lots and
buildings.
(6) Where modifications to an existing lot or structure are proposed
that require a land development plan under this chapter, a fire
hydrant shall be located within 400 feet of the lot and building
unless a waiver from the Fire Marshal is obtained.
B. Unless otherwise permitted by the Borough, all proposed land uses
shall be required to connect to the Reading Area Water Authority or PA
American Water Company water supply system, subject to the following
provisions:
(1) The Reading Area Water Authority or PA American Water Company
shall review all such subdivision or land development plan
applications, which shall review the adequacy of the proposed
water supply improvements. The Board of Commissioners shall not
approve a proposed subdivision or land development plan until the
§ 410-22 KENHORST CODE § 410-23
1:370
§ 410-24. Storm drainage.
Reading Area Water Authority or PA American Water Company
has issued a letter of adequacy for the proposed water supply
improvements.
(2) All proposed water supply facilities shall be located, designed,
constructed and installed in accordance with the standards and
specifications of the Reading Area Water Authority or PA American
Water Company and the Kenhorst Borough Code.
(3) The applicant shall be responsible for any required off-site water
supply improvements that may be necessary to provide a reliable
supply of water to the development. All such off-site improvements
shall be coordinated with the Reading Area Water Authority or PA
American Water Company.
A. Chapter 398, Stormwater Management, of the Code of the Borough of
Kenhorst shall govern all storm drainage and conveyance. Storm
sewers, culverts and related installations shall be provided as
necessary to:
(1) Permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses;
(2) Ensure adequate drainage of all low points along the line of streets;
(3) Intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals related to the
extent and grade of the area drained;
(4) Ensure adequate drainage at intersections of driveways with
streets.
B. Storm sewers and related installations shall be required only when the
runoff of stormwater cannot be satisfactorily handled within the street
cartway. The Borough Engineer shall determine whether the runoff can
be or cannot be satisfactorily handled within the street cartway.
C. Where existing storm sewers are reasonably accessible, and of
adequate capacity, proposed subdivisions shall, if necessary, connect to
the existing storm sewers.
D. In the design of storm drainage facilities, special consideration shall be
given to avoidance of problems which may arise from the concentration
of stormwater runoff onto adjacent developed or undeveloped
properties.
E. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed not only to handle the
anticipated peak discharge from the property being subdivided, but
also the anticipated increased runoff that will occur when all the
property at a higher elevation in the same watershed is fully developed.
F. Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by or contains a
pond, lake, watercourse, drainageway, channel, storm drainage system
§ 410-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-24
1:371
§ 410-25. Public use and service areas.
or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement that conforms
substantially with the line of such pond, lake, watercourse,
drainageway, channel, storm drainage system or stream of such width
as will be adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of drainage (onehundred-
year flow) and to provide for widening, deepening, relocating,
improving or protecting such features or drainage facilities. Minimum
easement width shall be 10 feet from each side of the watercourse,
water body, stream, pond, lake or drainage facility, but the Borough
may require a greater easement when necessary. Bearing and distances
shall be provided for the boundaries of easement.
(1) Any changes in an existing drainageway shall be subject to the
approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, the Army Corps of Engineers or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency when each or all have jurisdiction. All permits
and approvals shall be issued prior to construction or stormdrainage-
related improvements.
(2) The developer shall properly grade and seed slopes and fence open
ditches when a safety hazard can result. Areas within easements
shall be kept as lawn or in natural conditions to allow maintenance
and entrance.
G. All drainage facilities shall be designed to adequately handle surface
runoff and carry it to suitable outlets and shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 398, Stormwater Management.
H. All streets shall be so designed as to provide for the discharge of
surface water from their rights-of-way.
I. The slope of the crown on proposed streets shall be not less than 1/8 of
an inch per foot and not more than 1/3 of an inch per foot. Refer to
Appendix IV.181
J. Adequate facilities shall be provided at low points along streets and at
street intersections where necessary to intercept runoff. Crossing
gutters will not be permitted.
K. Where downspouts are directed to the curb, the bottom of the opening
within the curb shall be a minimum of one inch above the finished grade
of the street.
A. Public grounds.
(1) In reviewing subdivision plans, the Borough Planning Commission
shall consider whether community facilities, especially schools, in
the area are adequate to serve the needs of the additional dwellings
181. Editor's Note: Appendix IV is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 410-24 KENHORST CODE § 410-25
1:372
proposed by the subdivision, and shall make such report thereon as
it deems necessary in the public interest.
(2) Subdividers shall give earnest consideration to the desirability of
providing or reserving areas for facilities normally required in
residential neighborhoods, including churches, libraries, schools
and other public buildings; parks, playgrounds and playfields;
shopping and local business centers. Areas provided or reserved
for such community facilities should be adequate to provide for
building sites, landscaping and off-street parking as appropriate to
the uses proposed. Prior to the preparation of plans, subdividers of
large tracts should review with the staff of the Borough Planning
Commission the minimum standards for various community
facilities applicable to the tract being subdivided.
(3) The Borough Planning Commission shall consider the need for
suitable open areas for recreation and establish requirements for
the subdivider. The minimum standards to be used by the
Commission in requiring the reservation of open space shall be as
follows (du/ac is dwelling units per acre):
Density
(du/ac) % of Tract
1 to 3 5%
3.1 to 6 10%
6.1 to 10 15%
10.1 to 15 20%
Over 15 25%
(a) The above figures shall apply in land subdivisions or land
developments which intend to provide housing for the
following number of families by unit type.
Unit Type Open Pace Required
Single family 50 units or more
Townhouse and
multifamily
Densities in excess of 4.0 and/or
involving 20 or more units
Mobile home park Always required
(b) When mixed unit types are proposed within a development
(e.g., single-family and townhouses), open space shall be
required where there are 50 or more total units and/or a
density in excess of 4.0.
(c) When the developer provides open space as required, he shall
include appropriate recreation facilities for utilization of the
open space and satisfactory assurance for maintenance of the
open space.
§ 410-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-25
1:373
(d) Undevelopable land (slopes in excess of 25%, marsh land, etc.)
shall not comprise more than 50% of the required open space.
(4) The Borough Council may by resolution prohibit the subdivider
from erecting any structure on, removing or destroying any trees or
topsoil on, doing any grading on, and making any use of any land in
his subdivision which is designated for street, park, or other public
use on the Official Map of the Borough. The resolution may prohibit
the subdivider from engaging in such actions for a period of one
year after the subdivider has submitted a written notice to the
Borough Council announcing his intentions to develop the land
designated for public use, or has made formal application for an
official permit to build a structure for private use The reservation
for public grounds shall lapse at the end of one year unless the
Borough Council shall have acquired the property or begun
condemnation proceedings to acquire such property before the end
of the year.
B. Community assets. Consideration shall be shown for all natural
features, such as large trees, which if preserved, will add attractiveness
and value to the remainder of the subdivision. Trees shall be preserved
wherever possible.
C. Utility easements.
(1) Easements with a width of 15 feet shall be provided for poles,
wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and heat
mains and/or other utility lines intended to service the abutting
lots. No structures or trees shall be placed within such easements.
(2) To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or
adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
(3) There shall be a minimum distance of 20 feet from the right-of-way
line, measured in the shortest distance, between any proposed
dwelling unit and any petroleum, petroleum products or natural
gas transmission line which traverses the subdivision.
(4) Where gas or petroleum transmission lines are a part of the
proposed development, either existing within or requiring
relocation, construction shall occur within a right-of-way of 50 feet
minimum and shall comply to the applicable requirements of the
Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission Regulations.
(5) Underground electric distribution lines are to be installed in all
new subdivisions of five lots or more. Underground telephone lines
and television cable lines shall be installed in all new subdivisions.
In existing subdivisions with five or more unimproved lots, any
extensions of the electric distribution lines shall be placed
underground. It is desirable that all new service laterals from
existing overhead distribution lines shall be placed underground.
An approved plan for the utilization of an electric distribution
§ 410-25 KENHORST CODE § 410-25
1:374
system shall be submitted to the Borough prior to the recording of
a final plan.
D. Utilities.
(1) All basic utility services lines for electric, natural gas, cable
television and telephone shall be placed underground.
(2) The installation of all utilities shall be in strict accordance with the
engineering standards and specifications of the public utility
company.
(3) Where such underground utilities are located under the proposed
cartway, they shall be put in place, connected, and approved before
the streets are constructed and before any person is permitted to
occupy any building to be served by such utilities.
(4) Prior to approval, the applicant shall be responsible for contacting
all utility companies to determine the locations and depths of all
underground utilities within the tract of land being subdivision or
developed.
(5) A complete list of the applicable utility companies and their phone
numbers shall appear on the approved subdivision plan or land
development plan.
E. Erosion and sediment controls.
(1) Land proposed for subdivision shall not be developed or changed
by grading, excavating, or by the removal or destruction of the
natural topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover unless adequate
provisions for minimizing erosion and sediment are provided by the
plan.
(2) An approved plan for erosion and sediment control shall be
prepared and installations necessary to implement this plan shall
be made by the developer as required improvements.
(3) The plan for erosion and sediment control shall meet the standards
and specifications of the Berks County Conservation District and
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(4) The following guidelines shall be applied as needed in developing
erosion and sediment control measures:
(a) Stripping of vegetation, grading, filling, excavating or other
alteration of the landscape shall be done in such a way that will
minimize erosion.
(b) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained,
protected and supplemented.
(c) The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept
to a practical minimum.
§ 410-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-25
1:375
(d) Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
(e) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
exposed critical areas during development.
(f) The permanent vegetation and mechanical erosion control and
drainage measures shall be installed as soon as practical in the
development.
(g) Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the
increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions
during and after development. Where necessary, the rate of
surface water runoff shall be mechanically retarded.
(h) Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the
disturbed area is stabilized by the use of debris basins,
sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures.
(5) The following guidelines shall be applied as needed in excavation
and fills as part of erosion and sediment controls:
(a) All lots, tracts, or parcels shall be graded to provide positive
drainage away from the building without ponding.
(b) Grading and cut-fill operations shall be kept to a minimum to
ensure conformity with the natural topography, to minimize the
erosion hazard, and to adequately handle the surface runoff.
(c) Cut and fill slopes shall not be steeper than 2:1 unless
stabilized by a retaining wall or cribbing, except as approved
by the Borough Council when handled under special
conditions.
(d) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water
from damaging the cut face of excavations or the sloping
surfaces of fills.
(e) Cut and fills shall not endanger adjoining property.
(f) Fill shall be placed and mechanically compacted to minimize
sliding or erosion of the soil.
(g) Fills shall not encroach on natural watercourses or constructed
channels.
(h) Fills placed adjacent to natural watercourses or constructed
channels shall have suitable protection against erosion during
periods of flooding.
(i) Grading will not be done in such a way so as to divert water
onto the property of another landowner without the expressed
consent of the Borough Council and the adjoining landowner.
§ 410-25 KENHORST CODE § 410-25
1:376
(j) During grading operations, necessary measures for dust
control shall be exercised.
(k) Grading equipment will not be allowed to cross live streams.
Provision will be made for the installation of culverts or
bridges.
(6) The period of storage on the land being developed of materials
used in grading operations shall be kept to minimum. Such storage
shall not be continued after the completion of all grading activities
and may be stored for only short periods before the commencement
of grading activities.
F. Standards for mobile home parks.
(1) Mobile home parks shall be considered subdivisions and shall
comply with all the design standards and improvement
specifications found in Articles V and VI of this chapter.
(2) The submission, review, approval or disapproval, and recording of
any mobile home park shall be in accordance with the provisions of
Article III of this chapter.
(3) The plan of any mobile home park shall comply with the
requirements stated in Article IV of this chapter.
(4) All mobile home parks shall comply with all the requirements for
mobile home parks as may be listed in Chapter 475, Zoning.
§ 410-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-25
1:377

ARTICLE VI
Improvement Specifications
§ 410-26. General requirements.
§ 410-27. Required improvements.
The following improvements, as shown on the record plan, shall be provided
by the subdivider:
A. Physical improvements to the property being subdivided shall be
provided, constructed, and installed as shown on the record plan, in
accordance with the requirements of the Borough. Upon completion,
as-built plans shall be submitted for the Borough records.
B. As a condition to review of a final plan by the Borough Planning
Commission, the subdivider shall agree with the Borough as to
installations of all improvements shown on the plan and required by
these regulations and shall execute and file subdivision improvements
agreement as prepared by the Borough Solicitor.
C. All improvements installed by the subdivider shall be constructed in
accordance with the applicable design specifications of the Borough or,
where none apply, as prepared by the Borough Engineer. Where
required, the specifications of the applicable state agency shall be used.
D. Supervision of the installation of improvements required by § 410-27
following shall in all cases be the responsibility of the Borough or of the
appropriate state regulatory agency.
A. Street grading. All streets shall be graded at full right-of-way width. All
portions of street right-of-way not included within street cartway shall
be graded at a slope not to exceed two feet horizontal and one foot
vertical (six inches per foot). In areas where sidewalks are required,
street grading within the sidewalk areas shall conform to grades for
sidewalks and slopes shall begin beyond the inside edge of sidewalks.
(1) Planting strips within street right-of-way shall be graded, properly
prepared and seeded or sodded with lawn grass.
(2) Where wet conditions are encountered, the Borough Council may
require underdrains.
B. Cartway paving. All streets intended to be dedicated to public use shall
be paved to full cartway width (as shown on the final plan), in
accordance with Borough requirements. Refer to Appendix IV.
C. Curbs. Curbs shall be installed along both sides of all streets. Curbs
shall be either the vertical type or a combination curb and gutter. The
transition from one type of curb to another shall be made only at a
street intersection.
§ 410-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-27
1:379
D. Sidewalks. Sidewalks with a width of five feet shall be installed as
required by the Borough on both sides of all streets, except that, where
required, sidewalks shall be installed on only one side of marginal
access streets, and no sidewalks shall be required along service streets.
Wherever sidewalks are required, curbs shall also be required, and in
accordance with the specifications of § 410-27C.
E. Storm sewers. Storm sewers and related facilities shall be installed
consistent with acceptable design principles and the recommendations
contained in Chapter 398, Stormwater Management.
F. Sanitary sewage disposal.
(1) The subdivider shall provide a complete public sanitary sewage
disposal system. The design and installation of the public system
shall be subject to the approval of the Borough Engineer.
(2) The plan for sewage disposal shall be consistent with all pertinent
design requirements specified by the Borough, the City of Reading,
and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
G. Water supply.
(1) The subdivision shall be provided with a complete public water
distribution system. The design and installation of such public
system shall be subject to the approval of the Borough Engineer
and the City of Reading Water Bureau.
(2) The plan for water supply shall be consistent with all pertinent
design requirements specified by PA American Water Company and
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
H. Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed within 400 feet of all
existing and proposed structures, measured by way of accessible
streets, and be approved by the Fire Marshal.
I. Monuments.
(1) Markers shall be placed, if nonexistent, at the intersections of all
lines forming angles and at changes in direction in the line of
boundary (perimeter) of the property being subdivided. In addition,
at least two permanent stone or concrete monuments shall be
accurately placed on consecutive boundary (perimeter) corners
and their respective elevations established.
(2) All monuments shall be placed by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor so that the center of the monument shall
coincide exactly with the point of intersection of the lines being
monumented.
(3) Monuments shall be set with their top level with the finished grade
of surrounding ground, except:
§ 410-27 KENHORST CODE § 410-27
1:380
(a) Monuments which are placed within lines of existing or
proposed sidewalks shall be so located (preferably beneath
sidewalks) that their tops will not be affected by lateral
movement of the sidewalk; and
(b) Where monuments are located beneath a sidewalk, proper
access shall be provided for their use.
(4) All streets shall be monumented with a stone or concrete
monument (on the right-of-way line) at the following locations or on
the five-foot range line.
(a) At least one monument at each street intersection;
(b) At changes in direction of street lines, excluding arcs at
intersections;
(c) At each end of each curved street line, excluding curb arcs at
intersections;
(d) An intermediate monument wherever topographical or other
conditions make it impossible to sight between two otherwise
required monuments;
(e) At such other places along the line of streets as may be
determined by the Borough Engineer to be necessary so that
any street may be readily defined in the future.
J. Street signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all street
intersections. The design and placement of such signs shall meet PA
DOT standards and be subject to Borough approval.
K. Lighting.
(1) Streetlights are to be installed in all subdivisions with a minimum
of 0.3 footcandle.
(2) Streetlights shall be provided in all parking lots at a minimum of
0.5 footcandle.
L. Markers. Metal markers shall be accurately placed at all lot corners
prior to development or sale of lots.
M. Traffic control devices. The traffic control devices shown on the
approved plan, including such items as stop signs and signs restricting
parking, shall be installed.
N. Rock removal. Provision shall be made for rock removal in the
subdivision improvements agreement and guaranty.
O. When required by the Borough Council pursuant to § 410-21B(4),
acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be provided.
§ 410-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-27
1:381
§ 410-28. Shade trees.
Reasonable effort should be made by the subdivider to preserve existing
shade trees, which will be shown on the plan as remaining trees. In addition,
deciduous hardwood trees with a minimum caliper of 1 1/2 inches should
be provided. Such trees should be planted between the sidewalk and the
building reserve (setback) line at least five feet from the sidewalk or
between the curb and sidewalk, provided the planting strip is a minimum of
10 feet wide.
§ 410-29. Requirements for dedication of improvements for public
use.182
The Borough of Kenhorst will accept for public use only those improvements
which have been constructed in accordance with specifications and
requirements of applicable sections hereof. Proof of compliance with the
specifications and requirements of the Borough may be provided by
requesting the Engineer to inspect the work and supervise the work during
construction and installation of same or by providing test data acquired
under the supervision of the Engineer.
P. Backfilling. Utility excavations in areas of streets, access drives,
parking areas and loading areas shall be backfilled in accordance with
the following standards:
(1) Backfilling shall be done as promptly as possible.
(2) The trench shall be filled with stone acceptable to the Borough to a
height of at least one foot above the top of the conduit, pipe or pipe
bell.
(3) The remainder of the trench shall be backfilled with 2-RC and
promptly compacted. The backfill material shall be mechanically
tamped in approximately twelve-inch layers, to a minimum of 95%
using the Modified Proctor method.
(4) Where openings are made behind the curbline, work shall be done
as required in these specifications and the opening covered with
good topsoil to a depth of six inches and seeded or sodded to the
satisfaction of the Borough.
(5) Whenever the trenches have not been properly filled or if
settlement occurs, they shall be refilled, compacted, smoothed off
and finally made to conform to the surface of the ground.
(6) Frozen material shall not be used for backfill, nor shall any
backfilling be done when material already in the trench is frozen.
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 410-27 KENHORST CODE § 410-30
1:382
§ 410-30. Acceptance of dedication of improvements by the
Borough.
At the Borough's discretion, the Borough may hereafter choose to accept
any improvement for public use constructed in accordance with these
specifications upon receipt of a petition containing a general release in
favor of the Borough, duly executed by all of the abutting freeholders,
and requesting the Borough to accept such improvements for public use,
providing that all other conditions imposed by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code183 concerning the taking over of said
improvements are complied with.
§ 410-31. Maintenance of undeveloped lots and land in commercial
and industrial subdivisions and land developments.
Topsoil piles, debris, rubbish, construction materials and other materials
resulting from grading or construction activities on a lot in or a portion of a
commercial or industrial subdivision or land development shall be removed
from that lot, and any other lot or portion of a land development on which
it was deposited prior to issuance of a use and occupancy permit for said
construction. All areas disturbed for storage of materials shall be graded
and seeded with grass prior to issuance of such permit.
183. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-31
1:383

ARTICLE VII
Administration and Amendment
§ 410-32. Fees.
§ 410-33. Modifications.
§ 410-34. Violations and penalties; additional remedies.
A. The Borough Council shall establish by resolution a collection
procedure and schedule of fees to be paid by the subdivider at the time
of filing a preliminary plan in the case of a major subdivision and prior
to the recording of a minor subdivision plan.
B. The schedule of fees shall be obtainable in the office of the Borough
Secretary, and shall be posted therein and in such other places as the
Borough Council may designate.
C. No final plan shall be approved unless and until all fees and charges
have been paid in full.
A. The provisions of this chapter are intended as minimum standards for
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. The Borough
Council may modify or extend said provisions conditionally in individual
cases as may be deemed necessary in the public interest; provided,
however, that such variation shall not have the effect of nullifying the
intent and purpose of this chapter. If the literal compliance with any
mandatory provisions of these regulations is shown by a subdivider, to a
majority of the Borough Council present at a prescheduled public
meeting, to be unreasonable and to cause undue hardship as they apply
to his property to be subdivided, the Borough Council may grant a
variance to the subdivider from such mandatory provisions if the
variance will promote the public interest.
B. No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any
plan of a subdivision after approval has been made by the Council and
endorsed on the plan, unless said plan is first resubmitted to and
approved by the Borough Council.
C. Challenges. Any person desiring to challenge the validity of any
provision of this chapter or any amendment thereof shall make such
challenge in accordance with the provisions of Act 247 of 1968, the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.184
A. No lot in a subdivision shall be sold, no permit to erect any building
upon land in a subdivision shall be issued, and no buildings shall be
erected in a subdivision until a final plan of such subdivision shall have
been approved and properly recorded and until improvements have
been either constructed or guaranteed.
184. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-34
1:385
§ 410-35. Keeping of records.
The Borough Planning Commission and the Borough Council shall keep
a record of their findings, decisions, and recommendations relative to all
subdivision plans filed for review. Such records shall be made available to
the public for review.
B. Any person, copartnership or corporation who shall subdivide any lot,
tract, or parcel of land; layout, construct, open or dedicate any street,
sanitary sewer, storm sewer or water main for public use or travel or for
the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon; sell any lot;
or erect any building in a subdivision without first having complied with
all of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.185
C. Upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Borough, such persons or the members of such
copartnership or the officers of such corporation responsible for such
violation shall pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant
to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the Magisterial
District Judge, determining that there has been a violation, further
determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership
or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was no
such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only
one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge, and
thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation.186
D. The Borough Council may initiate and maintain civil action:
(1) To obtain a writ of injunction against the owner or agency who
attempted the improper sale or conveyance of land.
(2) To set aside and invalidate any conveyances of land made prior to
final plan approval of any subdivision.
E. Nothing herein shall prevent the Borough from taking such other action
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
185. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
186. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 410-34 KENHORST CODE § 410-36
1:386
§ 410-36. Responsibility.
The subdivider shall be responsible for observing the procedures
established in this chapter and for submitting all plans and documents as
may be required.
§ 410-37. Conflicts.
§ 410-38. Revision and amendment.
A. Whenever there is a difference between the minimum standards
specified herein and those included in other official regulations, the
more stringent requirements shall apply.
B. All existing ordinances or parts of ordinances which are contrary to the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent necessary
to give this chapter full force and effect.
A. The Borough Council may from time to time on its own motion revise,
modify, or amend these regulations in order to increase their
effectiveness or to expedite the approval of subdivision plans.
B. Any revisions, modifications, or amendments to these regulations shall
be made in accordance with the procedures of Act 247, as amended,
after a public hearing on the proposed revisions, modifications, or
amendments.
§ 410-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-38
1:387

ARTICLE VIII
Terminology
§ 410-39. Word usage; definitions.
This section clarifies, by definition, terminology used within and in
relationship to this chapter.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of these regulations, have the meanings indicated:
(1) Words in the singular include the plural and those in the plural
include the singular.
(2) Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
(3) The words "person," "subdivider" and "owner" include a
corporation, incorporated association and a partnership, or other
legal entity, as well as an individual.
(4) The word "building" includes structures and shall be construed as if
followed by the phrase "or part hereof."
(5) The word "watercourse" includes channel, creek, ditch, dry run,
spring, stream and river.
(6) The words "should" and "may" are permissive; the words "shall"
and "will" are mandatory and directive.
B. Other terms or words used herein shall be interpreted or defined as
follows:
ALLEY — See "service street."
BLOCK — An area bounded by three or more streets.
BOROUGH PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of
Kenhorst Borough.
BUILDING —
Any enclosed or open structure other than a boundary wall or
fence, occupying more than four square feet of area.
(a) DETACHED — A building which has no party wall.
SEMIDETACHED — A building which has only one party wall
in common with another building.
(b)
ATTACHED — A building which has two party walls in common
with another building.
(c)
(1)
A building is also any structure having a roof supported by
columns, piers, or walls, including structures having temporary or
permanent support. Any structure having an independent entrance
(2)
§ 410-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-39
1:389
BUILDING RESERVE (SETBACK) LINE — The line within a property
defining the minimum required distance between any dwelling to be
erected and an adjacent right-of-way or front lot line.
CARTWAY (ROADWAY) — The portion of a street right-of-way, paved or
unpaved, intended for vehicular use.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given
distance from the intersections of the street center lines.
COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough of Kenhorst.
COUNTY — The County of Berks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the
County of Berks.
CROSSWALK (INTERIOR WALK) — A publicly or private owned rightof-
way for pedestrian use extending from a street into a block, or across
a block to another street.
DEVELOPER (SUBDIVIDER) — Any landowner, agent of such
landowner, or tenant with the permission of such landowner, who
makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development of a planned
residential, commercial, or industrial development, including a plat of
subdivision, all covenants related to use or density of development,
streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space and public
facilities. The phrase "provisions of the development plan," when used
in this chapter, shall mean the written graphic material referred to in
this definition.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation
of sanitary or storm sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a
natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing
for the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood
damage.
DWELLING UNIT — Any structure or part thereof, designed to be
occupied as living quarters as a single housekeeping unit.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited
use of private land for a public or quasi-public purpose, and within
which the owner of the property shall not erect any permanent
structure, but shall have the right to make any other use of the land
which is not inconsistent with the rights of the grantee.
ENDORSEMENT — The application of the County Planning
Commission's appropriate stamp and the signature of the Executive
Director to the final plan. The application of the Borough Planning
Commission's appropriate stamp, the signature of the Chairman of
or electrical, mechanical or heating system shall be considered a
single building.
§ 410-39 KENHORST CODE § 410-39
1:390
the Commission, the signatures of the President and secretary of the
Borough Council, and the Borough Seal.
ENGINEER — A licensed professional engineer registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
GRADE — The inclination, with the horizontal, of a road, unimproved
land, etc., which is generally expressed by stating the vertical rise or
fall as a percentage of the horizontal distance.
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical additions and changes to the land
that may be necessary to produce usable and desirable lots.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land,
including the holder of an option to purchase (whether or not such
option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is
authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or
other person having a proprietary interest in land, shall be deemed to
be a landowner for the purpose of these regulations.
LAND PLANNER — A recognized professional individual or firm
affiliated with registered engineers, architects, and/or surveyors
capable of preparing development plans.
LOT — Any parcel of land, regardless of size, intended as a unit for
transfer or ownership, use or improvement or for development.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of a lot (as
shown on the plan) excluding space within all street rights-of-way and
within all permanent drainage easements, but including the areas of all
other easements.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — A guarantee by the subdivider that
he shall maintain all improvements in good condition for a period of
one year after completion of construction and installation of all such
improvements.
MARKER — A metal pipe or pin of at least 3/4 inch or 7/8 inch and at
least 30 inches in length.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly contained in one
unit, or two units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable
of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site
complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
The improvement of one or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels
of land for any purposes involving: a group of two or more
buildings; or the division or allocation of land between or among
two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for
the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, building groups,
condominiums or other features;
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
§ 410-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-39
1:391
unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be
used without a permanent foundation.
MONUMENT — A stone or concrete monument with a flat top at least
four inches in diameter or square, containing a copper or brass dowel
(one-quarter-inch drill hole) and at least 24 inches in length (preferred
30 inches to 36 inches). The bottom sides or radius must be at least two
inches greater than the top, to minimize movements caused by frost.
MULTIPLE DWELLING BUILDING — A building providing separate
dwelling units for three or more families.
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of Kenhorst.
OWNER — Any person, firm, association or syndicate, copartnership
or corporation having a proprietary interest in any land sought to be
subdivided in pursuance with this resolution.
PARCEL — See "lot."
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted
in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made before the
Borough gives final approval to the plan, including performance bonds,
escrow agreements, and any other collateral or surety agreements.
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision plan (and including
all required supplementary data), prepared for official recording of a
major subdivision by statute, to define property rights and proposed
streets and other improvements prepared by a registered engineer or
registered surveyor.
PLAN, MAJOR STREET — That element of the Borough Comprehensive
Plan, now or hereafter adopted, which shows the general location,
alignment and dimensions, and the identification and classification of
existing and proposed major streets, highways, and other
thoroughfares.
PLAN, OFFICIAL — The Comprehensive Development Plan and/or
master plan and/or future land use plan and/or ultimate right-of-way
plan and/or Official Map and/or topographical survey and/or other such
plans, or portions thereof, as may have been adopted, pursuant to
statute, for the area of the Borough in which the subdivision is located.
PLAN OF RECORD — The copy of the final plan which contains the
original endorsements of the County Planning Commission, the
Borough Planning Commission and the Borough Council, and is
intended to be recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds and is
prepared by a registered engineer or registered surveyor.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative subdivision plan (and including all
required supplementary data), in lesser detail than a final plan, showing
approximate proposed street and lot layout as a basis for consideration
of a major subdivision prior to preparation of a final plan prepared by
an engineer or surveyor.
§ 410-39 KENHORST CODE § 410-39
1:392
PLAN, SKETCH — An informal plan, not necessarily to exact scale,
indicating salient existing features of tract and its surroundings and the
general layout of a proposed subdivision prepared by the subdivider, an
engineer, a surveyor, or land planner.
PLAT — A map or plan of a subdivision, whether preliminary or final.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
RESERVE STRIP — A parcel of ground in separate ownership
separating a street from other adjacent properties, or from another
street, either proposed or existing.
RESUBDIVISION — See "subdivision."
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot extending between and having
frontage on two generally parallel streets (excluding service streets),
with vehicular access solely from one street.
REVIEW — Whenever the County Planning Commission and/or the
Borough Planning Commission possesses such jurisdiction, the action
of "review" shall also include "review and approval," or if necessary,
"review and disapproval."
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as
a street, alley, crosswalk or for other public or semipublic purposes.
ROADWAY — See "cartway."
SANITARY SEWAGE SYSTEM, PUBLIC — A sanitary sewage collection
system in which sewage is carried from individual lots by a system of
pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The required length of roadway visible to the
driver of a passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when
the view is unobstructed by traffic. Sight distance measurement shall
be made from a point 0.5 foot above the center line of the road surface
to a point 0.5 foot above the center line of the road surface.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS (SFHAs) — The one-percent-annualchance
flood (one-hundred-year flood), also known as the "base flood."
The area that has a one-percent annual chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The special flood hazard area is the area
subject to flooding by the one-percent-annual-chance flood.
STREET — A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way (i.e., not
limited to the cartway) to provide access to more than one lot. The word
"street" includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private. Streets
are further classified according to the function they perform:
(1) Parks, playgrounds and other public areas; and
(2) Sites for publicly owned buildings and facilities.
§ 410-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-39
1:393
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, copartnership or corporation (or agent
authorized thereby) which undertakes the subdivision or development
of land, as defined by this chapter, as the owner or equitable owner (or
agent authorized thereby) of the land being subdivided or developed.
SUBDIVISION —
MINOR STREETS — A street used primarily to provide access to
abutting properties.
(1)
CUL-DE-SAC STREET — A minor street intersecting another street
at one end, and terminating in a vehicular turnaround at the other
end.
(2)
HALF (PARTIAL) STREET — A street generally parallel and
adjacent to a property line, having a lesser right-of-way width than
normally required for improvement and use of the street.
(3)
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A minor street, parallel and
adjacent to a major street (but separated from it by a reserve
strip) which provides access to abutting properties and control of
intersections with the major streets.
(4)
COLLECTOR STREET — A street which, in addition to providing
access to abutting properties, intercepts minor streets to provide
a route serving 50 or more dwelling units to give access to
community facilities and/or other collector and major street.
(Streets in industrial and commercial subdivisions shall generally
be considered collector streets.)
(5)
MAJOR STREET — A street serving a large volume of
comparatively high-speed and long-distance traffic, including all
facilities classified as main and secondary highways by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
(6)
SERVICE STREET (ALLEY) — A minor right-of-way providing
secondary vehicular access to the side or rear of two or more
properties.
(7)
INTERNAL STREET — A minor street used for circulation and
access within a development project involving multiresidence or
commercial or industrial uses.
(8)
The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any
means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership or
building or lot development; provided, however, that the division
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10
acres, not involving any new street or easement of access, shall
be exempted. The term "subdivision" shall refer, as appropriate in
these regulations, to the process of subdividing land or to the land
proposed to be subdivided. A subdivision also includes division over
(1)
§ 410-39 KENHORST CODE § 410-39
1:394
SURVEYOR — A licensed surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, PUBLIC — A system for supplying
and distributing water from a common source to dwellings and other
buildings, but generally not confined to one neighborhood.
any period of time after the enactment of this chapter of a parcel of
land having frontage on an existing or proposed street into two or
more parcels having frontage on the existing or proposed street.
The term "subdivision" shall also include any development of a
parcel of land, for example, an industrial park, shopping center,
multiple dwelling project, or mobile home park, which involves
installation of streets and/or alleys, even though the streets and/or
alleys might not be dedicated to public use and the parcel might
not be divided immediately for purposes of conveyance, transfer or
sale, or even though the owner does not transfer legal or equitable
title (for example, structures for rental purposes).
(2)
The term subdivision includes any replotting of land including
changes in recorded plans.
(3)
§ 410-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-39
1:395
Chapter 419
TAXATION
§ 410-39 KENHORST CODE § 410-39
1:396
ARTICLE I
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 11-2-1972 by Ord. No. 291 (Ch. 22, Part 2, of the 1973
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 419-1. Levy of tax; rate. [Amended 1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 423187]
By the authority granted to boroughs in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
by the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq., as amended, a per
capita tax of $15 per annum is hereby levied and assessed on each resident
of the Borough of Kenhorst over 18 years of age, which tax shall be in
addition to all other taxes levied and assessed by the Borough of Kenhorst.
§ 419-2. Board of Assessment resident list used to assess tax.
The list of residents of the Borough of Kenhorst prepared annually by the
Board for the Assessment and Revision of Taxes of Berks County, or such list
of residents as may be prepared by law, and any names of residents added
to said list in the manner provided by law, are hereby adopted for purposes
of levying and assessing the per capita tax imposed by this article.
§ 419-3. Authority of Tax Collector.
Said tax shall be collected and paid over by the duly elected or appointed
Tax Collector of the Borough of Kenhorst in the same manner as other
Borough taxes are collected and paid over.
§ 419-4. Compensation of Tax Collector.
The compensation of the Tax Collector for the collection said tax shall be
the same as fixed from time to time by the Borough of Kenhorst for the
collection of other Borough taxes.
§ 419-5. Discounts and penalties.
The amount and periods of discount and penalty for payment of said tax
shall be the same as provided for in the Local Tax Collection Law of May 25,
1945, P.L. 1050, its amendments and supplements.188
§ 419-6. Powers and duties of Tax Collector.
The Tax Collector shall have all of the powers and be subject to all of the
duties to the same extent as fully provided for in said Local Tax Collection
Law of 1945, its amendments and supplements.
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
188. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 419-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-6
1:397

ARTICLE II
Penalties and Discounts
[Adopted 12-23-1976 by Ord. No. 344 (Ch. 22, Part 4, of the 1973
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 419-7. Policy on discounts and penalties.
A. For all taxes due and owing to the Borough of Kenhorst where payment
is made by the taxpayer of the whole amount of said tax within two
months from the date of tax notice, the taxpayer shall be entitled to
deduct from said tax amount a discount of 2%.
B. Any taxpayer who shall fail to pay any tax assessed against him by the
Borough of Kenhorst for a period of more than four months from the
date of the tax notice shall have added by the Tax Collector to the tax
amount due and owing a penalty of 10%, to be collected by the Tax
Collector in addition to the amount set forth on said tax notice, effective
for the 1977 tax year and thereafter.
§ 419-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-7
1:399

ARTICLE III
Occupation Tax
[Adopted 12-2-1993 by Ord. No. 427 (Ch. 22, Part 5, of the 1973
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 419-8. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Administrative Assistant for the Borough under
whose direction this tax shall be enforced.
BOROUGH — Kenhorst Borough, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons
on a salary, commission or other compensation basis, including a selfemployed
person.
HE, HIS or HIM — The singular and plural number, as well as male, female
and neuter gender.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, who attains or is over the
age of 18 years after the effective date of this article, and is engaged in
any occupation, trade or profession of any nature, type or kind whatsoever,
resides within the corporate limits of the Borough of Kenhorst, whether in
the employ of another or self-employed, during any fiscal year.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on
or performed either within the corporate limits of the Borough of Kenhorst
or outside the corporate limits of the Borough of Kenhorst for which
compensation is charged or received by means of salary, wages,
commissions or fees for services rendered.
TAX — The flat rate occupation tax levied by this article.
TAX COLLECTOR — The person or agency designated by the Borough of
Kenhorst to collect the tax.
YEAR — The fiscal year beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of
each fiscal year.
§ 419-9. Levy.
For general revenue purposes, a tax is hereby levied upon individuals
engaged in an occupation and residing within the corporate limits of the
Borough during the year beginning January 1, 1994, and during each year
thereafter. Each individual who engaged in an occupation for any length
of time during any year shall pay a flat rate tax in the amount of $10 in
accordance with the provisions of this article. This tax is in addition to all
other taxes of any kind or nature levied by the Borough.
§ 419-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-10
1:401
§ 419-10. Collection of tax.
A. Payment. Said tax shall be paid to the Tax Collector of the Borough.
B. Delinquency. If said tax is not paid by the due date, hereinafter, a
penalty of 10% of the amount of the tax, together with interest
computed at 6% per annum until paid, shall be added to the tax and
collected.189
C. Refund to certain individuals. If an individual engaging in an
occupation, as is defined in this article, receives $1,000, or less, gross
income in any one year for an occupation or occupations, a tax,
following payment, may be refunded upon written application
addressed to the Tax Collector and accompanied by any of the
following: (1) information return for U.S. income tax purposes, (2) a
copy of current year U.S. income tax return, (3) a certificate from the
individual's employer or employers certifying that the individual's gross
income was less than $1,000 when said certificate is accompanied by
the individual's affidavit that the attached receipts or certificates of
payment represent the total gross income received by him for the year.
The Tax Collector shall be entitled to grant a refund up to February 1 of
the following year.
D. Due date.
(1) During the calendar year, each resident shall pay said tax to the Tax
Collector on or before June 1, 1994. If said tax is paid on or before
April 30, 1994, the individual shall receive a 2% discount on the flat
rate tax, i.e., a tax of $9.80.
(2) If said tax is paid after June 1, 1994, there shall be a 10% penalty
on the flat rate tax, i.e., a tax and penalty of $11.
(3) During subsequent years, if the Borough reenacts the flat rate
occupation tax each resident shall pay said tax to the Tax Collector
on or before June 1 of the year.
(4) If said tax is paid on or before April 30 of the year, the individual
shall receive a 2% discount on the flat rate tax, i.e., a tax of $9.80.
(5) If said tax is paid June 1 of the year, the individual shall receive a
10% penalty on the flat rate tax, i.e., a tax and penalty of $11.
E. Administration of tax.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof, showing the
amount received by him from each employee or self-employed
person, together with the date the tax was received.
189. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 419-10 KENHORST CODE § 419-10
1:402
(2) The Tax Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered
to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations relating
to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of
this article, including any payment alleged or found to be incorrect
or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Collector shall
have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Berks
County as in other cases provided.
(3) The Administrator is hereby authorized to examine the books and
payroll records of any employer to ascertain the tax due. Each
employer is hereby directed and required to give the Administrator
the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
F. Suits for collection.
(1) In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid
30 days after the due date set forth, the Administrator may sue for
the recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article
together with interest and penalty.
(2) If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of
6% on the amount of said tax calculated beginning with the due
date of said tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
said tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the
recovery of this tax, the individual liable therefor shall, in addition,
be responsible and liable for the costs of collection.
G. Saving clause.
(1) Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Borough to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any resident
not within the taxing power of the Borough under the Constitution
of the United States and the Constitution and laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall
be held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of
the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution or laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as to any individual, the
decision of the Court shall not affect or impair the right to impose
or collect said tax, or the validity of the tax so imposed, on other
persons.
H. Effective date. This article shall become effective January 1, 1994, in
accordance with the Act of December 31, 1965 (511), P.L. 1257, as
amended, and 1986, Act 77, Section 23 (P.L. 318), as amended, known
as the "Local Tax Enabling Act,"190 and shall remain in effect thereafter
for each fiscal year until repealed or substantially changed.
190. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 419-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-10
1:403

ARTICLE IV
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 7-5-2007 by Ord. No. 516 (Ch. 22, Part 3, of the 1973 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 419-11. Imposition of tax.
The Borough of Kenhorst adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of the Tax
Reform Code of 1971191 and imposes a realty transfer tax as authorized
under that article subject to the rate limitations therein. The tax imposed
under this section shall be at the rate of 1%.
§ 419-12. Administration.
The tax imposed under § 419-11 shall be administered, collected and
enforced under the Act of December 31, 1965 (P.S. 1257, No. 511, as
amended), known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act,"192 provided that if the
correct amount of the tax is not paid by the last date prescribed for timely
payment, the Borough of Kenhorst, pursuant to Section 1102-D of the
Tax Reform Code of 1971 (72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and directs the
Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
determine, collect and enforce the tax.
191. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
192. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 419-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-12
1:405

ARTICLE V
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-3-2011 by Ord. No. 536]
§ 419-13. Authority and purpose.
§ 419-14. Name.
The name of this tax shall be known as the "Local Services Tax" (LST).
§ 419-15. Definitions.
The following words used in this article shall have, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them in this section:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons
on a salary, wage, commission, or other compensation basis, including a
self-employed person.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as determined under Section 303 of
the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2) (72 P.S. § 7303), known as the "Tax
Reform Code of 1971." and regulations of 61 Pa. Code Part I, Subpart B,
Article V (61 Pa. Code § 101.1 et seq.) (relating to personal income tax),
not including, however, wages or compensation paid to individuals on active
military service. Employee business expenses are allowable deductions as
determined under Article III of the Tax Reform Code of 1971. The amount
of any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy shall not be
taxable as earned income.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number as well as male,
female and neuter gender.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation
within the Borough.
A. This article is adopted in conformance with and pursuant to authority
granted by the Borough Code in 8 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 1006(4) and 1203, as
amended, and the Pennsylvania Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.101 et seq., as amended.193
B. This article is adopted to promote and protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the residents of the Borough to generate revenue for police,
fire and/or emergency services, road construction and/or maintenance,
and possibly the reduction of property taxes and/or through the
implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance
with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85, Subchapter F.194
193. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
194. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8581 et seq.
§ 419-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-15
1:407
NET PROFITS — The net income from operation of a business, profession or
other activity, except corporations, determined under Section 303 of the Act
of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2) (72 P.S. § 7303) known as the "Tax Reform
Code of 1971," and regulations of 61 Pa. Code Part I, Subpart B, Article
V (61 Pa Code § 101.1 et seq.) (relating to personal income tax). The term
does not include income which is not paid for services provided and which
is in the nature of earnings from an investment. For taxpayers engaged in
the business, profession or activity of farming, the term shall not include:
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business, or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on
or performed within the Borough for which compensation is charged or
received, whether by means of salary, wages, commission or fees for
services rendered.
PAYROLL PERIOD — The calendar year divided by the number of payrolls
of a person's employer. For a self-employed person, a payroll period shall be
one week.
PERSON — A natural person, male or female, engaged in any occupation
within Borough.
RECEIVER OF TAXES — The Tax Collector selected by a resolution of the
Borough Council to receive and collect the Local Services Tax.
TAX — The Kenhorst Borough Local Services Tax (LST) in the amount of $52
levied by this article.
§ 419-16. Amount of tax.
Beginning on January 1, 2012, each person engaged in an occupation within
the Borough during the effective term of this article shall pay a Local
Services Tax in the amount of $52 per year, assessed on a pro rata basis
for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
such share to be determined by dividing the annual tax by the number of
payroll periods established by the employer, rounded down to the nearest
one-hundredths of a dollar.
§ 419-17. Emergency funding.
No less than 25% of the funds collected by way of the LST shall be utilized
to fund emergency services.
Any interest earnings generated from any monetary accounts or
investment instruments of the farming business;
A.
B. Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
C.
D. Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
§ 419-15 KENHORST CODE § 419-18
1:408
§ 419-18. Levy and collection of taxes.
Tax collection sources shall be limited to earned income and net profits.
§ 419-19. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to him by the Borough Manager or the Receiver
of Taxes. It is further provided that if the employer fails to file said return
and pay the tax, whether or not he makes collection thereof from the salary,
wages, or commission paid by him to the persons engaged by him in an
occupation within the Borough, the employer shall be responsible for the
payment of the tax in full and as though the tax had originally be levied
against him.
§ 419-20. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
Beginning on January 1, 2012, and continuing each year thereafter, each
employer shall deduct the pro rata share on a payroll basis for each payroll
period in which the employee is engaged in an occupation, except as set
forth below. Tax deducted shall be paid over to the Borough quarterly,
within 30 days after the end of the quarter.
§ 419-21. Income exemption.
Individuals who earn less than $12,000 per year shall be exempt from the
payment of said LST. In order to obtain said exemption at the beginning of
the tax year, individuals who claim that they shall make less than $12,000
shall complete a low income exemption certificate.
§ 419-22. Military exemption.
All individuals who are on active military duty or have been called to active
military duty at any time within the taxing year shall be exempt from the
payment of the LST. This shall include any former and/or current member
of the military who is a paraplegic, double and/or quadruple amputee or
has any service-related disability as declared by the United States Veterans
Administration or its successor, to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
Proof of the same shall be submitted to the taxing authority to achieve said
exemption.
A. When employers receive said certificate, as prepared by Department of
Community and Economic Development, they shall be exempted from
the collection from the employee. In the event that the employee who
claimed an exemption reaches earnings of $12,000, the employer at
that time shall collect said LST.
B. The employee claiming the exemption must attach a copy of the prior
year's final pay stub or copy of a prior year's W-2 to the exemption when
it is submitted to the employer. The employee must file his income
exemption certificate with both the taxing body and the employer.
§ 419-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-23
1:409
§ 419-23. Restoration of withholding.
§ 419-24. Employer pay periods.
A. Employers must "restart" withholding the LST from an employee who
files an exemption certificate in the following circumstances:
(1) If instructed to do so by the municipality levying the tax;
(2) If notified by the employee that they are no longer eligible for the
exemption;
(3) If the employer pays the employee more than $12,000 for the
calendar year.
B. Employers must "restart" withholding of the LST by withholding: a
"catch-up" lump sum tax equal to the amount of tax that was not
withheld from the employee as a result of the exemption; and the same
amount per payroll period that is withheld from other employees.
Except for monitoring when an employee who has filed an income
exemption certificate earns more than $12,000, the intent of this
amendment is that employers are not responsible for investigating
exemptions, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or exempting an
employee from the tax.
A. Assessment and collection. Since the tax set forth herein totals $52, the
tax will be assessed and collected on a pro rata basis determined by the
number of payroll periods established by an employer for the calendar
year. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on each taxpayer for a
payroll period is calculated by dividing the combined rate of the LST by
the number of payroll periods established by the employer for the
calendar year. When calculating the pro rata share, employers are
required to round down to the nearest $100. For instance, a $52 tax
would be collected at $1 per week for taxpayers paid weekly, or at $4.33
per month for taxpayers paid monthly.
B. Remittance. Employers must remit withheld taxes to the designated Tax
Collector 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter. The municipal
and school taxes must be withheld together and remitted to the
municipality or the Tax Collector, who are required to distribute the
school's share of the tax to the school district.
C. Self-employed individuals. The tax shall be prorated and paid by selfemployed
individuals on a quarterly basis, as if the payroll period is a
calendar quarter. Self-employed taxpayers shall pay the tax to the
municipality or the Tax Collector 30 days after the end of each calendar
quarter.
D. Penalties. Failure to follow the above payment provisions shall result in
the imposition of a five-percent penalty collected and assessed by the
appropriate entity.
§ 419-23 KENHORST CODE § 419-25
1:410
§ 419-25. Persons employed in multiple jurisdictions.
The LST payment shall be limited to one jurisdiction per person per payroll
period. In the event that the employee (taxpayer) works in more than one
taxing area, tax will be due in the area of residence, if employed there, or in
the absence of that criteria to the taxing authority closest to their place of
residence.
§ 419-26. Persons engaged in more than one occupation.
Each person who is engaged in more than one occupation shall be subject
to the payment of the tax on his principal occupation, and his principal
employer shall deduct the tax and deliver to him evidence of the deduction
on a form to be furnished to the employer by the Borough Manager or the
Receiver of Taxes, which form shall be evidence of the deduction having
been made and, when presented to any other employer, shall be authority
for such employer to not deduct the tax from the person's wages, but to
include such person on his return by setting forth his name, address and the
name and account number of the employer who deducted the tax.
§ 419-27. Nonresident employers.
All employers having their place of business outside the Borough, but
whose employees engage in an occupation within the Borough, are by
virtue thereof bound by and are subject to the provisions, penalties, and
regulations promulgated under this part. Furthermore, any employee of a
nonresident employer or any person engaged in an occupation within the
Borough may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person and, in the event the tax is not paid, the Borough shall have the
option of proceeding against either the employer, or the employee for the
collection of the tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 419-28. Administration of tax.
A. It shall be the duty of the Receiver of Taxes to accept and receive
payment of the tax and to keep record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer or self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
B. The Receiver of Taxes is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered to
adopt rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions for
the examination of the payroll records of any employer subject to this
article, the examination and correction of any return made in
compliance with this article, any payment alleged or found to be
incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Receiver of
Taxes shall have the right to appeal to the Berks County Court of
Common Pleas as in other cases involved.
§ 419-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-28
1:411
§ 419-29. Refund rules and regulations.
The rules and regulations for the refund process shall be as follows:
§ 419-30. Receipt of payment.
In the event a taxpayer requests receipt of payment, said receipt shall be
issued by the Tax Collector of the Borough.
§ 419-31. Suits for collection.
§ 419-32. Violations and penalties.195
Whoever makes any false or untrue statements on any return required by
this article or whoever refuses inspection of his books, records or accounts
in his custody and control, setting for the number of persons or employees
subject to this tax who are in his employment or whoever fails or refuses
to file any return required by this article shall, upon conviction before the
C. The Receiver of Taxes is hereby authorized to examine the books and
payroll records of any employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain
the tax due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Borough Administrator the means, facilities and opportunity for such
examination.
A. In the event that an individual should be subjected to more than one
deduction or payment, such individual so aggrieved may file a "claim for
refund" on a form prescribed by the Receiver of Taxes.
B. Whenever it occurs that an individual is not engaged in a business or
occupation within the corporate limits of the Borough of Kenhorst and
this tax was withheld or paid, such individual so aggrieved may file a
"claim for refund" on a form prescribed by the Director.
C. Claim for refund must be submitted to the Borough within three years
of the due date for the filing of the tax return or report as extended or
within one year after actual payment of the tax, whichever is later.
A. In the event that the tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the dates set forth above, the Receiver of Taxes may sue for
the recovery of the tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of the tax shall be calculated beginning with the due date
of the tax, and a penalty of 10% shall be added to the flat rate of the tax
for nonpayment thereof. When suit is brought for the recovery of the
tax, the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and
liable for the costs of collection including reasonable attorney's fees.
195. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 419-28 KENHORST CODE § 419-32
1:412
Magisterial District Judge, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article
I, Enforcement; General Penalty, of this Code. It is further provided that the
action to enforce the fine and penalty herein provided may be instituted
against any person in charge of the business of any employer who has failed
or refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 419-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-32
1:413

ARTICLE VI
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-3-2011 by Ord. No. 537]
§ 419-33. Purpose; amendment and restatement; repeal.
The primary purpose of this article is to conform the earned income and net
profits tax currently imposed to the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended and
restated by Act 32 of 2008,196 and to do so within the time frame required by
Act 32. Any prior enactment imposing a tax on earned income or net profits
of individuals is amended and restated in its entirety to read as stated in this
article. Any other prior enactment or part of any prior enactment conflicting
with the provisions of this article is rescinded insofar as the conflict exists.
To the extent the same as any enactment in force immediately prior to
adoption of this article, the provisions of this article are intended as a
continuation of such prior enactment and not as a new enactment. If this
article is declared invalid, any prior enactment levying a similar tax shall
remain in full force and effect and shall not be affected by adoption of this
article. If any part of this article is declared invalid, the similar part of any
prior enactment levying a similar tax shall remain in effect and shall not be
affected by adoption of this article. The provisions of this article shall not
affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall such provisions affect any
suit or prosecution pending or to be initiated to enforce any right or penalty
or to punish offense under the authority of any enactment in force prior to
adoption of this article. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section,
this article shall amend and restate on the effective date any enactment
levying a tax on earned income or net profits in force immediately prior to
the effective date.
§ 419-34. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act shall have the meanings set
forth therein. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein:
COLLECTOR — The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the tax.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2012.
ENACTMENT — This article.
GOVERNING BODY — The Council of the Borough of Kenhorst.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth in
53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq. while such numbering and provisions remain in
effect under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
when such numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as
amended in the future.
TCD — Any tax collection district to which the Taxing Authority or any part
of the Taxing Authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
196. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 419-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-34
1:415
TCC — The tax collection committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TAX — The tax imposed by this article.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the Collector for reporting the
amount of tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted,
or reported under this article or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TAXING AUTHORITY — Borough of Kenhorst.
§ 419-35. Imposition of tax.
A. General purpose resident tax. The Taxing Authority hereby imposes a
tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 0.5% on earned income
and net profits of individual residents of the Taxing Authority.
B. General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The Taxing Authority also
imposes a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1.0% on
earned income and net profits derived by an individual who is not a
resident of the Taxing Authority from any work, business, profession, or
activity, of any kind engaged in within the boundaries of the Taxing
Authority.
C. Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this article is repealed or the rate is changed.
D. Combined tax rate applicable to residents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to residents of the Taxing Authority, including the tax
imposed by the school district and municipality in which the individual
resides, is 1.0%.
E. Municipal tax rate applicable to nonresidents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to nonresidents working within the Taxing Authority based
on the municipal nonresident tax rate is 1.0%.
F. Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this article.
Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that are required
to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will automatically
become part of this article upon the effective date of such amendment,
without the need for formal amendment of this article, to the maximum
extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
G. Applicable laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with: all applicable laws and
regulations; and policies and procedures adopted by the TCC or by the
Collector. This includes any regulations, policies, and procedures
§ 419-34 KENHORST CODE § 419-35
1:416
§ 419-36. No exemption from tax.
Although credits and deductions against tax are permitted under certain
circumstances as provided in applicable law and regulations, no individuals
are exempt from tax based on age, income, or other factors.
§ 419-37. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
§ 419-38. Employer withholding, remittance, and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold, and remit tax, and file tax returns
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 419-39. Tax Collector.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the Collector.
§ 419-40. Interest, penalties, costs, and fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by
the Collector in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 1937.
§ 419-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-40
1:417

ARTICLE VII
Agency Fees for Delinquent Taxes
[Adopted 6-2-2016 by Ord. No. 575]
§ 419-41. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein:
COLLECTOR — The Berks County Earned Income Tax Collection Bureau.
ENACTMENT — This article.
GOVERNING BODY — The Council of the Borough of Kenhorst.
TAX — All local earned income taxes, other taxes, penalties, interest, and
costs that the Collector collects on behalf of the Taxing Authority under the
Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq., or other statutory law.
TAXING AUTHORITY — Borough of Kenhorst.
TAXPAYER — An employer or taxpayer that is liable for tax.
§ 419-42. Authorization.
The Taxing Authority acknowledges the Collector may engage one or more
third-party collection agencies to pursue and collect delinquent tax in
situations where the amount of delinquent tax owed is relatively small and
it is therefore cost-prohibitive for the Collector to dedicate the upfront
resources necessary to pursue such delinquent tax. The Taxing Authority
hereby approves of the imposition on and collection of a fee from any
delinquent taxpayer by any third-party collection agency engaged by the
Collector, provided such fee does not exceed 25% of the amount of tax
collected from any such Taxpayer. The Collector acknowledges that in the
case of any unfair collection practices by its agents or any third-party
agency, it shall indemnify, hold harmless and defend the Taxing Authority
from any and all claims. The Taxing Authority adopts this authorization with
the condition precedent of an agreement to indemnify hold harmless and
defend, which is a material condition of this article.
§ 419-43. Notice.
Promptly after adoption of this article, the Taxing Authority will provide a
copy of this article to the Collector. If the Taxing Authority later rescinds,
limits, or changes the scope of, the authorization set forth in this article,
then the Taxing Authority will immediately notify the Collector.
§ 419-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-43
1:419
Chapter 424
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 475.
§ 424-1. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to establish general guidelines for the
setting of communications towers and antennas. The goals of this
chapter are to:
(1) Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas.
(2) Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas.
(3) Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community.
(4) Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as
a primary option rather than the construction of additional singleuse
towers.
(5) Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact of the
community is minimal.
(6) Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of towers and antennas
through careful design, setting, landscape screening and
innovative camouflage techniques.
(7) Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and
efficiently.
(8) Consider the public safety of communications towers.
(9) Minimize potential damage of adjacent properties from tower
failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
B. In furtherance of these goals, the Borough of Kenhorst shall give due
consideration to the Zoning Map, existing land uses and
environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of
towers and antennas.
§ 419-43 KENHORST CODE § 424-2
1:420
§ 424-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set
forth below:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers, bell
steeples, light poles and similar alternative design mounting structures that
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate
or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals
or other communication signals.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's tower's/
cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices and/or longdistance
providers, or the public switched telephone network.
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING — An unnamed building or
cabinet containing communications equipment required for operation of
communications antennas and covering an area on the ground not greater
than 25 square feet.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the
tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
PREEXISTING TOWERS and PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any tower or
antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been properly
issued prior to the effective date of this chapter, including permitted towers
or antennas that have not yet been constructed, so long as such approval is
current and not expired.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio or
similar communications purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guyed towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio and telephone
transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures and the like. The term
includes the structure and any support thereto.
§ 424-3. Applicability.
A. New towers and antennas. All new towers and antennas in the Borough
of Kenhorst shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided in
§ 424-3B through C, inclusive.
B. Radio towers/antennas. This chapter shall not govern any tower or the
installation of any antenna that is less than 40 feet in height.
§ 424-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-3
1:421
§ 424-4. General requirements.
C. Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this chapter,
other than the requirements of § 424-4F and G.
A. Principal or accessory use. Antennas or towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing
structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an
antenna or tower on such lot.
B. Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with district development regulations,
including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage
requirements and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be
located on leased parcels within such lot.
C. Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower
shall provide to the Zoning Officer an inventory of its existing towers,
antennas or sites approved for towers and antennas that are either
within the jurisdiction of the Borough of Kenhorst or within one mile of
the border thereof, including specific information about the location,
height and design of each tower. The Zoning Officer may share such
information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals
or special use permits under this chapter, or other organizations
seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the Borough of
Kenhorst; provided, however, that the Zoning Officer is not, by sharing
such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites
are available or suitable.
D. Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to
any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so
as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(2) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, screening and
landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and
surrounding buildings.
(3) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must
be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with,
the color of the supporting structures so as to make the antenna
and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
E. Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the
FAA, the Borough of Kenhorst or other applicable authority. If lighting is
required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen will be specified
by the Borough of Kenhorst and conform to FAA regulations.
§ 424-3 KENHORST CODE § 424-4
1:422
F. State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of
the state and federal government with authority to regulate towers and
antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the
owners of the towers and antennas governed by this chapter shall bring
such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards
and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by
the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and
antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations
shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the
owner's expense.
G. Building codes/safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of
towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards for towers that are published by the
Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If,
upon inspection, the Borough of Kenhorst concludes that a tower fails
to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to
persons or property, then, upon notice being provided to the owner of
the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into
compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into
compliance within said 30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal
of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
H. Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located
in the Borough of Kenhorst irrespective of municipal and county
jurisdiction boundaries.
I. Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this chapter and shall not be regulated or
permitted as essential services, public utilities or private utilities.
J. Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify
that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or operation
of a communication system in the Borough of Kenhorst have been
obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the Zoning
Officer.
K. Public notice. For purposes of this chapter, any conditional use request,
variance request or appeal of an administratively approved use or
conditional use shall require public notice to all abutting property
owners and property owners of properties that are located within the
corresponding separation distance listed in § 424-7B(5)(b), Table 2, in
addition to any notice otherwise required by this chapter.
L. Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower, except where
required by law or approved by the Borough of Kenhorst.
M. Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements
of § 424-8.
§ 424-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-4
1:423
§ 424-5. Permitted uses.
§ 424-6. Administratively approved uses.
N. Multiple antenna/tower plan. The Borough of Kenhorst encourages the
users of towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval
of multiple towers on one site within an approved zoning district.
O. Fall zone. The fall zone is the area within which there is a potential
hazard from falling debris on the collapsing of the communications
tower. The fall zone shall be determined by the applicant's engineer and
reviewed by the Borough's Engineer in accordance with latest
applicable codes.
P. Maintenance inspections. Routine maintenance inspections are
required, including reports to the Borough.197
A. General. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted in
the following zoning district only: C-2 (Shopping Center Commercial
District), located on the northeast corner of SR 0625 (New Holland
Road) and SR 0724 (Philadelphia Avenue), and shall require a
conditional use permit.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are specifically permitted:
(1) Antennas or towers located on property owned, lease or otherwise
controlled by the Borough of Kenhorst, provided a license or lease
authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the
Borough of Kenhorst.
A. General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
administrative approvals for towers and antennas:
(1) The Zoning Officer may administratively approve the uses listed in
this section only after a conditional use has been granted.
(2) Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the
Zoning Officer, providing the information set forth in § 424-7B(1)
and (3) of this chapter and a nonrefundable fee, as established by
resolution of Borough Council, to reimburse the Borough of
Kenhorst for the costs of reviewing the application.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall review the application for administrative
approval and determine if the proposed use complies with
§ 424-7B(4) and (5) of this chapter.
(4) The Zoning Officer shall respond to each such application within 60
days after receiving it by either approving or denying the
application. If the Zoning Officer fails to respond to the applicant
within said 60 days, then the application shall be deemed approved.
197. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 424-4 KENHORST CODE § 424-6
1:424
(5) In connection with any such administrative approval, the Zoning
Officer may, in order to encourage shared use, administratively
waive any zoning district setback requirements in § 424-7B(4) or
separation distances between towers in § 424-7B(5) by up to 50%.
(6) In connection with any such administrative approval, the Zoning
Officer may, in order to encourage the use of monopoles,
administratively allow the reconstruction of an existing tower or
monopole construction.
(7) If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant shall file an
application for a conditional use permit pursuant to § 424-7 prior to
filing any appeal that may be available under this chapter.
B. List of administratively approved uses. The following uses may be
approved by the Zoning Officer after conducting administrative review:
(1) Location of a tower or antenna, including the placement of
additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in
connection with said tower or antenna, in the C-2 District, located
on the northeast corner of SR 0625 (New Holland Road) and SR
0724 (Philadelphia Avenue).198
(2) Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with
the terms of Subsection B(2)(a) and (b), below.
(a) Antennas on existing structures. Any antenna which is not
attached to a tower may be approved by the Zoning Officer as
an accessory use to any commercial, industrial, professional,
institutional or multifamily structure of eight or more dwelling
units, provided:
[1] The antenna does not extend more than 20 feet above the
highest point of the structure.
[2] The antenna complies with all applicable FAA and FCC
regulations.
[3] The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
(b) Antenna on existing towers. An antenna which is attached to
an existing tower may be approved by the Zoning Officer and,
to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the
proliferation and clustering of towers, co-location of antennas
by more than one carrier on existing towers shall take
precedence over the construction of new towers; provided,
such co-location is accomplished in a manner consistent with
the following:
198. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 424-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-6
1:425
[1] A tower which is modified or reconstructed to
accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna
shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower,
unless the Zoning Officer allows reconstruction as a
monopole.
[2] Height.
[a] An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to taller
height, to exceed 30 feet over the tower's existing
height, to accommodate the co-location of additional
antennas.
[b] The height change referred to in the above subsection
may only occur one time per communication tower.
[c] The additional height change referred to in the above
subsection shall not require an additional distance
separation as set forth in § 424-7. The tower's
premodification height shall be used to calculate such
distance separations.
[3] On-site location.
[a] A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the colocation
of additional antennas may be moved on site
within 50 feet of an existing location.
[b] After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate co-location,
only one tower may remain on the site.
[c] A relocation on-site tower shall continue to be
measured from the original tower location for
purposes of calculating separation distances between
towers pursuant to § 424-7B(5). The relocation of a
tower hereunder shall in no way be deemed to cause a
violation of § 424-7B(5).
[d] The on-site relocation of a tower which comes within
the separation distances to residential units or
residentially zoned lands as established in § 424-7B(5)
shall only be permitted when approved by the Zoning
Officer.
[4] A new permit and/or inspection is required when placing a
co-location on the tower in order to monitor changes or
potential overloads.199
(3) A new tower may be located in the C-2 Zoning District; provided, a
licensed professional engineer certifies the tower can structurally
accommodate the number of shared users proposed by the
199. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 424-6 KENHORST CODE § 424-6
1:426
§ 424-7. Conditional use permits.
applicant; the Zoning Officer concludes the tower is in conformity
and with the goals set forth in § 424-1 and the requirements of
§ 424-4; and the tower meets the setback requirements in
§ 424-7B(4) and separation distances in § 424-7B(5); and the tower
meets the following height and usage criteria:
(a) For a single user or systems, up to 100 feet in height.
(b) For two users or systems, up to 150 feet in height.
(c) For three or more users or systems, up to 200 feet in height.
(4) Locating any alternate tower structure in a C-2 Zoning District
that, in the judgment of the Zoning Officer, is in conformity with the
goals set forth in § 424-1 of this chapter.
(5) Installing a cable microcell network through the use of multiple
low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to existing wireless
systems, such as conventional cable or telephone wires, or similar
technology that does not require the use of towers.
A. General. The provisions of Chapter 475, Zoning, shall govern the
issuance of conditional use permits for towers or antennas by the
combined Borough Council.200
B. Towers.
(1) Information required. Applicants for a conditional use permit for a
tower shall submit the following information:
(a) A scale site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height
of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent
land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to other
municipalities), master plan classification of the site and all
properties within the applicable separation distance set forth
in § 424-7B(5), adjacent roadways, proposed means of access,
setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the
proposed tower and any other structures, topography, parking
and other information deemed by the Zoning Officer to be
necessary to assess compliance with this chapter.
(b) Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
(c) The setback distance between the proposed tower and the
nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties.
200. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 424-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-7
1:427
(d) The separation distance from other towers described in the
inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to § 424-4C shall
be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall
also identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s)
and owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known.
(e) A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
(f) Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the
method of camouflage and illumination.
(g) A description of compliance with § 424-4C through G and I, J, L
and M and § 424-7B(4) and (5), and all applicable federal, state
and local laws.
(h) A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether
construction of the tower will accommodate co-location of
additional antennas for future users.
(i) Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network
for the tower(s) described in the application and other tower
sites owned and operated by the applicant in the Township.
(j) The applicant shall demonstrate:
[1] That it is licensed by the FCC to operate a communications
tower, if applicable, and communication antennas;
[2] Documentation from the FAA approving towers exceeding
200 feet;
[3] Insurance certificate evidencing general liability; and
[4] All federal standards regarding human exposure to
electromagnetic radiation have been met.
(k) The applicant shall submit proof that the Reading Airport, as
well as all other small airports within a five-mile radius, have
been notified of the tower installation.
(l) The applicant shall submit a copy of its current Federal
Communications Commission licenses, name, address and
emergency telephone number for the operator of the
communications tower and a certificate of insurance
evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount
of $1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage
in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering
the communications tower, communications antenna and the
communications equipment building.
(2) Factors considered in granting conditional use for towers. The
Borough of Kenhorst shall consider the following factors in
determining whether to issue a conditional use permit:
§ 424-7 KENHORST CODE § 424-7
1:428
(a) Height of proposed tower.
(b) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries.
(c) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties.
(d) Surrounding topography.
(e) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage.
(f) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness.
(g) Proposed ingress and egress.
(h) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or
structures as discussed in § 407-7B(3) of this chapter.
(3) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the
applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Borough Council that no existing tower, structure or alternative
technology that does not require the use of towers or structures
can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. An applicant
shall submit information requested by the Borough Council related
to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no
existing tower, structure or alternative technology can
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any
of the following:201
(a) No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area which meet the applicant's engineering
requirements.
(b) Existing towers or structures are not sufficient height to meet
applicant's engineering requirements.
(c) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related
equipment.
(d) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause
electromagnetic interference with the antenna(s) on the
existing towers or structures, or the antenna(s) on the existing
towers or structures would cause interference with the
applicant's approved antenna.
201. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 424-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-7
1:429
(e) The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner
in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an
existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs
exceeding new tower development are presumed to be
unreasonable.
(f) The applicant demonstrates that there are limiting factors that
render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
(g) The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures, such as cable
microcell network using multiple low powered transmitters/
receivers attached to a wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs of
alternative technology that exceed new tower or antenna
development shall not be presumed to render the technology
unsuitable.
(4) Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all
towers for which a conditional use permit is required; provided,
however, that the Borough Council may reduce the standard
setback requirements if the goals of this chapter would be better
served thereby:
(a) Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning
setback requirements.
(5) Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply to
all towers and antennas for which a conditional use permit is
required; provided, however, that the Borough Council may reduce
the standard separation requirements if the goals of this chapter
would be better served.
(a) Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
[1] Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the
tower to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or designated
areas as specified in Table 1, except as otherwise provided
in Table 1.
[2] Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the
minimum standards established in Table 1.
§ 424-7 KENHORST CODE § 424-7
1:430
Table 1
Off-Site Uses/Designated
Area
Separation Distance
(feet)
Single-family or duplex
residential units
200
Vacant single-family or
semidetached residentially
zoned land which is either
platted or has preliminary
subdivision plan approval
which is not expired
200
Vacant unplatted residentially
zoned lands
100
Existing multifamily
residential units greater than
semidetached units
100
Nonresidentially zoned lands
or nonresidential uses
None: only setbacks apply
(b) Separation distances between towers. Separation distance
between towers shall be applicable for and measured between
the proposed tower and existing towers. The separation
distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight
line between the base of the existing tower and the proposed
base, pursuant to the site plan, of the proposed tower. The
separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as shown in
Table 2.
Table 2
Existing Towers - Type
Lattice Guyed
Monopole
75 feet in
Height or
Greater
Monopole
Less Than
75 feet in
Height
Lattice 2,000 5,000 1,500 750
Guyed 2,000 5,000 1,500 750
Monopole 75
feet in height
or greater
1,500 1,500 1,500 750
Monopole
less than 75
feet in height
750 750 750 750
(6) Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not
less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an
§ 424-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-7
1:431
§ 424-8. Buildings or other equipment storage.
appropriate anticlimbing device; provided, however, that the
Borough Council may waive such requirements, as it deems
appropriate.
(7) Landscaping The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers for which a conditional use permit
is required; provided, however, that the Borough Council may
waive such requirements if the goals of this chapter would be
better served thereby.
(a) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view year round of the
tower compound from the property used for residencies. The
standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four
feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound.
(b) In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or
waived.
(c) Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some
cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural
growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
A. Antenna mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment or
structure used in association with antennas shall comply with the
following:
(1) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 100 square
feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in height. In
addition, for buildings and structures which are less than 65 feet in
height, the related unmanned equipment structure, if over 100
square feet of gross floor area or 10 feet in height, shall be located
on the ground and shall not be located on the roof of the structure.
(2) If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building, the
area of the equipment structure and other equipment and
structures shall not occupy more than 10% of the roof area.
(3) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with
applicable building codes.
B. Antennas mounted on utility poles or light poles. The equipment cabinet
or structure used in association with antennas shall be located in
accordance with the following, provided a conditional permit is
granted:
(1) The equipment cabinet or structure shall be no greater than 10 feet
in height or 100 square feet in area. The structure or cabinet shall
§ 424-7 KENHORST CODE § 424-8
1:432
§ 424-9. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers.
Upon issuance of the permit by the Borough to operate the communication
tower, applicant shall submit quarterly inspection reports as evidence the
communication tower is in operation. If the tower and/or antenna remains
unused for a period of 12 consecutive months, the owner or operator shall
dismantle and remove the tower and/or antenna within six months of notice
to do so by the Borough. Further, the owner or operator of the tower
and/or antenna shall post security in a form acceptable to the Borough
in an amount to cover tower and/or antenna removal and site cleanup.
The security shall be utilized by the Borough in the event that the owner
or operator of the tower and/or antenna fails to remove the tower and/or
antenna within six months of notification by the municipality.
§ 424-10. Nonconforming uses.
be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of at
least eight feet and a planted height of at least 36 inches. In all
other instances, structures or cabinets shall be screened from view
of all residential properties which abut or are directly across the
street from the structure or cabinet by a solid fence eight feet in
height or an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of at least
eight feet and a planted height of at least 36 inches.
C. Antennas located on towers. The related unmanned equipment
structure shall not contain more than 100 square feet of gross floor area
or be more than 10 feet in height and shall be located in accordance
with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located.
D. Modification of building size requirements. The requirements of
§ 424-8A through C may be modified by the Borough Council.
A. Nonexpansion of nonconforming use. Towers that are constructed and
antennas that are installed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a
nonconforming use or structure.
B. Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue
their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance, including
replacement with a new tower of like construction and height, shall be
permitted on such preexisting towers. New construction other than
routine maintenance on a preexisting tower shall be required to comply
with the requirements of this chapter.202
C. Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or antennas.
Notwithstanding § 424-9, bona fide nonconforming towers or antennas
that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having to first
202. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 424-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 424-10
1:433
§ 424-11. Violations and penalties.203
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable
as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General Penalty, of this
Code.
Chapter 429
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 341.
§ 429-1. Definitions; word usage. [Amended 1-6-2003 by Ord. No.
482]
obtain administrative approval or a conditional use permit and without
having to meet the separation requirements specified in § 424-7B(4)
and (5). The type, height and location of the tower on site shall be of
the same type and intensity as the original facility. Building permits
to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then applicable building
codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the date the facility
is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained, or if said permit
expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified
in § 424-9.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings hereby ascribed to them, except in those instances where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Kenhorst.
PERMIT — Any permit in writing as issued by the Secretary of the
Council of the Borough of Kenhorst.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, association, partnership or
corporation.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — Any street, sidewalk or alley open to the public
and extending to the building line as shown on the topographical survey
or other recorded plan of property within said Borough.
SECRETARY — The Borough Secretary, in her capacity as the appointed
Secretary of the Council of the Borough of Kenhorst.
SHADE TREE — Any tree, shrub or other woody plant on any public
highway in the Borough of Kenhorst, or that part of any tree, shrub
203. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 424-10 KENHORST CODE § 429-1
1:434
§ 429-2. Responsibility for planting, removing, care and
maintenance.
The ownership and sole responsibility for the planting, removing, care and
maintenance of public shade trees is vested in the owner of the property
abutting the area wherein the tree or trees are planted.
§ 429-3. Unlawful to permit diseased trees to remain on property.
No person shall permit any trees, shrubs or other woody plants afflicted
with the Dutch elm or other diseases, which threaten to injure or destroy
other trees, shrubs or other woody plants in the Borough, to remain at
any place upon property owned by him or upon any portion of the public
highway abutting such property.
§ 429-4. Removal of diseased trees. [Amended 1-6-2003 by Ord. No.
482]
The owner of any property, and/or the owner of any property abutting a
portion of the public highway, upon which any trees, shrubs or other woody
plants afflicted with the Dutch elm or other diseases which threaten to
injure or destroy other trees, shrubs or other woody plants in the Borough,
shall exist or be situate contrary to the provisions of this chapter, shall, upon
20 days' written notice from the Council, take the necessary measures to
cut and/or remove the same as the case may be, to rectify such condition so
that the same shall thereafter conform to all requirements of this chapter.
If at the expiration of such period, such conditions shall not have been
corrected or rectified by the owner of such property, Borough Council may
cause the necessary work to be done and levy and collect the cost thereof
from the owner of the property. The cost of such work shall be a lien upon
the premises from the time of the commencement of the work, which date
shall be fixed by the Borough Engineer and shall be filed with the Borough
Secretary. Any such lien may be collected by an action in assumpsit or by
lien filed in the manner provided by law for the filing and collection of
municipal claims.
§ 429-5. Location of trees.
All trees planted in accordance with this chapter shall be planted no closer
than 25 feet from the curb intersection of any street or alley, not closer than
35 feet apart, within 10 feet of any fire hydrant, within 20 feet of streetlights
or other woody plant which extends within the limits of any public
highway.
B. In these regulations, and in this chapter, the singular shall include the
plural and the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.204
204. Editor's Note: Original Section 12, Authority of Council, as amended 1-6-2003 by Ord. No.
482, which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 429-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 429-5
1:435
or lamp posts, or within five feet of any sewer, gas, water, electric line or
conduit except as otherwise permitted by Borough Council.
§ 429-6. Property owner required to trim public shade trees.
[Amended 1-6-2003 by Ord. No. 482]
§ 429-7. Unlawful to attach wires to public shade trees. [Amended
1-6-2003 by Ord. No. 482]
No person shall attach any wire, insulator or any other device for holding
such wire, to any public shade tree. All other wires shall be securely
fastened so as not to come in contact with any public shade tree or any part
thereof; nor shall any person direct or allow their employees to climb any
public shade tree without permission from the Council of the Borough of
Kenhorst. The use of implements with sharp penetrating points is positively
prohibited for the purpose of climbing any public shade tree.206
§ 429-8. Attachments to public shade trees unlawful.
No person shall attach any rope, wire, sign, poster, handbill or other object
to any shade tree or guard thereof.
A. Said owner shall trim the branches of trees covered by this chapter to
maintain a clearance of no less than eight feet above the grade of the
sidewalk and no less than 13 feet from the grade of the street or alley
for the entire distance of the cartway or eight feet outside the curb,
except that Borough Council may designate a higher clearance where
conditions or circumstances warrant.
B. The Council reserves the right to permit the trimming of shade trees, at
the expense of others, so as not to interfere with the proper lighting of
streets and providing clearance for fire alarm and utility wires, poles
and other structures and appurtenant equipment.205
205. Editor's Note: Original Section 18, Permit required to plant, trim or replace public shade
trees, Section 19, Permit application required; content, and Section 20, Permit issued free
of charge; term, all as amended 1-6-2003 by Ord. No. 482, which immediately followed
this section, were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
206. Editor's Note: Original Section 22, Unlawful to pour deleterious substances on public
shade trees, Section 23, Gas company to repair gas leaks, Section 24, Certain guards or
devices not to be attached to public shade trees without permission (as amended 1-6-2003
by Ord. No. 482), Section 25, Excavations near public shade trees to be supervised (as
amended 1-6-2003 by Ord. No. 482), and Section 26, Public shade trees to be protected
from building hazards, which immediately followed this section, were repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 429-5 KENHORST CODE § 429-9
1:436
§ 429-9. Uprooted trees to be removed. [Amended 1-6-2003 by Ord.
No. 482207]
It shall further be the duty of the Council of the Borough of Kenhorst to see
to the prompt removal or replacement of any uprooted trees or broken down
limbs and branches by the adjacent property owner.208
§ 429-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-6-2003 by Ord. No.
482209]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Enforcement; General
Penalty, of this Code. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall be
construed as a separate violation for which a penalty may be assessed.
Such penalties for any violation of these regulations and this chapter shall
be assessed by the Council upon majority vote. Any penalty so assessed
shall be a lien upon the real estate of the offender and may be collected as
municipal claims are collected. All penalties or assessments imposed under
this article shall be paid to the Borough Treasurer.
Chapter 450
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 404.
207. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
208. Editor's Note: Original Section 29, Council of the Borough of Kenhorst to make annual
inspection of shade trees, and Section 30, Enforcement, both as amended 1-6-2003 by
Ord. No. 482, which immediately followed this section, were repealed at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
209. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 429-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 429-10
1:437

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 450-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 450-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Borough of Kenhorst.
§ 450-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania,210 as now in force,
or as hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
C. Although the highways in the Borough run generally in a northeastsouthwest
and a northwest-southeast direction, for the purpose of this
chapter, the highways running parallel or generally parallel thereto
shall be deemed to run in a north-south direction, and the highways
parallel or generally parallel thereto shall be deemed to run in an eastwest
direction.
D. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
HIGHWAY — Every way or place, of whatever nature, open to the use
of the public as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic. The
term "highway" shall not be deemed to include a roadway or driveway
upon grounds owned by private persons, colleges, universities, or other
institutions.
LEGAL HOLIDAYS — Shall mean and include New Year's Day, Memorial
Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas.
A. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations;
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
210. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 450-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-3
1:439
§ 450-4. Authority of peace officers.
The peace officers of the Borough are hereby given authority to direct traffic
on the highways of the Borough and at intersections thereof.213
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Mayor and the Police Department in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in
violation of any such regulation, or who shall move, remove, destroy,
injure or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give
notice of any such regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to
the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a
violation of such nature.211,212
211. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
212. Editor's Note: Original Section 4, Experimental regulations, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
213. Editor's Note: Original Section 6, Use of speed-timing devices, as added 3-1-1984 by Ord.
No. 375, which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 450-3 KENHORST CODE § 450-4
1:440
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 450-5. Driving on sidewalks prohibited.214
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or tractor upon any sidewalk in the
Borough, nor shall any person operate a motor vehicle upon or across any
sidewalk except in order to gain access to or egress from a driveway or alley
at such locations where the curb, if such sidewalk is curbed, shall have been
properly cut down for the purpose.
§ 450-6. Speed limits.215
The following speed limits are hereby established:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
All highways 25 Entire length
§ 450-7. Traffic signals at certain intersections.216
At the following intersections, official traffic signals shall be erected (or
if heretofore erected are hereby ratified), and traffic at such intersections
shall be directed by such signals:
Name of Street
Intersection of Routes 724 and 625
§ 450-8. One-way highways. [Amended 12-2-1982 by Ord. No. 368;
6-2-1983 by Ord. No. 371; 12-7-2000 by Ord. No. 463217]
The following are hereby established as one-way highways:
Highway From To
Direction of
Travel
Fayette Avenue Fairview School High Boulevard South
Columbia
Avenue
Kenhorst
Boulevard
Hancock Avenue South
Crowder
Avenue
Hancock
Boulevard
Brooke Boulevard North
214. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
215. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
216. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
217. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 450-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-9
1:441
§ 450-9. U-turns prohibited.218
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle or tractor to make a Uturn
anywhere upon any highway in the Borough.219
§ 450-10. Traffic to keep to right of certain center structures and
barriers.220
All vehicular traffic shall keep to the right of the following structures or
barriers located in the center of the specified intersections.221
Location
(Reserved)
§ 450-11. Stop intersections. [Amended 4-6-1978 by Ord. No. 351;
6-2-1983 by Ord. No. 371; 6-4-1987 by Ord. No. 392; 10-5-1995 by
Ord. No. 432; 12-7-2000 by Ord. No. 463; 8-7-2008 by Ord. No.
523222]
The following intersections are hereby established as stop intersections,
and official stop signs shall be erected (or are hereby confirmed if
heretofore erected) upon the first-named highway in such a position as
to face traffic approaching the second-named highway in the direction
or directions hereby indicated. All vehicles and tractors approaching any
such intersection in the direction or directions hereby indicated, upon the
highway indicated in each case, shall come to a full stop, within reasonable
distance, before entering any such intersection:
Stop Highway Through Highway Direction of Travel
Alley (20 feet wide
between Fern Avenue
and Daniels Avenue)
Daniels Avenue Southwest
Alley (20 feet wide
between Fern Avenue
and Daniels Avenue)
Fern Avenue Northeast
Baker Avenue Brooke Boulevard Northwest and
southeast
218. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
219. Editor's Note: Original Section 16, Prohibited turns, as amended 11-1-2001 by Ord. No.
471, which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
220. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
221. Editor's Note: Original Section 18, Traffic to move in counterclockwise direction around
center square and or malls, which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
222. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 450-9 KENHORST CODE § 450-11
1:442
Stop Highway Through Highway Direction of Travel
Baker Avenue Fern Avenue Northwest and
southeast
Baker Avenue New Holland Road Southeast
Bellefonte Avenue Broadway Boulevard West and east
Bellefonte Avenue Commonwealth
Boulevard
Northeast
Bellefonte Avenue Kenhorst Boulevard West
Bleeker Avenue Bellefonte Avenue North
Broadway Boulevard Commonwealth
Boulevard
South
Broadway Boulevard Muncy Avenue North and south
Broadway Boulevard Upland Avenue North
Brooke Boulevard McArthur Avenue Northeast and
southwest
Brooke Boulevard Kenhorst Boulevard Northeast and
southwest
Brooke Boulevard McAdoo Avenue Northeast and
southwest
Columbia Avenue Hancock Boulevard Southwest
Commonwealth
Boulevard
Broadway Boulevard Southwest
Commonwealth
Boulevard
Grill Avenue Easterly
Commonwealth
Boulevard
High Boulevard Northeast and
southwest
Commonwealth
Boulevard
LaCrosse Avenue Northeast and
southwest
Commonwealth
Boulevard
Upland Avenue Northerly
Commonwealth
Boulevard
Wesleyan Drive Northeast
Cortland Avenue Bellefonte Avenue North and south
Cortland Avenue Kenhorst Boulevard West
Cortland Avenue Milford Avenue North and south
Crowder Avenue Brooke Boulevard North
Crowder Avenue Ext. Hancock Boulevard Southeast
Daniels Avenue Fern Avenue Northwest and
southeast
Daniels Avenue New Holland Road Southeast
§ 450-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-11
1:443
Stop Highway Through Highway Direction of Travel
Fayette Avenue Haig Boulevard Southwest
Fayette Avenue High Boulevard South
Fayette Avenue Milford Avenue South
Fern Avenue Baker Avenue North and south
Fern Avenue Daniels Avenue Northeast and
southwest
Fern Avenue Funston Avenue Southwest
Fern Avenue Kenhorst Boulevard Northeast and
southwest
Fern Avenue McArthur Avenue Northeast and
southwest
Fern Avenue New Holland Road Northeast
Fern Avenue McAdoo Avenue Northeast and
southwest
Funston Avenue Fern Avenue South
Funston Avenue Lancaster Avenue Northwest
Greenway Terrace Commonwealth
Boulevard
West
Haig Boulevard Hancock Boulevard Northwest
Haig Boulevard Kenhorst Boulevard Southeast
Haig Boulevard New Holland Road Northwest and
southeast
Hancock Boulevard Haig Boulevard Northeast
Hancock Boulevard High Boulevard North
Harding Avenue New Holland Road East
High Boulevard Commonwealth
Boulevard
Northwest
High Boulevard Liberty Avenue East and west
High Boulevard New Holland Road Northwest and
southeast
Highwood Avenue Commonwealth
Boulevard
West
Highwood Avenue Jackson Street East
Hoover Avenue Fern Avenue Southwest
Hancock Boulevard Harding Avenue North
Jackson Street Greenway Terrace Southeast
Kenhorst Boulevard High Boulevard South
Kenhorst Boulevard Milford Avenue North and south
§ 450-11 KENHORST CODE § 450-11
1:444
Stop Highway Through Highway Direction of Travel
Kenhorst Boulevard New Holland Road Southeast
LaCrosse Avenue Bellefonte Avenue North and south
LaCrosse Avenue Milford Avenue North and south
Liberty Avenue Brooke Boulevard Northeast
Liberty Avenue Haig Boulevard Northeast and
southwest
Liberty Avenue Harding Avenue North and south
Liberty Avenue John Glenn Avenue North and south
Liberty Avenue Kenhorst Boulevard Northeast and
southwest
Liberty Avenue Quentin Avenue Northeast and
southwest
McAdoo Avenue Fern Avenue Northwest and
southeast
McAdoo Avenue Liberty Avenue Northwest and
southeast
McAdoo Avenue New Holland Road Southeast
McArthur Avenue Columbia Avenue South
McArthur Avenue Hancock Avenue South
McArthur Avenue Lancaster Avenue Northwest
McArthur Avenue Quentin Avenue South
Milford Avenue New Holland Road West
Muncy Avenue Commonwealth
Boulevard
East
Muncy Avenue Broadway Boulevard East and west
Park Avenue New Holland Road Northwest
Quentin Avenue Fayette Avenue Northwest
Quentin Avenue Hancock Boulevard Northwest
Quentin Avenue Kenhorst Boulevard Southeast
Quentin Avenue New Holland Road Southeast
Second Street Commonwealth
Boulevard
Northwest
Tyrone Avenue Broadway Boulevard West
Tyrone Avenue Commonwealth
Boulevard
Northeast
Upland Avenue New Holland Road Northwest
Wesleyan Drive Woodcrest Drive Southeast
Wingate Avenue Wesleyan Drive Northeast
§ 450-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-12
1:445
§ 450-12. Yield-right-of-way intersections. [Amended 9-5-1974 by
Ord. No. 314; 6-2-1983 by Ord. No. 371; 6-4-1987 by Ord. No.
392223]
The following intersections are hereby established as yield-right-of-way
intersections and official yield signs shall be erected (or are hereby ratified
if heretofore erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named highway from the first-named highway, in the direction or
directions hereby indicated. All vehicles and tractors approaching any such
intersection upon the first-named highway, in the direction or directions
hereby indicated, shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on the second-named highway so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard during the time that the operator of such
vehicle or tractor is moving across or within such intersection:
Yield Highway Through Highway Direction of Travel
Brooke Boulevard Daniels Avenue East
§ 450-13. Certain classes of vehicles prohibited on certain
highways. [Amended 6-2-1983 by Ord. No. 371; 9-6-2001 by Ord.
No. 469]
§ 450-14. Vehicle weight limits.225
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle or other
tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combination, having a gross weight in
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or tractor,
except a passenger vehicle (but towing any other vehicle), upon any of
the following portions of the highways in the Borough:
Highway Between
Fern Avenue New Holland Road and Funston
Avenue
20-foot-wide alley (approximate
150 feet south of 1300 Block
Lancaster Avenue)
Kenhorst Boulevard and McArthur
Avenue
B. Provided: nothing herein shall prohibit the operation of any commercial
vehicle or tractor upon any highway or portion thereof listed
hereinabove where such operation thereon shall be necessary in order
to pick up or deliver any goods, wares, merchandise or material from or
to any premises located upon any such highway or portion thereof.224
223. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
224. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
225. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 450-12 KENHORST CODE § 450-14
1:446
excess of that herein respectively prescribed, upon any of the following
highways or portions thereof.
Street or Bridge Between
Maximum Gross
Weight Limit
(tons)
High Boulevard
[Added 7-1-2010 by
Ord. No. 530226]
Commonwealth
Boulevard and Borough
line over Angelica Creek
30/40 Combination
§ 450-15. Unlawful to operate motor vehicles or tractors on
highways closed for construction or repair.227
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or tractor upon
any highway in the Borough that is under construction, resurfacing or
repair, in disregard of any official sign, barricade or notice that the same is
closed to vehicular traffic.228
§ 450-16. Accident reports.229
The operator of any motor vehicle involved in an accident in the Borough
and required by law to report such accident to any department or agency of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any other person required to make
such report, shall, at the time of making such report to the commonwealth,
make a written report to the Chief of Police of the Borough containing the
same information.230
226. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
227. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
228. Editor's Note: Original Section 24, Play highways, as amended 4-6-1978 by Ord. No. 351,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II).
229. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
230. Editor's Note: Original Section 26, Right-turn-only intersections, as added 11-1-1990 by
Ord. No. 415, which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 450-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-16
1:447

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 450-17. Parking without lights authorized.
The boundary limits of the Borough of Kenhorst are hereby established as
a zone in which motor vehicles may remain standing without lights, and all
highways within such boundary limits are hereby designated as highways
where motor vehicles may remain standing without lights.
§ 450-18. Parking within marked spaces.
Wherever a space shall be marked off on any highway for the parking of
an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the
lines bounding such space.
§ 450-19. Angle parking.
§ 450-20. Parking prohibited at all times. [Amended 6-4-1987 by
Ord. No. 385; 10-5-1995 by Ord. No. 432; 10-5-2000 by Ord. No.
461]
A. Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of the
highway:
Highway Side Between
(Reserved)
B. On all highways or portions thereof where angle parking is now or shall
hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked
with the front thereof nearest the curb.
A. Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Highway Side Between
Bellefonte Avenue South Kenhorst Boulevard and
Commonwealth Boulevard
Broadway Boulevard West Upland Avenue and Muncy
Avenue
Commonwealth
Boulevard
East Muncy Avenue and Upland
Avenue
Harding Avenue South Hancock Boulevard and New
Holland Road
LaCrosse Avenue West Milford Avenue and
Commonwealth Boulevard
LaCrosse Avenue West Milford Avenue and the eastern
end of LaCrosse Avenue
§ 450-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-20
1:449
§ 450-21. Parking in bus stop lanes, emergency vehicle lanes and
handicap parking spaces prohibited. [Added 10-1-1998 by Ord. No.
452]
No person shall park a vehicle in areas designated for "bus stops,"
"emergency vehicles" or "handicap parking," except buses, emergency
vehicles and persons with a handicap parking permit, respectively.
§ 450-22. Parking prohibited certain days and hours.
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days
and between the hours indicated:
Highway Side Between
Milford Avenue North New Holland Road and Kenhorst
Boulevard
New Holland Road
(SR 625) [Added
10-4-2012 Ord. No.
547]
East High Boulevard and Philadelphia
Avenue (SR 724)
New Holland Road East Milford Avenue and northward
115 feet to driveway entrance
New Holland Road
(SR 625) [Added
10-4-2012 Ord. No.
547]
West The boundary of 1727 New
Holland Road and Philadelphia
Avenue (SR 724)
Philadelphia Avenue North East Borough line and west
Borough line
Upland Avenue North New Holland Road and Broadway
Boulevard
B. Parking shall be prohibited on any Borough street on which two-way
traffic is permitted which is not more than 20 feet in width, as said
width is set forth on the topographical survey of the Borough.
C. Parking shall be prohibited on any Borough alleyway, either public or
private, which is set forth on the topographical survey of the Borough.
No person shall erect, maintain or permit any obstruction which would
interfere with access to the alleyway by an emergency vehicle.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or allow to remain parked, in
any public alleyway any of the following: passenger vehicles, trucks,
recreational vehicles, trailers, motor boats, camping trailers, or
motorcycles.231,232
231. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
232. Editor's Note: Original Section 35, Parking on bridges prohibited, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 450-20 KENHORST CODE § 450-22
1:450
Highway Side Location Days Hours
Greenway
Terrace
[Added
11-5-2015 by
Ord. No. 570]
North In the vicinity of
911 Greenway
Terrace and across
from the Adams
Street entrance to
Alvernia University
Monday
through
Friday
8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
§ 450-23. Parking time limited.
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow the same to remain parked, for
longer than the time herein indicated, in any of the following locations, at
any time on the days and between the hours herein indicated:
Highway Side Between
Parking Time
Limit
Liberty Ave
[Added
9-4-2014 by
Ord. No. 565]
Kenhorst Boulevard and
the center of the
unmarked alley adjacent
to Borough Hall
No parking
between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m., unless
there is a
municipal purpose
for the person
using the space
New Holland
Road
West Fern Avenue and a point
along the curbline of
New Holland 97 feet 6
inches south of the
south end of the radius
at the southwestern
corner of New Holland
Road and Fern Avenue
1 hour
New Holland
Road233
At 1629 New Holland
Road
2 hour
§ 450-24. Special purpose parking zones.
The following are hereby established as special purpose parking zones, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or tractor, or to allow
the same to remain parked, in any such zone, except as specifically provided
for in such zone:
Highway Side Location
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle
(Reserved)
233. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 450-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-25
1:451
§ 450-25. Limited parking in Residential District.
§ 450-26. Parking of unattached or uncoupled trailers or
semitrailers.236
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any
unattached or uncoupled trailer or semitrailer upon any highway within the
Borough of Kenhorst.
§ 450-27. Stopping or standing prohibited. [Added 7-6-1978 by Ord.
No. 352]
Stopping or standing shall be prohibited at all times in the following
locations:
Highway Side Between
New Holland Road East Borough/City of Reading line to
Upland Avenue
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or allow to remain parked,
on any street or public alley or any part of any street or public alley in a
residential zone within the Borough of Kenhorst, any vehicle other than
a passenger vehicle or car. The definition of a passenger vehicle or car
does not include buses, tow trucks, rollback trucks, stake body trucks,
step vans, cube vans, any truck in excess of 10,000 pounds (GVW) and
moving vans, except for local pickup and delivery. Exempt from this
provision are work trucks with (or without) company logos used by
residents for their daily employment.234
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or allow to remain parked,
on any street or public alley or any part of any street or public alley in a
residential zone within the Borough of Kenhorst, for more than 24 hours
the following: boats, motor homes, camping trailers, trailers of any type
or passenger cars attached to trailers of any kind.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or allow to remain parked,
on any street or public alley or any part of any street or public alley in a
residential zone within the Borough of Kenhorst, any construction
vehicles in excess of 10,000 pounds (GVW) unless a building or work
permit has been obtained from the Borough of Kenhorst conspicuously
posted on the dwelling where work is being performed.235
234. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
235. Editor's Note: Original Section 39, Violations and penalties, as amended 4-3-1997 by Ord.
No. 440, 4-1-2010 by Ord. No. 529, and 9-4-2014 by Ord. No. 565, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
236. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 450-25 KENHORST CODE § 450-28
1:452
§ 450-28. Additional parking regulations. [Added 7-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 569237]
A. Parking regulations. No motor vehicle of any kind shall be permitted to
park at any time in the Borough of Kenhorst as follows:
(1) In a space designated by the Borough of Kenhorst or its designee as
a handicapped parking zone, unless the vehicle parked in that zone
is the vehicle authorized to be parked in that handicapped parking
zone, by permit, for handicap parking.
(2) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant or in a designated fire zone.
(3) It shall be illegal to park a vehicle on a public street or on private
property with a missing or expired inspection or registration
sticker.
(4) In parking at a meter space longer than the designated time limit.
(5) In parking outside of the delineated space provided by parking
meters.
(6) In parking in a zone designated for the use of motor buses or other
means of public transportation.
(7) Within 20 feet of any intersection.
(8) Facing the wrong direction/opposite the flow of traffic.
(9) Parked in a lane used by moving traffic.
(10) More than 12 inches from the curb.
(11) At an improper angle.
(12) In a posted no-parking zone by signs and lines.
(13) In a manner that obstructs a crosswalk or sidewalk.
(14) In front of or in a private driveway without the owner's permission.
(15) In a manner that constitutes double parking.
(16)On a sidewalk or curb or planting strip located between a curb and
sidewalk.
(17) In a manner that blocks entrance to or exit from a garage or
driveway.
(18) In a manner that obstructs or blocks vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(19) In an area designated as prohibited parking by temporary
regulations, when signs are erected giving notice.
237. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 450-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-28
1:453
(20) In a designated street sweeping area.
(21) In a designated loading zone.
(22) In an alley.
(23) On grass; parking allowed only on gravel or paved surfaces.
(24) In a designated temporary parking zone at any business or
commercial establishment in excess of the time limit posted for the
area.
(25) In violation of any other parking ordinance adopted by the Borough
of Kenhorst from time to time.
B. Temporary parking for business and commercial establishments. In
order for a business to obtain an official, temporary parking sign for
enforcement by the Borough, they shall make application to Borough
Council for consideration of the placement and enforcement for such
signage. Such signage shall be considered by the Borough Council on a
case-by-case basis based upon the following factors, and if approved,
the approval of such signage shall be by resolution which shall
designate the time for parking restriction, the location of signage, and
any other special requirement the Borough Council may set forth based
upon the application:
(1) Applicants for temporary signage and enforcement shall submit an
application with the appropriate application fee to the Borough and
set forth:
(a) The purpose and need for temporary parking; which may
include, but need not be limited to: unique property shape,
frontage limitations, use on the property and the ability for
placement of clear signage;
(b) The time limitations desired by the applicant which shall not be
less than one hour and not more than two hours;
(c) Additional application information as needed by the Borough
staff for processing such application;
(d) Applicants shall allow the Borough public works department to
inspect the area and location proposed for the signage to
ensure that the location of the signage is appropriate for
posting, parking and is in an enforceable location.
(2) Only one on-street parking space may be designated for temporary
parking on a public street per address.
(3) Applicants shall also submit an application fee that shall be
established by resolution from time to time by the Borough Council
which shall include all real costs associated with the posting of a
business or commercial establishment, including administrative
§ 450-28 KENHORST CODE § 450-28
1:454
time and expense, the cost of posting, sign costs, and other costs
associated with the processing of temporary sign requests.
§ 450-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-28
1:455

ARTICLE IV
Kenhorst Community Park Lot
§ 450-29. Parking of certain vehicles prohibited.
The municipally owned parking lot with entrance on Muncy Street is hereby
declared to be for the use of private passenger vehicles only, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to park in such lot any bus, truck, tractor, trailer,
tractor trailer or commercial vehicle of any kind or nature.
§ 450-30. Parking time limited.
No person shall cause, allow or permit any vehicle registered in his name to
remain parked in the Kenhorst Community Park lot for a period longer than
as posted.
§ 450-31. Manner of parking.
All vehicles parked in the Kenhorst Community Park lot, hereinabove
referred to, shall be parked wholly within the lines bounding or marking
an individual parking space, and it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle
elsewhere than in such a space, such prohibited areas including but not
limited to the access and exit driveways and turning spaces.238
238. Editor's Note: Original Section 54, Violations and penalties, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 450-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-31
1:457

ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice Emergencies
[Amended 11-2-1995 by Ord. No. 433]
§ 450-32. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of excessive snow and ice on the highways or portions of highways named
in § 450-35 of this article, the Mayor, in his discretion, may declare an
emergency due to such hazards.
§ 450-33. Parking during emergency prohibited; operation of
vehicles restricted.
After any such emergency shall have been declared, it shall be unlawful
during the period of any such emergency for any person to park a motor
vehicle or tractor or allow the same to remain parked, on any highway or
portion thereof named in § 450-35 of this article or to operate any motor
vehicle or tractor on any such highway or portion thereof unless such motor
vehicle or tractor shall be equipped with adequate equipment to provide
sufficient traction to keep such vehicle or tractor in motion so that other
traffic on such highways will not be blocked or seriously impeded.
§ 450-34. Placement of signs; notification of existence of
emergency.
§ 450-35. Snow emergency routes.
The highways or portions thereof to which the provisions of § 450-33 shall
be applicable during all periods of declared emergency as provided in
§ 450-32 of this article are as follows: such highways as are designated as
"Snow Emergency Routes" by the Mayor or the Chief of Police in a public
A. In order to assist the operators of motor vehicles and tractors in
determining the highways affected by § 450-33 of this article, the Mayor
or Chief of Police shall place around the utility poles on the highways or
portions thereof designated in § 450-35 of this article signs reading as
follows:
SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE
SNOW TIRES OR CHAINS REQUIRED
NO PARKING DURING EMERGENCY
VEHICLES TOWED AWAY
B. The Mayor or Chief of Police shall also, through radio, newspaper or
other available media, disseminate information as to the existence of
such an emergency.
§ 450-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-35
1:459
announcement and those highways where signs, as specified in § 450-34,
have been installed.
§ 450-36. Parking during snowfall and/or ice accumulation.
[Amended 3-2-2000 by Ord. No. 456]
§ 450-37. Towing of vehicles in violation.
Borough police are hereby authorized to have any vehicle which is in
violation of this article towed away at the expense of the owner.239
A. During the course of any snowfall or ice accumulations deemed by the
Mayor to be hazardous to pedestrian and vehicular traffic, parking shall
be prohibited on the even-numbered (house numbers) side of Borough
streets until such time as plowing is completed on said side of streets;
except on LaCrosse Avenue and the 1000 Block of Broadway Boulevard,
parking shall be prohibited on the uneven numbered side of the street.
Also excepted is the 900 Block of New Holland Road and Upland
Avenue; parking restrictions will be posted after the storm.
B. After 8:00 a.m. on the day immediately following any such snow storm,
parking shall be prohibited on the uneven-numbered side of all Borough
streets until such time as plowing is completed on said side of street,
except on LaCrosse Avenue and the 1000 Block of Broadway Boulevard,
parking shall be prohibited on the even-numbered side of the street.
239. Editor's Note: Original Section 67, Violations and penalties, as amended 12-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 532, which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 450-35 KENHORST CODE § 450-37
1:460
ARTICLE VI
Removal and Impounding of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 450-38. Authority to remove and impound.
The Chief of Police of the Borough is hereby authorized to remove and
impound or to order the removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked on
any of the streets, highways or public property in the Borough in violation
of any provisions of the law or of any ordinance of the Borough. Provided:
no such vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence
to the provisions of this article.240
§ 450-39. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that such vehicle has been
impounded shall be sent by the Chief of Police of the Borough to the owner
of record of such vehicle. Such notice shall designate the place from which
such vehicle was removed, the reason for its removal and impounding, and
the pound in which it shall have been impounded.
§ 450-40. Effect of payment of charges without protest.
The payment of any towing and impounding charges authorized by this
article, shall, unless such payment shall have been made "under protest,"
be final and conclusive, and shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover
the money so paid.
§ 450-41. Effect of payment of charges under protest.
In the event that any towing and impounding charges, so imposed, shall be
paid "under protest," the offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a
Magisterial District Judge or court of record having jurisdiction, in which
case, such defendant shall be proceeded against and shall receive such
notice as is provided in the Vehicle Code in other cases of summary offenses,
and shall have the same rights as to appeal and waiver of hearing.
§ 450-42. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded and shall
be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or the agents of the
owners thereof with information as to the place of storage of such vehicles.
240. Editor's Note: Original Section 72, Approved storage garages, as amended 8-4-1998 by
Ord. No. 405, Section 73, Garages to be bonded, and Section 74, Towing and storage
charges, as amended 8-4-1988 by Ord. No. 402, which immediately followed this section,
were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 450-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-43
1:461
§ 450-43. Owner or operator of vehicle remains liable for fine or
penalty.
The payment of towing and storage charges authorized by this article shall
not operate to relieve the owner or operator of any vehicle from liability for
any fine or penalty for violation of any law or ordinance on account of which
such vehicle was removed and impounded.
§ 450-44. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the time
of the intended removal thereof, the owner or person for the time being in
charge of such vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove such vehicle immediately.
§ 450-43 KENHORST CODE § 450-44
1:462
ARTICLE VII
Abandonment and Permanent Parking
[Added 12-7-1978 by Ord. No. 356]
§ 450-45. Abandonment or permanent parking prohibited.
§ 450-46. Authority to remove and impound illegally parked
vehicles.
The Mayor or any member of the police force of the Borough of Kenhorst,
Berks County, Pennsylvania, is hereby authorized to remove and impound
or to order the removal and impounding of any motor vehicle parked on
or along any of the streets or highways of the Borough of Kenhorst, Berks
County, Pennsylvania, in violation of any of the provisions of the law or
of any ordinance of the Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania;
provided, no motor vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict
adherence to the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 450-47. Enforcement.
The Mayor or any member of the police force of the Borough of Kenhorst,
Berks County, Pennsylvania, or any person duly authorized by them, may
enter upon private property at all reasonable hours for the purpose of
inspecting motor vehicles, posting notices thereon, and removing and
impounding such motor vehicle, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
prevent the Mayor or any member of the police force of the Borough of
Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania, or any person authorized by them,
from entering on private property for purposes of carrying out his duties
hereunder or to interfere with him in the lawful performance of his duties
under the provisions of this article.
A. No person in charge or control of any property within the Borough of
Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania, whether as owner, tenant,
occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled,
nonoperating, wrecked, junked, discarded or abandoned motor vehicle
to remain on such property longer than 15 days; except that this
provision shall not apply with regard to a motor vehicle in an enclosed
building; a motor vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise
operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the lawful
operation of such business enterprise; or a motor vehicle in an
appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place
and manner by the Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
B. No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind shall continuously park any motor vehicle upon
any highway in an unrestricted parking area for a period of time longer
than three days. Said three-day period shall be computed from the date
such parked motor vehicle was first observed by or called to the
attention of the police force of the Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 450-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-48
1:463
§ 450-48. Removal, impounding and disposition of vehicles.
The removal, impounding and disposition of any motor vehicles under this
article shall be accomplished in strict accordance with the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania applying to motor vehicles.241
§ 450-49. Declaration clause.
It is hereby declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the
protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
§ 450-50. Definitions and interpretations.
Words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, as now in force, or
as hereafter amended, enacted, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. The singular shall include the plural
and the masculine shall include the feminine.
241. Editor's Note: Original Section 90.5, Violations and penalties, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 450-48 KENHORST CODE § 450-50
1:464
ARTICLE VIII
Parking of Inoperable or Illegally Registered Vehicles
[Added 4-1-2010 by Ord. No. 528]
§ 450-51. Registration plates.
No person shall park or leave on the streets, highways or public property of
the Borough any vehicle without any current valid registration plates.
§ 450-52. Inspection stickers.
No person shall park or leave on the streets, highways or public property
of the Borough any vehicle without a current inspection sticker unless the
vehicle is legally parked in front of, or in close proximity to, an official state
inspection station which identifies said vehicle by work order specifying a
state inspection will be performed within 24 hours. Additional work orders
beyond the initial twenty-four-hour period are prohibited.
§ 450-53. Mechanically inoperable vehicles.
No person shall park or leave on the streets, highways or public property of
the Borough any vehicle deemed mechanically inoperable.
§ 450-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-53
1:465

ARTICLE IX
Interpretation; Penalties
§ 450-54. Provisions to be a continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments. The provisions of this chapter shall
not affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit
of prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any of these repealed
ordinances or regulations.
§ 450-55. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-29-1975 by Ord. No.
328; amended 4-29-1975 by Ord. No. 339242]
Any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be subject to the appropriate penalties set forth in the Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) for each provision so violated.
242. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 450-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-55
1:467

ARTICLE X
Dead-End or Non-Through Streets
[Added 8-3-1961 by Ord. No. 181]
§ 450-56. Dead-end or non-through streets established. [Amended
4-3-1997 by Ord. No. 439]
§ 450-57. Police authorized to erect barriers. [Amended 4-3-1997 by
Ord. No. 439]
§ 450-58. Northbound vehicles not to cross barriers.
No person shall drive an automobile or other vehicle in a northerly direction
on said twenty-foot-wide street from any point of the northern curbline of
said ten-foot-wide alley as extended across said twenty-foot-wide street to a
point north of said northern curbline of said ten-foot alley as extended.
§ 450-59. Southbound vehicles not to cross barriers.
No person shall drive an automobile or other vehicle in a southerly direction
on said twenty-foot-wide street from any point north of the northern
curbline of said ten-foot-wide alley as extended across said twenty-foot-wide
A. The twenty-foot-wide street leading from the intersection of
Commonwealth Boulevard and Upland Avenue to New Holland Road is
hereby made a dead-end or non-through street with passage in and
along the same permitted only from points south of the northerly
curbline of the ten-foot-wide alley, approximately 110 feet north of and
concentric to Upland Avenue, as extended across said twenty-foot-wide
street to said northerly curbline of said ten-foot-wide alley as extended
and from points north of the northerly curbline of said ten-foot-wide
alley as extended to said northerly curbline of said ten-foot-wide alley
as extended.
B. Fern Avenue, a sixty-foot-wide street leading from the intersection of
Funston Avenue to the Western Borough Line, is hereby made a deadend
or non-through street with passage in and along the same
permitted only to the Western Borough Line for residential motor
vehicles and trucks for local residential deliveries.
A. The Borough Police are hereby authorized to erect barriers along the
northern curbline of said ten-foot-wide alley as extended across said
twenty-foot-wide street and are directed to erect proper warning signs
to warn the traveling public that said street is a dead-end or nonthrough
street and to mark said barriers with proper safety reflectors.
B. The Borough Police are hereby authorized to erect barriers extended
across said Fern Avenue at its terminus at the western Borough line and
are directed to erect proper warning signs to warn the traveling public
that said street is a dead-end or non-through street and to mark said
barriers with proper safety reflectors.
§ 450-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-59
1:469
street to a point south of said northern curbline of said ten-foot-wide alley
as extended.243
243. Editor's Note: Original Section 155, Violations and penalties, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 450-59 KENHORST CODE § 450-59
1:470
Chapter 460
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Telecommunications towers and
antennas — See Ch. 424.
Zoning — See Ch. 475.
§ 450-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-59
1:471

ARTICLE I
Nontower Wireless Communications Facilities
[Adopted 7-6-2017 by Ord. No. 585]
§ 460-1. General requirements for facilities not involving
substantial change.
The following regulations shall apply to all nontower wireless
communications facilities that do not substantially change the physical
dimensions of the wireless support structure to which they are attached:
A. Permitted in all zones, subject to the Borough's zoning regulations.244
Nontower WCFs are permitted in all zones, subject to the restrictions
and conditions prescribed below and subject to the prior written
approval of the Borough, as well as any zoning regulations. Applicants
proposing installations on existing buildings or towers shall submit
evidence of agreements and/or easements necessary to provide access
to the existing building or tower so that installation and maintenance of
the equipment can be accomplished.
B. Upon receipt of an application for any non-tower-based WCF, the
Borough shall mail notice thereof to the owner or owners of every
property on which is located a residential use on the same street within
500 linear feet of the parcel or property of the proposed facility and of
every residential property not on the same street within 500 linear feet
of the parcel or property of the proposed facility.
C. Standard of design and care. Any nontower WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and removed in
strict compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and
safety-related codes, including, but not limited to, the most recent
editions of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code,
National Electrical Safety Code, and National Electrical Code. Design
certification from a Pennsylvania-registered professional engineer is
required to attest that the existing structure can adequately support
the proposed equipment installation. Detailed construction and
elevation drawings indicating antenna locations and mounting design
shall be submitted by the applicant. Any WCF shall at all times be kept
and maintained in good condition, order and repair by qualified
maintenance and construction personnel, so that the same shall not
endanger the life of any person or any property in the Borough.
D. Wind. Any nontower WCF structures shall be designed to withstand the
effects of wind according to the standard designed by the American
National Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering
departments of the Electronics Industry Association and
Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSFEINTIA-222-E Code,
as amended).
244. Editor's Note: See Ch. 475, Zoning.
§ 460-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-1
1:473
E. Public safety communications. No nontower WCF shall interfere with
public safety communications or the reception of broadband, television,
radio or other communication services enjoyed by occupants of nearby
properties.
F. Aviation safety. Nontower WCFs shall comply with all federal and state
laws and regulations concerning aviation safety. Applications for
nontower WCFs shall be submitted to the Reading Regional Airport
Authority for comments. The WCF applicant shall furnish a statement
from the FCC, FAA and Commonwealth Bureau of Aviation that the
nontower WCF complies with applicable regulations or is exempt from
these regulations.
G. Radio frequency emissions. No nontower WCF may, by itself or in
conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency emissions in
excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC, including but not
limited to the FCC Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled
"Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to
Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
H. Removal. In the event that use of a nontower WCF is discontinued, the
owner shall provide written notice to the Borough of its intent to
discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued.
Unused or abandoned WCFs or portions of WCFs shall be removed as
follows:
(1) All abandoned or unused WCFs and accessory facilities shall be
removed within three months of the cessation of operations at the
site unless a time extension is approved by the Borough.
(2) If the WCF or accessory facility is not removed within three months
of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any longer period
approved by the Borough, the WCF and/or associated facilities and
equipment may be removed by the Borough and the cost of removal
assessed against the owner of the WCF through any process
permitted by law, including but not limited to liens, judgments or
equitable relief.
I. Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a nontower WCF is filed with the Borough, the Borough
shall notify the applicant, in writing, of any information that may be
required to complete such application. Within 90 calendar days of
receipt of a complete application, the Borough shall make its final
decision on whether to approve the application and shall advise the
applicant, in writing, of such decision. If additional information was
requested by the Borough to complete an application, the time required
by the applicant to provide the information shall not be counted toward
the Borough's ninety-day review period.
J. Permit fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Borough's actual costs in reviewing
§ 460-1 KENHORST CODE § 460-1
1:474
§ 460-2. General requirements for facilities involving substantial
change.
The following regulations shall apply to all nontower wireless
communications facilities that substantially change the wireless support
structure to which they are attached:
and processing the application for approval of a nontower WCF or
$1,500, whichever is less.
A. Nontower WCFs are permitted in all zones subject to the restrictions
and conditions prescribed below and subject to the prior written
approval of the Borough.
B. Upon receipt of an application for any nontower-based WCF, the
Borough shall mail notice thereof to the owner or owners of every
property on which is located a residential use on the same street within
500 linear feet of the parcel or property of the proposed facility and of
every residential property not on the same street within 500 linear feet
of the parcel or property of the proposed facility.
C. Standard of care. Any nontower WCF shall be designed, constructed,
operated, maintained, repaired, modified and removed in strict
compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and safetyrelated
codes, including, but not limited to, the most recent editions of
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National
Electrical Safety Code, and National Electrical Code. Any WCF shall at
all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair by
qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so that the same
shall not endanger the life of any person or any property in the
Borough.
D. Historic buildings. Nontower WCFs may not be located on a property,
building or structure that is listed on either the National or
Pennsylvania Register of Historic Places or the official historic
structures and/or historic districts lists maintained by the Borough, or
that has been designated by the Borough as being of historic
significance.
E. Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall apply:
(1) The nontower WCF shall be fully automated and unattended on a
daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or emergency
repair.
(2) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of the
facility in order to promote the safety and security of the Borough's
residents.
(3) All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than the best
available technology for preventing failures and accidents.
§ 460-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-2
1:475
§ 460-3. Nontower facilities outside the rights-of-way.
The following additional regulations shall apply to nontower wireless
communications facilities located outside the rights-of-way that
substantially change the wireless support structure to which they are
attached:
F. Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a nontower WCF is filed with the Borough, the Borough
shall notify the applicant, in writing, of any information that may be
required to complete such application. Within 90 calendar days of
receipt of a complete application, the Borough shall make its final
decision on whether to approve the application and shall advise the
applicant, in writing, of such decision. If additional information was
requested by the Borough to complete an application, the time required
by the applicant to provide the information shall not be counted toward
the Borough's ninety-day review period.
G. Retention of experts. The Borough may hire any consultant(s) and/or
expert(s) necessary to assist the Borough in reviewing and evaluating
the application for approval of the WCF and, once approved, in
reviewing and evaluating any potential violations of the terms and
conditions of this article. The applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall
reimburse the Borough for all costs of the Borough's consultant(s) in
providing expert evaluation and consultation in connection with these
activities.
H. Bond. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the owner of each individual
nontower WCF shall, at its own cost and expense, obtain from a surety
licensed to do business in Pennsylvania and maintain a bond or other
form of security acceptable to the Borough Solicitor in an amount of
$25,000 for each individual nontower WCF to assure the faithful
performance of the terms and conditions of this article. The bond shall
provide that the Borough may recover from the principal and surety any
and all compensatory damages incurred by the Borough for violations
of this article, after reasonable notice and opportunity to cure. The
owner shall file a copy of the bond with the Borough.
I. Permit fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Borough's actual costs in reviewing
and processing the application for approval of a nontower WCF, as well
as related inspection, monitoring and related costs.
A. Development regulations.
(1) Nontower WCFs shall be co-located on existing structures subject
to building code regulations and zoning regulations245 including,
245. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Uniform Construction Codes, and Ch. 475, Zoning,
respectively.
§ 460-2 KENHORST CODE § 460-3
1:476
but not limited to, such as existing buildings or tower-based WCFs,
subject to the following conditions:
(a) Such WCF does not exceed a maximum height of 150 feet.
(b) If the WCF applicant proposes to locate the communications
equipment in a separate building, the building shall comply
with the minimum requirements for the applicable zoning
district.
(2) An eight-foot-high security fence shall surround any separate
communications equipment building. Vehicular access to the
communications equipment building shall not interfere with the
parking or vehicular circulations on the site for the principal use.
B. Design regulations.
(1) Nontower WCFs shall employ stealth technology and be treated to
match the supporting structure in order to minimize aesthetic
impact. The application of the stealth technology chosen by the
WCF applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Borough.
(2) Nontower WCFs which are mounted to a building or similar
structure may not exceed a height of 15 feet above the roof or
parapet, whichever is higher, unless the WCF applicant obtains a
conditional use permit.
(3) All nontower WCF applicants must submit documentation to the
Borough justifying the total height of the nontower structure. Such
documentation shall be analyzed in the context of such justification
on an individual basis.
(4) Antennas and their respective accompanying support structures
shall be no greater in diameter than any cross-sectional dimension
that is reasonably necessary for their proper functioning.
C. Noncommercial usage exemption. The design regulations enumerated
in this subsection shall not apply to direct broadcast satellite dishes
installed for the purpose of receiving video and related communications
services at residential dwellings.
D. Removal; replacement; modification.
(1) The removal and replacement of nontower WCFs and/or accessory
equipment for the purpose of upgrading or repairing the WCF is
permitted, so long as such repair or upgrade does not increase the
overall size of the WCF or the number of antennas.
(2) Any material modification to a wireless telecommunications facility
shall require a prior amendment to the original permit or
authorization.
§ 460-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-3
1:477
§ 460-4. Nontower facilities in rights-of-way.
The following additional regulations shall apply to all nontower wireless
communications facilities located in the rights-of-way:
E. Visual or land use impact. The Borough reserves the right to deny an
application for the construction or placement of any nontower WCF
based upon visual and/or land use impact.
F. Inspection. The Borough reserves the right to inspect any WCF to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this article and any other
provisions found within the Borough Code or state or federal law. The
Borough and/or its agents shall have the authority to enter the property
upon which a WCF is located at any time upon reasonable notice to the
operator to ensure such compliance.
A. Co-location. Nontower WCFs in the ROW shall be co-located on existing
poles, such as existing utility poles or light poles.
B. Design requirements.
(1) WCF installations located above the surface grade in the public
ROW, including, but not limited to, those on streetlights and joint
utility poles shall consist of equipment components that are no
more than six feet in height and that are compatible in scale and
proportion to the structures upon which they are mounted. All
equipment shall be the smallest and least visibly intrusive
equipment feasible.
(2) Antennas and all support equipment shall be treated to match the
supporting structure. WCFs and accompanying equipment shall be
painted or otherwise coated to be visually compatible with the
support structure upon which they are mounted.
(3) Compensation for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as described
above, every nontower WCF in the ROW is subject to the Borough's
right to fix annually a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid
for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such compensation for ROW
use shall be directly related to the Borough's actual ROW
management costs, including, but not limited to, the costs of the
administration and performance of all reviewing, inspecting,
permitting, supervising and other ROW management activities by
the Borough. The owner of each nontower WCF shall pay an annual
fee to the Borough to compensate the Borough for its costs
incurred in connection with the activities described above. The
annual ROW management fee for nontower WCFs shall be
determined by the Borough and authorized by resolution of
Borough Council and shall be based on the Borough's actual ROW
management costs as applied to such nontower WCF.
(4) Time, place and manner. The Borough shall determine the time,
place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or
§ 460-3 KENHORST CODE § 460-4
1:478
removal of all nontower WCFs in the ROW based on public safety,
traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and related
considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner
requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of the
Borough and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.246
C. Equipment location. Nontower WCFs and accessory equipment shall be
located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards to
pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public use
of the ROW as determined by the Borough. In addition:
(1) In no case shall ground-mounted equipment, walls, or landscaping
be located within 18 inches of the face of the curb.
(2) Ground-mounted equipment shall be located underground. In the
event an applicant can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the
Borough Engineer, that ground-mounted equipment cannot be
underground, then all such equipment shall be screened, to the
fullest extent possible, through the use of landscaping or other
decorative features to the satisfaction of the Borough.
(3) Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend in
with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the Borough.
D. Any graffiti on the tower or on any accessory equipment shall be
removed at the sole expense of the owner within 10 business days of
notice of the existence of the graffiti.
E. Any underground vaults related to nontower WCFs shall be reviewed
and approved by the Borough.
F. Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written
notice from the Borough , or such longer period as the Borough
determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the case
of an emergency, an owner of a WCF in the ROW shall, at its own
expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter
the position of any WCF when the Borough, consistent with its police
powers and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is
reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
(1) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Borough or other public improvement in the right-of-way.
(2) The operations of the Borough or other governmental entity in the
right-of-way.
(3) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement.
(4) An emergency as determined by the Borough.
246. Editor's Note: See 66 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 460-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-4
1:479
§ 460-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 460-6. Police powers.
The Borough, by granting any permit or taking any other action pursuant
to this section, does not waive, reduce, lessen or impair the lawful police
powers vested in the Borough under applicable federal, state and local laws
and regulations.
G. Visual or land use impact. The Borough retains the right to deny an
application for the construction or placement of a nontower WCF based
upon visual and/or land use impact.
A. Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
subject upon finding by a Magisterial District Judge to a penalty not
exceeding $500 for each and every offense, together with attorney's
fees and costs. A separate and distinct violation shall be deemed to be
committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues to occur.
In addition to an action to enforce any penalty imposed by this section
and any other remedy at law or in equity, the Borough may apply to a
Federal District Court for an injunction or other appropriate relief at
law or in equity to enforce compliance with or restrain violation of any
provision of this article.
B. Determination of violation. In the event a determination is made that a
person has violated any provision of this section, such person shall be
provided written notice of the determination and the reasons therefor.
Except in the case of an emergency, the person shall have 30 days to
cure the violation. If the nature of the violation is such that it cannot be
fully cured within such time period, the Borough may, in its reasonable
judgment, extend the time period to cure, provided that the person has
commenced to cure and is diligently pursuing its efforts to cure. If the
violation has not been cured within the time allowed, the Borough may
take any and all actions authorized by this section and/or federal and/or
Pennsylvania law and regulations.
§ 460-4 KENHORST CODE § 460-6
1:480
Chapter 475
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 157.
Open burning — See Ch. 163.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 190.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 241.
Rental property — See Ch. 362.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 404.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
410.
Telecommunications towers and
antennas — See Ch. 424.
§ 460-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-6
1:481

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 475-1. Title.
This is a chapter establishing regulations, specifications and restrictions for
the uses of land, watercourses and other bodies of water; the size, height,
bulk, location, erection, construction, repair, maintenance, alteration,
razing, removal and use structures; the areas and dimensions of land and
bodies of water to be occupied by uses and structures, including areas,
courts, yards and other open spaces, and distances to be left unoccupied
by uses and structures; and the density of population and intensity of
land uses in the Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania, and for
said purposes, dividing the Borough into districts and prescribing certain
uniform regulations for each such district and providing for the
administrative enforcement and amendment provisions in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.247
§ 475-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "Kenhorst Borough
Zoning Ordinance of 2012, as amended."
§ 475-3. Purpose.
This chapter has been adopted in accordance with the requirements of
Act 247 (Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code), as amended,248 with
the goals, objectives and policies established in the Kenhorst Borough
Comprehensive Plan and with consideration for the character of the
Borough and its capacity to accommodate growth and development. In
addition to implementing the Kenhorst Borough Comprehensive Plan, the
purpose of this chapter is designed to:
A. Promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following: the public
health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and practical
community development, proper density of population, civil defense,
disaster evacuation, airports and national defense facilities, the
provisions of adequate light and air, police protection, vehicle parking
and loading space, transportation, water, sewage, schools, public
grounds and other public requirements as well.
B. Prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, blight,
danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life
or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
C. Identify, protect and preserve the physical and environmental amenities
within the Borough.
247. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
248. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 475-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-3
1:483
§ 475-4. Application.
Except as hereinafter provided, no building, structure, land or parts thereof
in Kenhorst Borough shall be used or occupied, erected, constructed,
assembled, moved, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, unless
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 475-5. Exemptions.
D. Encourage aesthetic and innovative residential growth within the
Borough that will meet the needs of existing and future residents.
E. Encourage commercial development that is adequate to meet the
Borough's needs for employment, goods and services.
F. Ensure through planning that public facilities and controls are
adequate to accommodate future growth.
G. Provide for a system of open space through the preservation of
floodplains, wooded areas and wetlands, providing areas for passive
and active recreation.
H. Promote, encourage and practice energy conservation within the
Borough.
I. Provide and establish a transportation network that safely and
efficiently circulates people and goods throughout and within the
Borough.
A. This chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed buildings, or
extension thereof, used or to be used by a public utility corporation or
communication corporation if, upon petition of the corporation, the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or Federal Communication
Commission shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or
proposed situation of the building in question is reasonably necessary
for the convenience or welfare of the public.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission or Federal Communication Commission to ensure that both
the corporation and the Borough have notice of the public hearing and
are granted an opportunity to appear, present witnesses, cross-examine
witnesses presented by other parties and otherwise exercise the rights
of a party to the proceedings.
C. The Kenhorst Borough Planning Commission and Council shall have
right to require that a land development plan be prepared by and
submitted by the representatives of the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission or Federal Communication Commission. The land
development plan shall be prepared to meet goals, objectives and
policies identified in the Kenhorst Borough Comprehensive Plan and
this chapter, and with the requirements specified in Chapter 410,
Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 475-3 KENHORST CODE § 475-6
1:484
§ 475-6. Interpretation.
§ 475-7. Community development objectives.
This chapter attempts to emulate through its regulations, the goals and
objectives of the Kenhorst Borough Comprehensive Plan. These regulations
have been established with considerations to the Borough's physical
characteristics, population trends, housing characteristics, existing land
use characteristics, community facilities and services and existing
transportation characteristics. The regulations established in this chapter
reflect and portray the goals, objectives and policies of the functional
components of the adopted Comprehensive Plan.
A. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health and safety and the general welfare of the residents and
occupants of the Borough.
B. Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than
those of any other Borough statute, ordinance or regulation, the
provisions of this chapter shall be complied with.
C. Where the provisions of any other Borough statute, ordinance or
regulations impose greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions
of such other Borough statute, ordinance or regulation shall be
complied with, unless otherwise stated in this chapter.
§ 475-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-7
1:485

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 475-8. Word usage.
§ 475-9. Definitions.
Terms or words used herein, unless otherwise expressly stated, shall be
construed as defined below. When terms, phrases or words are not defined,
they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context
may imply.
ACCESS — The point in which a vehicle and person can enter, exit and/or
approach a parcel of land.
ACCESSIBLE — The ability to enter, exit and/or approach a parcel of land
by a person and vehicle.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to the principal building
on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the
principal use.
ACCESSORY USE — A subordinate use of a portion of a lot which is
customarily incidental to the main or principal use of land or of a building
on a lot.
ACRE — 43,560 square feet.
ACT or ACT 247 — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended.249
ADJACENT — The state of being side by side, having a common border.
ADT (AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC) — The average number of vehicles that
pass over a given point per day.
ADULT BUSINESS USE — Any adult bookstore, arcade, bar, cabaret,
tavern, dance hall, nightclub, restaurant, theater, mini motion-picture
theater, motel and/or any other adult establishment as defined within this
A. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined
below. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
Words in the singular shall include the plural and words in the plural
shall include the singular. Words in the masculine include the feminine
and the neuter.
B. The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. The word
"person" includes "individual," "company," "unincorporated
association" or other similar entities. The words "used for" include
"designed for," "arranged for," "intended for," "maintained for" or
"occupied for." The word "building" shall be construed as if followed by
the phrase "or part thereof."
249. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 475-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-9
1:487
chapter, and which, under the State Obscenity Code,250 as amended, must
exclude minors or may not knowingly disseminate to minors.
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated, or electronically, electrically
or mechanically controlled still or motion producing devices are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at
any one time or where the image is so displayed or distinguished or
characterized by depicting or describing specific sexual activities or
specific anatomic areas.
A.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment, having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade (for sale or rental), books,
magazines and other materials which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
B.
ADULT CABARET, DANCE HALL, CLUB, BAR, TAVERN, NIGHTCLUB,
RESTAURANT OR SIMILAR COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any
place or establishment offering entertainment used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on manner
depicting or describing specific sexual activities or specific anatomic
areas for observation by patrons therein, whether or not liquor is
sold on the premises. Such presentation or material may be live or
through films, motion pictures, videocassettes or other photographic
reproduction depicting or describing specific sexual activities or
specific anatomic areas.
C.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Live or non-live entertainment containing
specific sexual activities or presenting specific anatomic areas. This
definition shall also include, but not be limited to, adult bookstore,
arcade, bar, cabaret, tavern, dance hall, nightclub, restaurant, theater,
mini motion-picture theater, retail establishment motel, peep shows,
sexual encounter center and/or any other adult establishment as
defined within this chapter.
D.
ADULT RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Any commercial place or
establishment offering principally, either by sale or by rental, books,
videos, magazine rentals, printed matter, photographs, films, motion
pictures, slides, instruments, devices and/or any other paraphernalia
showing or utilized for specific sexual activities or specific anatomic
areas by patrons on or off the premises. This definition may not apply
to commercial establishments which may have other principal business
purposes and which may offer to sell or rent adult material; provided, it
is displayed in such a way that only the name of the item appears and/
or that it is not utilized or viewed by patrons on the premises.
E.
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed or partially
enclosed building which houses a commercial establishment with the
F.
250. Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903.
§ 475-9 KENHORST CODE § 475-9
1:488
AGRICULTURE (GENERAL) — The cultivation of the soil and the raising
and harvesting of the products of the soil including, but not limited to,
horticulture, forestry and animal husbandry.
capacity for less than 50% used for presenting material distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for
observation by patrons therein.
ADULT THEATER — An enclosed or partially enclosed building which
houses a commercial establishment with the capacity for more than
50% used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons
therein.
G.
ADULT MOTEL OR HOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment which offer accommodation to the public for any form
of consideration, provides patrons with closed circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproduction which are used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized with an emphasis on matter depicting or
describing specific sexual activities or specific anatomic areas.
H.
NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of the specific
anatomic areas without any coverings on the body area.
I.
PEEP SHOWS — An enclosed or partially enclosed building which
houses a commercial establishment with the capacity for one or more
persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by
parties or patrons therein.
J.
SEMINUDE or SEMINUDITY — State of dress in which clothing
partially or opaquely covers specific anatomical areas.
K.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTERS — A business of commercial enterprise that,
as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between persons of the opposite sex or activities between male and
female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the
persons is in a state of nudity or seminude.
L.
SPECIFIC ANATOMIC AREAS — Parts of the human body, including
human genitals, pubic area, anus, buttocks, female breast(s) and/or
human male genitals.
M.
SPECIFIC SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal; acts or simulated acts of human masturbating,
sexual intercourse, sodomy or oral copulation; fondling or other erotic
touching of specific anatomic areas; and/or excretory functions.
N.
§ 475-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-9
1:489
AGRICULTURE (INTENSIVE) — Specialized agricultural activities
including, but not limited to, composting, mushroom, egg and poultry
production and livestock production which, due to the intensity of
production or raw material storage needs, necessitates special control of
operation, raw material storage and processing, and disposal of liquid/solid
wastes.
ALTERATION — Any change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in
the existing facilities of a building or structure or any enlargement thereof,
whether by extension on any side or by an increase in height, or the moving
of such building from one location or position to another.
ANIMAL UNIT — Livestock which is equivalent to 1,000 pounds.
ANTENNA — A metallic device (such as a rod or wire) utilized for radiating
or receiving transmission waves. For the purposes of this chapter, a support
tower shall be construed as an accessory structure to the antenna.
ATTIC — That part of a building which is immediately below and wholly or
partly within the roof framing.
BASEMENT — A story partly below the finished grade but having 1/2
or more of its height (measured from finished floor to finished ceiling)
above the average level of the finished grade where such grade abuts the
exterior walls of the building. A basement shall not be considered a story in
determining the permissible number of stories.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — The provisional short-term use and occupancy
of a single-family detached dwelling for the purpose of accommodating
transient guests for rent.
BLOCK — A tract of land or a lot or group of lots, bounded by streets, public
parks, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses or bodies of water, boundary
lines of the Borough or by any combination of the above.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A private house or enterprise that provides
accommodations for guests in exchange for payment.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Kenhorst Borough Council, Berks County,
Pennsylvania.
BUFFER YARD — A continuous strip of land which is clear of all buildings
and paved areas and is adequately landscaped in accordance with § 475-34
of this chapter.
BUILDING — A structure enclosed within exterior walls or fire walls, built,
erected and framed of component structural parts, designed for the
enclosure and support of individuals, animals or property of any kind.
BUILDING AREA — The total area taken on a horizontal plane at the
main grade level of all primary and accessory buildings on a lot, excluding
unroofed porches, paved terraces, steps, eaves and gutters, but including
all enclosed extensions.
§ 475-9 KENHORST CODE § 475-9
1:490
BUILDING CONVERSION — The change in use of a property or structure
from the principal use a structure was constructed for to another use.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot which is covered by
principal and accessory buildings.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade at the two front corners of the building to the
highest point of the roof.
BUILDING LENGTH — The measurement of a building in one general
direction, whether it is the front, side or rear of the building.
BUILDING SETBACK — The minimum distance a building or structure must
be set back from the street right-of-way line (except the right-of-way of a
service street).
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line within a property establishing the
minimum required distance between any building or structure or portions
thereof to be erected or altered and a street right-of-way (except the rightof-
way of a service street). The distance shall be measured at right angles
from the street right-of-way line which abuts the property and the building
setback line shall be parallel to said right-of-way line.
CARPORT — A building open on two or more sides and used in association
with a dwelling for the storage of private motor vehicles.
CARTWAY — The portion of a street right-of-way, whether paved or
unpaved, designed for vehicular use.
CELLAR — For the purpose of this chapter, a cellar shall be considered a
basement.
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY — A statement, based on an
inspection, signed by the designated person or firm authorized by Council,
setting forth that a building, structure, sign and/or land complies with this
chapter or that a building, structure, sign, and/or land may be lawfully
employed for specific uses, or both.
CHURCH — A building used for public worship by a congregation, excluding
buildings used primarily for residential, educational, burial, recreational or
other uses not associated with worship.
CLUB or LODGE — An association of persons for some common nonprofit
activity, not including groups organized primarily to render a service which
is customarily carried on as a business.
COMMERCIAL CAR WASH — Any commercially operated enterprise open
to the public for the purpose of cleaning, washing, waxing, vacuuming,
detailing, etc., vehicles.
COMMERCIAL SCHOOL — A school for the teaching of a trade or skill,
carried on as a business.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water, within a development site and designed
and intended for use or enjoyment of all residents of the development in
§ 475-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-9
1:491
which it is located. Land included within the right-of-way lines of streets
shall not be classified as common open space. Common open spaces shall
not include required open areas between buildings and between buildings
and street rights-of-way, driveways, parking areas and property lines in the
development. No dwelling unit, residential accessory buildings or parking
areas may be located within common open spaces.
COMMON PARKING AREA — A parking facility other than those provided
within the lot lines for use by multiple parcels of land, multiple tenants,
or any other area where parking is shared and not used for a sole specific
parcel and use.
COMMON WALL — A wall used or adopted for joint service between two
buildings or parts thereof. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the
side yard setback shall not apply to a common lot line extending from the
common wall.
COMPLETION — The act of bringing to a condition of physical
completeness and readiness for use and occupancy.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The document entitled the "Kenhorst Borough
Comprehensive Plan," or any part thereof, adopted by the Kenhorst Borough
Council.
CONDITIONAL USE — Certain specified uses which are permitted or
denied by Borough Council pursuant to express standards and
specifications established in this chapter.
CONSTRUCTION SITE — The total necessary land required for all buildings
or uses within a unified development before a zoning permit may be issued.
CONVALESCENT HOME — An association of mentally and/or physically
handicapped adults and their caregivers which have been licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All residents shall function as a single
housekeeping unit, sharing kitchen facilities and a communal dining area.
Court-mandated associations, rehabilitative facilities, penal institutions
and/or any type of living arrangement which is clearly an involuntary
association shall not under any circumstance be considered as a
convalescent home, regardless of the living arrangement within the facility
or dwelling unit.
CONVERSION — To change or adapt land or structures to a different use,
occupancy or purpose.
COUNCIL — The Kenhorst Borough Council, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
COUNTY — The County of Berks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION — The Berks County Planning
Commission.
COURT — A portion of a lot unoccupied above grade, but partially or wholly
surrounded by the walls of a structure or buildings.
CURBLINE — The edge of the cartway.
§ 475-9 KENHORST CODE § 475-9
1:492
CURATIVE AMENDMENT, LANDOWNER — A proposed zoning amendment
made to the Borough by any landowner who desires to challenge on
substantial grounds the validity of an ordinance which prohibits or restricts
the use of the development of land in which the applicant has an interest.
CURATIVE AMENDMENT, MUNICIPAL — A zoning amendment initiated by
the Borough pursuant to Section 609.2 of Pennsylvania Act 247.251
DAY CARE/NURSERY SCHOOL — Any facility that is required to be licensed
by the PA Department of Public Welfare or the PA Department of Education
to oversee children or adults with no overnight accommodations.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per net acre.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved land
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, the installation
of utilities, filling, grading, paving, excavation, mining, dredging or drilling
operations.
DISTRICT — A portion of the Borough within which certain uniform
regulations and requirements or combinations thereof apply under the
provisions of this chapter.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL/PET — Animals including, but not limited to, dogs,
cats, fish, birds or other animals, which have been domesticated by man to
live and breed in a tame condition.
DWELLING — A building or structure or portion thereof arranged,
intended, designed or used as the living quarters for one or more families
living independently of each other. Such buildings as hospitals, hotels,
boarding, rooming, lodging houses, nursing homes, motels and institutional
residences are not included in the definition of "dwelling."
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A building arranged,
intended or designed to be occupied exclusively as a residence for one
family and having no common wall with an adjacent building.
A.
SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED DWELLING — A building arranged,
intended or designed to be occupied exclusively as a residence for two
families, one family living on each side of a common wall.
B.
TWO-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING (DUPLEX) — A building
arranged, designed or intended for occupancy of two families living
independent of each other in separate dwelling units that are separated
by horizontal floors as opposed to vertical walls.
C.
TOWNHOUSE — A building arranged, intended or designed to be
occupied exclusively as a residence for one family, which is one of
a group of three or more such buildings, placed side by side and
separated by unpierced common walls, each dwelling having at least
one separate entrance.
D.
251. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.2.
§ 475-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-9
1:493
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof providing one or more
rooms arranged for the use of one or more individuals living together as
a single housekeeping unit and having no cooking or sanitary facilities in
common with any other unit.
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION — An assemblage of equipment for purposes other
than generation or utilization, through which electric energy in bulk is
passed for the purpose of switching or modifying its characteristics to meet
the needs of the public.
FAMILY — One or more persons living together in a single dwelling unit as a
traditional family or the functional equivalent of a traditional family. It shall
be a rebuttable presumption that four or more persons living together in a
single dwelling unit, who are not related by blood, adoption, or marriage,
do not constitute the functional equivalent of a traditional family. This
definition does not intend to prohibit group homes and/or community living
arrangements that are determined to be protected by the Federal Fair
Housing Law, provided such facilities are licensed and permitted under
the authority of the Department of Welfare of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or other state department or agency. In determining the
functional equivalent of a traditional family, the following criteria shall be
present:254
APARTMENT BUILDING — A building on a single lot arranged,
intended or designed to be occupied as a residence for three or more
families and in which the dwelling units may be separated horizontally
and/or vertically.
E.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for
common open space, solely for the owners of those portions, created
under the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, as amended.252,253
F.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling constructed
in accordance with the specifications of the State of Pennsylvania,
intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or
more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again
being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete
and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental assembly
operations.
G.
MODULAR HOME — Any structure designed primarily for residential
occupancy which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated,
formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or
assembly and installation, on the building site.
H.
A. The group shares the entire dwelling unit.
252. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
253. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
254. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-9 KENHORST CODE § 475-9
1:494
FARM — An area of land, including all buildings, accessory buildings,
farm buildings and one single-family detached principal dwelling all used
for agriculture and where the primary source of income is derived from
property.
FENCE — A man-made barrier placed or arranged as a line of demarcation
between lots or to enclose a lot or portion thereof. The term "fence" shall be
deemed to include a wall.
FLOOR AREA (GROSS FLOOR AREA) —
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The floor area in square feet of all buildings on a lot
divided by the gross area of such lot in square feet.
FRONTAGE — The lot dimensions measured along the right-of-way line of
any one street or highway abutting a lot.
B. The group lives and cooks together as a single housekeeping unit.
The group shares expenses for food, rent, utilities or other household
expenses.
C.
The group is permanent and stable, and not transient or temporary in
nature.
D.
Any other factor reasonably related to whether the group is the
functional equivalent of a family.
E.
The gross floor space of the building or buildings, measured from the
exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center line of wall separating
buildings. In particular, the floor area of a building or buildings shall
include:
(1) Basement space.
All spaces with structural headroom of seven feet, six inches or
more.
(2)
(3) Interior balconies and mezzanines.
Enclosed porches or terraces or other space which are attached to
the principal structure on at least one side.
(4)
Attic spaces (with or without a finished floor) providing structural
headroom of seven feet, six inches or more is available over 50% of
such attic space.
(5)
A.
However, the "floor area" shall not include:
Elevator shafts, stairwells, bulkhead, accessory water tanks or
cooling towers.
(1)
(2) Uncovered terraces, breezeways, steps or open space.
(3) Accessory buildings.
B.
§ 475-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-9
1:495
GARAGE, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL — An accessory building or a part of a
principal building used for the storage of motor vehicles owned and used by
the owner or tenant of the premises and for the storage of not more than
three motor vehicles owned and used by persons other than the owner or
tenant of the premises. Not more than one commercial vehicle or truck may
be stored in a private garage.
GARAGE, PUBLIC OR REPAIR — A building, other than a private or storage
garage, one or more stories in height, used solely for the commercial
storage, service or repair of motor vehicles.
GARAGE, STORAGE — A building, not a private residential nor a public
garage, one story in height, used solely for the storage of motor vehicles
used in conjunction with a business or industry, but not for the sale, service
or repair thereof nor for the sale of fuel, accessories or supplies.
GOVERNING BODY — The Kenhorst Borough Council, Berks County,
Pennsylvania.
GROUP HOME — A facility or building, associated with or owned by an
institution of higher education, which is designed or used as a residence for
students enrolled at said institution of higher education, including, but not
limited to, a dormitory, fraternity house, or sorority house.
HEALTH CLUB — A private or public indoor facility utilized for recreational
activities. All activities relating to an adult business use shall be prohibited
within a health club.
HIGHWAY ACCESS POINT — A place of ingress/egress from or access to
a street or highway created by a driveway or another street or highway.
Measurement between them shall be from the center line of one such point
to the center line of another such point.
HOME OCCUPATION OR ACCESSORY PROFESSIONAL OFFICE USE —
A professional use which is customarily carried on in a dwelling unit,
or a structure accessory thereto, clearly secondary and incidental to the
dwelling in which the practitioner resides. The office of a licensed medical
practitioner or allied health field, dentist, architect, artist, baker (not for
retail consumption), lawyer, accountant, insurance agent, real estate
broker, teacher, tax collector, engineer, dance, music or voice instructor,
dressmaker, milliner or seamstress, general repair or service, farm-based
business, barber or beautician or similar occupation.
HOTEL — A building or group of buildings containing six or more individual
rooms for rental, primarily for transients, with common hallways for all
rooms on the same floor, and where no provision is made for cooking
in any individual room or suite. "Hotel" does not include institutional or
educational uses and buildings where human beings are housed under legal
constraint.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The percentage of lot area covered by any
and all impervious materials, such as buildings, paved parking areas, paved
walks, terraces, decks, patios and similar surfaces which do not normally
absorb rainfall.
§ 475-9 KENHORST CODE § 475-9
1:496
IMPROVEMENT — Any type of structure or paved section, excluding
driveway, curb, sidewalk or barrier to unchanneled motor vehicle entrance
or exit.
IMPROVEMENT SETBACK — The minimum distance an improvement or
land use activity must be set back from a street right-of-way and/or property
line.
INDUSTRY — A facility for the manufacture, processing or warehousing of
products and materials.
KENNEL — A commercial establishment, structure, lot or portion of a lot in
which five or more domesticated pets more than six months old are kept for
the purpose of breeding, boarding, sale and/or show.
LABORATORY — A building or group of buildings containing the facilities
for scientific research, investigation, testing and experimentation, but not
including the manufacture of products for sale.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition). A lessee under a written lease,
who has written authorization of the legal owner, shall be deemed to be a
landowner for the purpose of this chapter.
LIVESTOCK — Animals including, but not limited to, horses, cattle, pigs,
hogs, sheep, goats, poultry, rabbits or similar animals which are kept or
raised for use, pleasure and/or profit.
LOT — A tract or parcel of land, regardless of size, held in single or joint
ownership, not necessarily a lot or lots shown on a duly recorded map,
which is occupied or capable of being occupied by buildings, structures and
accessory buildings, including such open spaces as are arranged, designed
or required. The term "lot" shall also mean parcel, plot and/or site.
LOT AREA (GROSS) — The space contained within the lot lines, including
land area within all existing and future/ultimate street rights-of-way, areas
CORNER LOT — A lot situate at and abutting the intersection of two
streets having an interior angle of intersection not greater than 135°.
The front yard and lot width requirements shall apply to each public
street to which the corner lot has frontage.
A.
INTERIOR LOT — A lot other than a corner lot, the sides of which do
not abut a street.
B.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOTS — Lots which have frontage on two public
streets while restricting vehicular access solely from the public street
which would front along the commonly identified rear of the lot.
C.
FLAG LOT or KEYHOLE LOT — An irregularly shaped lot characterized
by an elongated extension from a street to the principal part of the lot.
The flag or keyhole shape of the lot is normally intended to provide for
access to an otherwise landlocked interior parcel.
D.
§ 475-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-9
1:497
delineated as "wetlands," areas identified as common open space and land
area within all utility, municipal and stormwater easements.
LOT AREA (NET) — The space contained within the lot lines, excluding
any and all land areas as follows: areas within any rights-of-way; areas
identified as common open space; areas within easements; areas delineated
as wetlands; and areas within the one-hundred-year floodplain as defined by
FEMA. The net lot area for all proposed lots shall be no smaller than the
minimum lot size for the zoning district in which the lot is located.
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of lot area covered by any and all
impervious materials, such as buildings, paved parking areas, paved walks,
terraces and similar surfaces which do not normally absorb rainfall.
LOT DEPTH — The mean average horizontal distance between the front and
the rear lot lines.
LOT FRONTAGE — That portion of a lot which fronts on a single street.
LOT LINE — A line forming the front, rear or side boundary of a lot.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot or parcel recorded in the Office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Berks County, Pennsylvania. Any lot which has been recorded prior
to the enactment of this chapter, and does not comply with the minimum
or maximum requirements set forth by this chapter, shall be considered as
a nonconforming lot. All lots of record shall be subject to the development
controls and limitations specified within this chapter.
LOT WIDTH — The width of a lot measured at the street line and at the legal
right-of-way line of the public street immediately adjacent thereto.
MASSAGE PARLOR — A place of business where a person or persons
engage in or carry on any method of pressure on, friction against or
stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating
any part of the body with the hands or with the aid of any apparatus.
This use does not include licensed physicians or members of the American
Massage Therapist Association.
MIXED COMMERCIAL/RESIDENTIAL — A structure with a permitted
commercial use on the street level and residential units above.
MOTEL — A group of attached or detached buildings which primarily have
direct access to the outside and contain individual living or sleeping units
designed for temporary use by tourists or transients generally traveling by
motor vehicle.
FRONT LOT LINE — The line separating a lot from a street. The front
lot line is also the street line.
A.
REAR LOT LINE — The lot line which is opposite the front lot line.
The rear line of any triangularly or irregularly shaped lot shall be
established such that it will be at least 10 feet long.
B.
C. SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
§ 475-9 KENHORST CODE § 475-9
1:498
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — An area of land, including
structures thereon, used primarily for the sale of gasoline or motor vehicle
fuel, but which may be used secondarily for supplying services generally
required for the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles, but which
shall not include painting, body and fender repairs or sale, rental and
storage of vehicles.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL USE — A use by the Borough of Kenhorst for public recreation
area, park, municipal offices, police station, water and sewage facilities,
utilities, road materials and equipment storage and similar governmental
uses.
MUSHROOM HOUSE/PRODUCTION — An enclosed unit or group of units
which are utilized for the production, processing or cultivation of
mushrooms for commercial purposes or profit.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or
patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated
with residential use. The business or commercial activity must satisfy the
following requirements:
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot which does not meet with the minimum
lot width, depth, or area dimensions specified for the district where such lot
is situated, but was lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of this
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
A.
The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
B.
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
C.
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
D.
The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
which is detectable in the neighborhood.
E.
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
F.
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
G.
H. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
§ 475-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-9
1:499
chapter or is legally established through the granting of a variance by the
Zoning Hearing Board.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — A structure or building
or part thereof which does not meet the applicable provisions or
requirements of the district in which it is located, either at the time of
enactment of this chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments thereto,
where such building or structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of
such chapter or amendment. Such nonconforming structures include, but
are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A building, structure, sign or use of land which
does not conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is
located, either at the time of the enactment of this chapter or as a result of
subsequent amendments thereto, but which did not violate any applicable
use regulations prior to the enactment of such chapter or amendments.
However, no existing use shall be deemed nonconforming solely because of
the existence of less than the required off-street parking spaces.
NURSERY OR GREENHOUSE, COMMERCIAL — The raising of trees (for
transplanting), ornamentals, shrubs, flowers or house plants for any
commercial purpose. All such accessory buildings or structures shall not
be utilized as a separate commercial land use. Accessory buildings and
structures customary to agricultural and horticultural land uses shall be
exempt from the height and open area requirements specified within this
chapter.
NURSERY OR GREENHOUSE, RESIDENTIAL — The raising of trees (for
transplanting), ornamentals, shrubs, flowers or house plants for private or
residential purposes. All such accessory buildings or structures shall not
be utilized as a separate commercial land use and shall be subject to the
provisions for residential accessory structures and uses specified under
§ 475-22B of this chapter.
NURSING HOME — A building containing sleeping rooms used by persons
who are lodged and furnished with meals and are provided with needed
support services, including the availability of basic nursing care. Such
a facility may or may not include skilled nursing or medical care. This
definition shall be limited to facilities licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as a nursing center or personal care center.
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP — The Zoning Map of Kenhorst Borough.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
occur once every 100 years or has a one-percent chance of occurring each
year, although the flood may occur in any given year.
OPEN SPACE — Unoccupied space open to the sky and on the same lot with
the principal use.
PARENT TRACT OF LAND — A lot or parcel which has been recorded in
the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Berks County, prior to the enactment
of this chapter. All lots of record shall be subject to the development
limitations and controls specified within this chapter.
§ 475-9 KENHORST CODE § 475-9
1:500
PARKING LOT — An off-street area designed solely for the parking of
motor vehicles, including driveways, passageways and maneuvering space
appurtenant thereto.
PARKING PERIMETER — The limit beyond which parking is not allowed;
the circumscribed parking area.
PARKING SPACE — A reasonably level space, available for the parking of
one motor vehicle, not less than 10 feet wide and having an area of not
less than 200 square feet, exclusive of passageways or other means of
circulation or access.
PAVED AREA — The percentage of lot area covered by any and all
impervious materials, such as buildings, paved parking areas, paved walks,
terraces and similar surfaces which do not normally absorb rainfall.
PERMITTED USE — A use permitted in a particular district to occupy or use
land for a specific purpose in accordance with this chapter, when such use
is permitted by right.
PIGGERIES/SWINE OPERATION — An establishment devoted to the
raising, of pigs, hogs, boars, sows, gilts or similar animals, which are kept
in densely defined areas (inside or outside) for use and/or profit.
PLAN — The proposal for development, including a part of subdivision,
all covenants, grants or easements and other conditions relating to use,
location and bulk of buildings, density of development, common open space,
recreation areas and/or public facilities.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission for the Borough of
Kenhorst, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which a principal use on a lot is
carried on.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main or primary purpose for which any land,
structure, or building is designed, arranged or intended, and for which they
may be occupied or maintained under the terms of this chapter.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — An office wherein a professional, clerical and/
or administrative service is performed.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICE — A commercial service wherein the provider
is a licensed, accredited or otherwise recognized expert in some field of
business. Professional services shall include all types of services related
to medical, financial, legal, advertising, public relations, engineering,
architectural, land use planning, surveying, graphic design and similar
services.
PUBLIC CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for the burial of
human remains and may include a columbarium, crematorium, mausoleums
and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary
of such cemetery.
PUBLIC UTILITY — A government or private business organization, subject
to governmental regulation, that provides an essential commodity or
§ 475-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-9
1:501
service, such as water, electricity, transportation, or communication, to the
public.
RECREATION AREA, ACTIVE — Land area that contains facilities that
require visitors/participants to become involved in physical or an energetic
moving function, primarily group functions.
RECREATION AREA, PASSIVE — Land area that contains facilities that
require visitors/participants to become involved in quiet functions that do
not require physical or energetic functions.
RESIDENTIAL SETBACK — The minimum distance that a building or
structure must be set back from a principal residential dwelling unit.
RETIREMENT HOME — A building containing age-restricted sleeping
rooms or units. This definition shall be limited to facilities not licensed by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a nursing center or personal care
center.
SALVAGE YARD — A lot, land or structure or parts thereof used for the
collection, storage, dismantling, salvage, sale or recycling of used and
discarded materials including, but not limited to, wastepaper, rags, scrap
metal or the scrap, salvage or discarded material from vehicles or
machinery.
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — A public system which is designed to collect,
convey, treat and dispose of sewage from users in compliance with state and
local regulations.
SIGN — Any structure, building, wall or other outdoor surface or any
device or part thereof which displays or includes any letter, word, model,
banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or other representations used for
announcement, direction or advertisement. The word "sign" includes the
word "billboard," but does not include the flag, pennant or insignia of any
nation, state, city or other political unit, nor public traffic or directional
signs.
SOLID WASTE — Waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous materials.
PERMANENT SIGN — A sign that is installed on a foundation or
mechanically affixed to a building without intention to be able to readily
remove said sign.
A.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign that is freestanding on a frame; or not
mechanically affixed to a building which displays a message for a
limited time frame. Temporary signs include all moveable signs.
B.
CHANGEABLE SIGN — A sign that consists of or contains a component
that allows for the manual changing of letters or numbers to alter
the message of the sign without removal or modification to the sign
structure or display surfaces.
C.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN — A sign that consists of or contains
changing text or graphics generated by electrical components.
D.
§ 475-9 KENHORST CODE § 475-9
1:502
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use permitted in a particular district by the
Zoning Hearing Board, to occupy or use land for a specific purpose in
accordance with this chapter, when such use is not permitted by right.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS (SFHAs) — The one-percent-annualchance
flood (one-hundred-year flood), also known as the "base flood." The
area that has a one-percent annual chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year. The special flood hazard area is the area subject to flooding
by the one-percent-annual-chance flood as delineated by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
STATE OBSCENITY CODE — 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903, as amended.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no floor
above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it. A
basement, but not a cellar, shall be deemed to be a story.
STREET — A public or private right-of-way, excluding driveways, intended
as a means of vehicular and pedestrian travel, furnishing access to abutting
properties. The word "street" includes thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard,
road, court, drive, expressway, highway and similar terms.
ARTERIAL (MAJOR) STREET — A street serving a large volume of
comparatively high-speed and long-distance traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street which, in addition to providing access
to abutting properties, intercepts minor streets to provide a route
serving 50 or more dwelling units to give access to community facilities
and/or arterial streets or other collector streets.
B.
MINOR STREET — A street used primarily to provide access to
residential properties.
C.
CUL-DE-SAC STREET — A minor street intersecting another street at
one end and terminating in a permanent vehicular turnaround at the
other end.
D.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A minor street, parallel and adjacent
to an arterial or collector street which provides access to abutting
properties and control of intersections.
E.
INTERNAL STREET — A minor street used for circulation and access
within a development involving multi-residential, commercial and/or
nonresidential land uses.
F.
SERVICE STREET (ALLEY) — A right-of-way providing secondary
access to the side or rear of two or more properties.
G.
PUBLIC STREET — A street which has been officially dedicated to
Kenhorst Borough or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
H.
§ 475-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-9
1:503
STREET FRONTAGE — The lot dimension measured along the street line or
right-of-way line of any one street or highway abutting a lot.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and the outside boundary
of a public street, road or highway right-of-way legally open or officially
mapped by a municipality or higher governmental authority, between a lot
and the outside boundary of a street shown on a recorded subdivision or
land development plan, or between a lot and a private street or road over
which the owners or tenants of one or more lots held in single and separate
ownership have a right-of-way.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to land.
STUDENT — An individual who is enrolled at a university, college or trade
school and whose primary occupation is as a student or who is on a
semester or summer break from studies at a college, university or trade
school or any combination of such persons. The term "student" shall not
apply to students who have completed a bachelor or equivalent degree or
persons enrolled in a single course at a time. The residents of a student
home may or may not live as a single housekeeping unit.
STUDENT HOME — A home that is not owned by an institution of higher
education and contains a living arrangement for at least two students, up
to a maximum of three students (as defined in this chapter) and who are
unrelated to each other by blood, marriage or legal adoption. The term
"student home" shall not include dormitories owned or operated by an
institution of higher education, a fraternity house, or a sorority house. The
term "student home" shall be used interchangeably with the term "student
housing." This term shall not include one or more students living in the
same dwelling as their parent(s).
SUBDIVIDER — Any landowner, whether an individual, firm, partnership,
association, corporation, estate, trust or any other group or combination
acting as a unit (or agent of said landowner authorized thereby) which
undertakes the subdivision or development of land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development. Provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE — Chapter 410,
Subdivision and Land Development, as adopted by the Kenhorst Borough
Council.
PRIVATE STREET — A street which is held under private ownership by
an individual, group, partnership or corporation and has not been titled
or dedicated to the Borough of Kenhorst.
I.
§ 475-9 KENHORST CODE § 475-9
1:504
SWIMMING POOL — A body of water or receptacle for water having a depth
at any point greater than 18 inches which is primarily used or intended to
be used for swimming or bathing.
THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE — A licensed or certified establishment that
provides for the manipulation of the body to alleviate pain, discomfort,
muscle spasm and promote health and wellness.
UNCONVENTIONAL GAS WELL AND FACILITIES — A well or facility for
either the production or support of production of natural gas from a
geological formation existing below the base of the Elk Sandstone or its
geologic equivalent stratigraphic interval where natural gas generally
cannot be produced at economic flow rates or in economic volumes except
by vertical or horizontal well bores stimulated by hydraulic fracture
treatments or by using multilateral well bores or other techniques to expose
more of the formation to the well bore.
USE — The specific purpose for which land, a sign or a structure or
building is designed, arranged, intended, or for which it may be occupied or
maintained or any activity, occupation, business or operation which may be
carried on, thereon or therein. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent
shall not be deemed to include any nonconforming use.
VARIANCE — Relief granted by the Zoning Hearing Board from the terms
and conditions of this chapter all in accordance with the provisions
established within this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (Act 247, as amended).255
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed. The
term "waste" shall also include and apply to waste considered as hazardous,
contaminated, toxic, residual, municipal or recyclable, as defined by the
Pennsylvania DEP and/or Environmental Protection Agency.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A system designed to transmit public water
from the source to users in compliance with the requirements of the
appropriate state agencies and the Borough of Kenhorst.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. The three major
characteristics of wetlands include vegetation, soil and hydrology.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a structure (or a group of
structures) which lies between the structure (or a group of structures) and a
lot line and which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward,
except as herein permitted.
FRONT YARD — A yard extending the full width of the lot between
a structure and the front lot line. On lots abutting more than one
A.
255. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 475-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-9
1:505
ZONING — Division of all of the land of an entire political subdivision
into districts having different regulations pertaining to use of land; and
height, area, bulk and use of buildings and yard requirements; and in some
states, density of population. Zoning is affected by local ordinance under the
police power of the state granted by specific legislation generally termed an
"enabling act."
ZONING HEARING BOARD — A board created by Borough Council to hear
matters as provided for in this chapter.
ZONING MAP — Kenhorst Borough Zoning Map.
ZONING OFFICER — The designated person, agent, firm or official
authorized by Borough Council to administer and enforce the Zoning
Ordinance of the Borough.
ZONING ORDINANCE — The Kenhorst Borough Zoning Ordinance of 2012,
as adopted by the Kenhorst Borough Council on August 2, 2012 (this
chapter).
public street other than an alley, the front yard requirement shall apply
fronting each public street.
REAR YARD — A yard extending the full width of the lot between a
structure and a rear lot line.
B.
SIDE YARD — A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between a structure and the nearest side lot line.
C.
§ 475-9 KENHORST CODE § 475-9
1:506
ARTICLE III
Zoning Map and Zoning Districts
§ 475-10. Establishment of zoning districts.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Borough is hereby divided into classes
of zoning districts which shall be designated as follows:
R-1 Suburban Residential District
R-2 Medium-Density Residential District
R-3 Medium-High-Density Residential District
R-4 Urban Residential District
M-1 Mixed-Use District
C-1 Highway Commercial District
C-2 Shopping Center Commercial District
§ 475-11. Official Zoning Map.
A. The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be as shown on the Zoning
Map of Kenhorst Borough. The Zoning Map and all notations,
references and data illustrated thereon are hereby incorporated by
reference into this chapter. The official copy of the Zoning Map shall be
labeled and identified by the signature of the President of Council,
attested by the Secretary of said Council, and bears the seal of the
Borough under the following words:
"This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map of the Borough of
Kenhorst adopted by the Kenhorst Borough Council on August 2, 2012,
as part of the Kenhorst Borough Zoning Ordinance of 2012."
B. If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,256 changes
are made in district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the
Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on the Official
Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by
Borough Council. No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official
Zoning Map or matter thereon shown, except in conformity with the
applicable procedures established in this chapter. All changes shall be
noted by date with a brief description of the nature of the change.
C. The Official Zoning Map shall be located in a place designated by
Borough Council and shall be the final authority as to the current
zoning status of land and water area in Kenhorst Borough regardless of
unofficial copies which may have been made or published from time to
time.
256. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 475-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-11
1:507
§ 475-12. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as indicated on
the Official Zoning Map, the following rules provided within this section
shall be applicable:
D. In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed,
lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes
and additions, Council may, by resolution, adopt a new Official Zoning
Map. The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors
or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction
shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning Map or
any subsequent amendment thereof. The new Official Zoning Map shall
be identified by the signature of Council, attested by the Secretary of
said Council, and bear the seal of the Borough under the following
words:
"This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map of Kenhorst Borough
supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted as part of
Ordinance No._____ of Kenhorst Borough, Berks County, Pennsylvania."
E. Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost or has been totally
destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining
shall be preserved, together with all applicable records pertaining to its
adoption or amendment.
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding
with the center lines of streets, highways, lanes, alleys, railroad tracks,
rivers or creeks, such center line shall be construed to be such
boundaries.
B. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding
with lot lines or municipal boundary lines, such lines shall be construed
to be such boundaries.
C. Where district boundaries are indicated as being approximately parallel
to the center or right-of-way lines of streets or highways, lanes, alleys,
railroad tracks, rivers or creeks, such district boundaries shall be
construed as being parallel to the center or right-of-way lines at such
distance as is indicated on the Official Zoning Map. Distances not
specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by
the scale of the map.
D. Where district boundaries are indicated as being approximately
perpendicular to the right-of-way lines of streets or highways, such
district boundaries shall be construed as being perpendicular to the
right-of-way lines.
E. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at a
variance with those indicated on the Official Zoning Map, or in
circumstances not covered within the context of this section, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall interpret the district boundaries.
§ 475-11 KENHORST CODE § 475-12
1:508
§ 475-13. Application of district regulations.
The following standards indicated within this section shall be utilized for
the generalized application of the district regulation in association with this
chapter:
F. Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single
ownership at the effective date of this chapter, at the election of the
property owner, the regulations of either zoning district may be
extended a distance of not more than 50 feet beyond the district
boundary line onto the remaining portion of the lot.
A. No building, structure or land shall be used and no building, structure
or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, assembled, moved,
enlarged, reconstructed, removed or structurally altered without the
issuance of a zoning and/or building permit by the designated person or
firm authorized by Council. No building, structure or land shall be
occupied without the issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy by
the designated person or firm authorized by Council.
B. No part of a yard, common open space, other open space or off-street
parking or loading space required in connection with one structure,
building or use of the land shall be included as part of a yard, common
open space, open space or off-street parking or loading space similarly
required for any other structure, building or use of the land, except as
permitted or required by this chapter or other Borough ordinance or
regulation.
C. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter, which
meets the requirements of this chapter, shall be reduced in dimension
or area below the minimum requirements set forth in this chapter. A
yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall not be
further reduced below the minimum requirements of this chapter.
D. Where district regulations specify a minimum lot width at the street
line, the minimum lot width shall be provided contiguous along the
street line of one street. It is prohibited, when calculating the width of a
lot, to add widths along the street lines of two or more streets. In the
case of a corner lot, the minimum lot width must be provided along the
street line of one street, but does not have to be provided along the
street line of each street on which the lot fronts.
E. Where district regulations specify a minimum lot width at the building
setback line, the minimum lot width shall be provided contiguous along
the building setback line established from one street. It is prohibited,
when calculating the width of a lot, to add widths along the building
setback lines established from two or more streets. In the case of a
corner lot, the minimum lot width must be provided along the building
setback line established from one street, but does not have to be
provided along the building setback line established from each street
on which the lot fronts.
§ 475-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-13
1:509
F. In the case of a lot of irregular shape in which a portion of the lot abuts
a street and a portion not abutting a street abuts the rear yards of lots
which have frontage on the same street as does the irregularly shaped
lot, on the irregularly shaped lot a building setback line shall be
established from the abutting rear yards. As a minimum, the building
setback requirement of the applicable zoning district shall be used in
establishing such building setback line.
G. No person shall alter the use of any land, or erect, alter, convert, move
or add to any building, structure or sign, without complying with the
requirements of all Borough ordinances and the Zoning Officer or the
person or firm designated by Borough Council issues a zoning permit to
the person/applicant for said change or construction. No zoning permit
is required for normal maintenance and repairs.
§ 475-13 KENHORST CODE § 475-13
1:510
ARTICLE IV
Zoning District Regulations
§ 475-14. R-1 Suburban Residential District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-1 Zoning District is to encourage
moderate residential development, retain the suburban characteristics
of the Borough, and serve as a transition between areas of variable
densities. All uses permitted within the R-1 Zoning District shall be
serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and public water
supply facilities.
B. Uses permitted by right. The following, as a principal use, their
accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the R-1 Zoning District;
provided, that the use, type, dimensional and all other applicable
requirements of this chapter are satisfied:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Municipal use.
(3) Agricultural uses, subject to § 475-25 of this chapter.
(4) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
(5) No-impact-home-based businesses, except that such permitted use
shall not supersede the rights of any deed restriction, covenant or
agreement restricting the use of land, nor any master deed, bylaw
or other document applicable to a common interest ownership
community.
C. Uses permitted by conditional use. The following, as a principal use,
their accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the R-1 Zoning
District when a conditional use is granted by Borough Council subject
to and in accordance with Article VII of this chapter.
(1) Public utilities uses, subject to § 475-48 of this chapter.
(2) Home occupation, subject to § 475-23 of this chapter.
(3) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
(4) Unconventional gas operations and related facilities.
D. Uses permitted by special exception. The following, as a principal use,
their accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the R-1 Zoning
District when a special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board, subject to and in accordance with Article VII of this chapter:
(1) Building conversions.
§ 475-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-14
1:511
§ 475-15. R-2 Medium-Density Residential District.
(2) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
E. Area, yard and height regulations. Unless otherwise specifically
provided for within this chapter, each of the following minimum and
maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted use
in the R-1 Zoning District:
(1) Minimum regulations.
(a) Lot area: 7,000 square feet.
(b) Lot width: 60 feet.
(c) Building setback: 30 feet.
(d) Rear yard: 25 feet.
(e) Side yard:
[1] Total: 20 feet. (Note: Unless otherwise specified in this
chapter, the side yard setback shall not apply to a common
lot line extending from the common wall.)
[2] One side: 10 feet. (Note: Unless otherwise specified in this
chapter, the side yard setback shall not apply to a common
lot line extending from the common wall.)
(2) Maximum regulations.
(a) Building height: 35 feet.
(b) Building coverage: 25%.
(c) Lot coverage: 45%.
F. Supplementary regulations. All sections under Article V of this chapter
shall apply as supplementary guidelines and specifications for the R-1
District.
G. No more than one principal building, structure or land use shall be
permitted or erected on a single lot.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-2 Zoning District is to encourage
moderate residential development, retain the suburban characteristics
of the Borough, and serve as a transition between areas of variable
densities. All uses permitted within the R-2 Zoning District shall be
serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and public water
supply facilities.
B. Uses permitted by right. The following, as a principal use, their
accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the R-2 Zoning District;
§ 475-14 KENHORST CODE § 475-15
1:512
provided, that the use, type, dimensional and all other applicable
requirements of this chapter are satisfied:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Municipal use.
(3) Public utilities uses, subject to § 475-48 of this chapter.
(4) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
(5) No-impact home-based businesses, except that such permitted use
shall not supersede the rights of any deed restriction, covenant or
agreement restricting the use of land, nor any master deed, bylaw
or other document applicable to a common interest ownership
community.
C. Uses permitted by conditional use. The following, as a principal use,
their accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the R-2 Zoning
District when a conditional use is granted by Borough Council subject
to and in accordance with Article VII of this chapter.
(1) Home occupation, subject to § 475-23 of this chapter.
(2) Fire station.
(3) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
(4) Unconventional gas operations and related facilities.
D. Uses permitted by special exception. The following, as a principal use,
their accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the R-2 Zoning
District when a special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board, subject to and in accordance with Article VII of this chapter:
(1) Public cemetery.
(2) Building conversions.
(3) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
E. Area, yard and height regulations. Unless otherwise specifically
provided for within this chapter, each of the following minimum and
maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted use
in the R-2 Zoning District:
(1) Minimum regulations.
(a) Lot area: 6,500 square feet.
(b) Lot width: 60 feet.
§ 475-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-15
1:513
§ 475-16. R-3 Medium-High-Density Residential District.
(c) Building setback: 30 feet.
(d) Rear yard: 20 feet.
(e) Side yard:
[1] Total: 16 feet. (Note: Unless otherwise specified in this
chapter, the side yard setback shall not apply to a common
lot line extending from the common wall.)
[2] One side: eight feet. (Note: Unless otherwise specified in
this chapter, the side yard setback shall not apply to a
common lot line extending from the common wall.)
(2) Maximum regulations.
(a) Building height: 35 feet.
(b) Building coverage: 30%.
(c) Lot coverage: 60%.
F. Supplementary regulations. All sections under Article V of this chapter
shall apply as supplementary guidelines and specifications for the R-2
District.
G. No more than one principal building, structure or land use shall be
permitted or erected on a single lot.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-3 Zoning District is to encourage
medium- to medium-high-density residential development, retain the
suburban characteristics of the Borough, and serve as a transition
between areas of variable densities. All uses permitted within the R-3
Zoning District shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal
facilities and public water supply facilities.
B. Uses permitted by right. The following as a principal use, their
accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the R-3 Zoning District,
provided that the use, type, dimensional and all other applicable
requirements of this chapter are satisfied:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Municipal use.
(3) Public utilities uses, subject to § 475-48 of this chapter.
(4) Single-family semidetached residential developments, subject to
§ 475-50 of this chapter.
(5) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
§ 475-15 KENHORST CODE § 475-16
1:514
(6) No-impact-home-based businesses, except that such permitted use
shall not supersede the rights of any deed restriction, covenant or
agreement restricting the use of land, nor any master deed, bylaw
or other document applicable to a common interest ownership
community.
C. Uses permitted by conditional use. The following, as a principal use,
their accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the R-3 Zoning
District when a conditional use is granted by Borough Council subject
to and in accordance with Article VII of this chapter:
(1) Home occupation, subject to § 475-23 of this chapter.
(2) Fire station.
(3) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
(4) Unconventional gas operations and related facilities.
(5) Group home, subject to § 475-67 of this chapter.
(6) Student housing, subject to § 475-68 of this chapter.
(7) Two-family detached developments, subject to § 475-51 of this
chapter.
D. Uses permitted by special exception. The following, as a principal use,
their accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the R-3 Zoning
District when a special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board, subject to and in accordance with Article VII of this chapter:
(1) Building conversions.
(2) Two-family residential developments, subject to § 475-51 of this
chapter.
(3) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
E. Area, yard and height regulations. Unless otherwise specifically
provided for within this chapter, each of the following minimum and
maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted use
in the R-3 Zoning District:
(1) Minimum regulations.
(a) Lot area: 6,500 square feet.
(b) Lot width: 60 feet.
(c) Building setback: 30 feet.
(d) Rear yard: 20 feet.
§ 475-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-16
1:515
§ 475-17. R-4 Urban Residential District.
(e) Side yard:
[1] Total: 12 feet. (Note: Unless otherwise specified in this
chapter, the side yard setback shall not apply to a common
lot line extending from the common wall.)
[2] One side: four feet. (Note: Unless otherwise specified in
this chapter, the side yard setback shall not apply to a
common lot line extending from the common wall.)
(2) Maximum regulations.
(a) Building height: 35 feet.
(b) Building coverage: 40%.
(c) Lot coverage: 65%.
F. Supplementary regulations. All sections under Article V of this chapter
shall apply as supplementary guidelines and specifications for the R-3
District.
G. No more than one principal building, structure or land use shall be
permitted or erected on a single lot.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-4 Zoning District is to permit mediumhigh
to high-density residential development, and retain the suburban
characteristics of the Borough. All uses permitted within the R-4 Zoning
District shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities
and public water supply facilities.
B. Uses permitted by right. The following, as a principal use, their
accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the R-4 Zoning District;
provided, that the use, type, dimensional, and all other applicable
requirements of this chapter are satisfied:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Municipal use.
(3) Recreational uses, subject to § 475-26 of this chapter.
(4) Public utilities uses, subject to § 475-48 of this chapter.
(5) Single-family semidetached residential developments, subject to
§ 475-50 of this chapter.
(6) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
(7) No-impact-home-based businesses, except that such permitted use
shall not supersede the rights of any deed restriction, covenant or
agreement restricting the use of land, nor any master deed, bylaw
§ 475-16 KENHORST CODE § 475-17
1:516
or other document applicable to a common interest ownership
community.
C. Uses permitted by conditional use. The following, as a principal use,
their accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the R-4 Zoning
District when a conditional use is granted by Borough Council, subject
to and in accordance with Article VII of this chapter.
(1) Home occupation, subject to § 475-23 of this chapter.
(2) Fire station.
(3) Multifamily residential developments, subject to the provisions of
§ 475-49 of this chapter.
(4) Tourist, bed-and-breakfast, rooming or boarding house, subject to
§ 475-52 of this chapter.
(5) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
(6) Unconventional gas operations and related facilities.
(7) Group home, subject to § 475-67 of this chapter.
(8) Student housing, subject to § 475-68 of this chapter.
(9) Two-family detached developments, subject to § 475-51 of this
chapter.
D. Uses permitted by special exception. The following, as a principal use,
their accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the R-4 Zoning
District when a special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board, subject to and in accordance with Article VII of this chapter:
(1) Building conversions.
(2) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
E. Area, yard and height regulations. Unless otherwise specifically
provided for within this chapter, each of the following dimensional
requirements shall apply to each permitted use in the R-4 Zoning
District:
(1) Minimum regulations.
(a) Lot area: 6,500 square feet.
(b) Lot width: 50 feet.
(c) Building setback: 20 feet.
(d) Rear yard: 20 feet.
(e) Side yard:
§ 475-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-17
1:517
§ 475-18. M-1 Mixed-Use District.
[1] Total: 10 feet. (Note: Unless otherwise specified in this
chapter, the side yard setback shall not apply to a common
lot line extending from the common wall.)
[2] One side: two feet. (Note: Unless otherwise specified in
this chapter, the side yard setback shall not apply to a
common lot line extending from the common wall.)
(2) Maximum regulations.
(a) Building height: 35 feet.
(b) Building coverage: 50%.
(c) Lot coverage: 70%.
F. Supplementary regulations. All sections under Article V of this chapter
shall apply as supplementary guidelines and specifications for the R-4
District.
G. No more than one principal building, structure or land use shall be
permitted or erected on a single lot.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the M-1 Zoning District is to provide an area
for a mixture of residential and village commercial type land uses which
service the needs of the community. The M-1 Zoning District is located
within the vicinity of the New Holland Road (SR 625). All development
which occurs shall be planned to accomplish safe vehicular access and
to protect the integrity of any adjacent residential uses. All uses
permitted within the M-1 Zoning District shall be serviced by public
sanitary sewage disposal facilities and public water supply facilities.
B. Uses permitted by right. The following, as a principal use, their
accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the M-1 District;
provided, that the use, type, dimensional and all other applicable
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied:
(1) Banks, savings and loan associations and finance companies.
(2) Professional office.
(3) Funeral home.
(4) Municipal use.
(5) Personal and household service establishments such as, but not
limited to, barber shops, beauty shops, dry-cleaning shops,
laundromats, repair shops, seamstress/tailor shops.
(6) Restaurants and similar types of eating establishments.
§ 475-17 KENHORST CODE § 475-18
1:518
(7) Retail business establishment such as, antiques, appliances,
beverages, bicycles, books (except adult bookstores), carpeting,
clothing, dry goods, flowers, food, furniture, hardware, household
supplies, lumber, jewelry, newspapers, office equipment, paint,
periodicals, sporting goods, stationery, travel and tobacco.
(8) Single-family detached dwelling subject to the area, yard and
height requirements for the R-3 Zoning District, as specified under
§ 475-16E of this chapter.
(9) Tourist, bed-and-breakfast, rooming or boarding house, subject to
§ 475-52 of this chapter.
(10) Home occupation, subject to § 475-23 of this chapter.
(11) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
(12) Mixed commercial/residential.
(13) Student housing, subject to § 475-68 of this chapter.
C. Uses permitted by conditional use. The following, as a principal use,
their accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the M-1 District
when a conditional use is granted by Borough Council, subject to and in
accordance with Article VII of this chapter:
(1) Fire station.
(2) Public utilities, subject to § 475-48 of this chapter.
(3) Multifamily residential developments, subject to the provisions of
§ 475-49 of this chapter.
(4) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
(5) Unconventional gas operations and related facilities.
(6) Church or similar place of worship.
D. Uses permitted by special exception. The following, as a principal use,
their accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the M-1 District
when a special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board
subject to and in accordance with Article VII of this chapter:
(1) Nursing home, retirement home, convalescent home.
(2) State-licensed nursery school, elementary school, middle school,
junior high school, senior high school, college, university, day-care
center, or facility for the support of such schools, college,
university, or day-care center.
(3) Recreational uses, subject to § 475-26 of this chapter.
§ 475-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-18
1:519
(4) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
(5) Therapeutic massage.
(6) Medical building, hospital.
(7) Group home, subject to § 475-67 of this chapter.
(8) Building conversion.
E. Area, yard and height regulations. Unless otherwise specifically
provided for within this chapter, each of the following dimensional
requirements shall apply to each permitted use in the M-1 Zoning
District:
(1) Minimum regulations.
(a) Lot area: 6,500 square feet.
(b) Lot width: 60 feet.
(c) Building setback: 10 feet.
(d) Rear yard: 20 feet.
(e) Side yard:
[1] Total: 12 feet. (Note: Unless otherwise specified in this
chapter, the side yard setback shall not apply to a common
lot line extending from the common wall.)
[2] One side: four feet. (Note: Unless otherwise specified in
this chapter, the side yard setback shall not apply to a
common lot line extending from the common wall.)
(2) Maximum regulations.
(a) Building height: 35 feet.
(b) Building coverage: 60%.
(c) Lot coverage: 80%.
F. Zoning plan. Prior to the issuance of a zoning and/or building permit for
a nonresidential land use that is permitted in the M-1 District, the
applicant shall submit a zoning plan for approval by the Zoning Officer.
G. Supplementary regulations. All sections under Article V of this chapter
shall apply as supplementary guidelines and specifications for the M-1
Zoning District.
H. No more than one principal building, structure or land use shall be
permitted or erected on a single lot.
§ 475-18 KENHORST CODE § 475-19
1:520
§ 475-19. C-1 Highway Commercial District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the C-1 Zoning District is to provide an area for
general commercial land uses which service the needs of surrounding
residential communities. The C-1 Zoning District is concentrated
around existing commercial land uses that are located along collector
and arterial highways within the Borough of Kenhorst. Development
which occurs shall be planned to accomplish safe development of
highway frontage and to protect major highways as thoroughfares. All
uses permitted within the C-1 Zoning District shall be serviced by
public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and public water supply
facilities.
B. Uses permitted by right. The following, as a principal use, their
accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the C-1 District; provided,
that the use, type, dimensional and all other applicable requirements of
this chapter have been satisfied:
(1) Banks, savings and loan associations, and finance companies.
(2) Professional or government office or studio.
(3) Church or similar place of worship.
(4) Funeral home.
(5) Municipal use.
(6) Personal and household service establishments such as, but not
limited to, barber shops, beauty shops, dry cleaning shops,
laundromats, repair shops, seamstress and tailor shops.
(7) Restaurants and similar types of eating establishments.
(8) Retail business establishment such as, but not limited to, antiques,
appliances, auto parts, beverages, bicycles, books (except adult
bookstores), carpeting, clothing, dry goods, flowers, food,
furniture, hardware, household supplies, lumber, jewelry,
machinery, newspapers, office equipment, paint, periodicals,
pharmaceuticals, sporting goods, stationery, travel and tobacco.
(9) Single-family detached dwelling, subject to the area, yard and
height requirements for the R-3 Zoning District, as specified under
§ 475-16E of this chapter.
(10) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
C. Uses permitted by conditional use. The following, as a principal use,
their accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the C-1 District
when a conditional use is granted by Borough Council, subject to and in
accordance with Article VII of this chapter.
(1) Agricultural uses, subject to § 475-25A of this chapter.
§ 475-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-19
1:521
(2) Fire station.
(3) Public utilities, subject to § 475-48 of this chapter.
(4) Hotel/motel accommodations.
(5) State-licensed nursery school, elementary school, middle school,
junior high school, senior high school or day-care center.
(6) Mixed commercial/residential.
(7) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
(8) Unconventional gas operations and related facilities.
D. Uses permitted by special exception. The following, as a principal use,
their accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the C-1 District
when a special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board,
subject to and in accordance with Article VII of this chapter:
(1) Commercial car wash.
(2) Automobile sales.
(3) Automobile service station.
(4) Club or lodge for fraternal or social purposes; provided, that the
primary activity of such use is not operated for business; and,
provided, that the building and services shall be primarily for use of
members and their guests.
(5) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
(6) Nursing home, retirement home, convalescent home, or special
care home.
(7) Therapeutic massage.
(8) Building conversion.
E. Area, yard and height regulations. Unless otherwise specifically
provided for within this chapter, each of the following minimum and
maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted use
in the C-1 Zoning District:
(1) Minimum regulations.
(a) Lot area: 8,000 square feet.
(b) Lot width: 80 feet.
(c) Building setback: 30 feet.
(d) Rear yard: 30 feet.
§ 475-19 KENHORST CODE § 475-19
1:522
§ 475-20. C-2 Shopping Center Commercial District.
(e) Side yard:
[1] Total: 20 feet. (Note: Unless otherwise specified in this
chapter, the side yard setback shall not apply to a common
lot line extending from the common wall.)
[2] One side: 10 feet. (Note: Unless otherwise specified in this
chapter, the side yard setback shall not apply to a common
lot line extending from the common wall.)
(f) Improvement setback: 10 feet.
(g) Buffer yard (depth): five feet.
(2) Maximum regulations.
(a) Building height: 40 feet.
(b) Building coverage: 40%.
(c) Lot coverage: 60%.
F. Zoning plan. Prior to the issuance of a zoning and/or building permit for
a nonresidential land use that is permitted in the C-1 District, the
applicant shall submit a zoning plan for approval by the Zoning Officer.
G. Supplementary regulations. All sections under Article V of this chapter
shall apply as supplementary guidelines and specifications for the C-1
Zoning District.
H. No more than one principal building, structure or land use shall be
permitted or erected on a single lot.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the C-2 Zoning District is to provide an area for
shopping center commercial land uses which service the needs of
surrounding residential communities. The C-2 Zoning District is
concentrated around existing commercial land uses that are located
along collector and arterial highways within the Borough of Kenhorst.
Development which occurs shall be planned to accomplish safe
development of highway frontage and to protect major highways as
thoroughfares. All uses permitted in the C-2 Zoning District shall be
serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and public water
supply facilities.
B. Uses permitted by right. The following, as a principal use, their
accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the C-2 District; provided,
that the use, type, dimensional and all other applicable requirements of
this chapter have been satisfied:
(1) Banks, savings and loan associations, and finance companies.
(2) Professional or government office or studio.
§ 475-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-20
1:523
(3) Municipal use.
(4) Personal and household service establishments such as, but not
limited to, barber shops, beauty shops, dry-cleaning shops,
laundromats, repair shops, seamstress and tailor shops.
(5) Restaurants and similar types of eating establishments.
(6) Retail business establishment such as, but not limited to, antiques,
appliances, auto parts, beverages, bicycles, books (except adult
bookstores), carpeting, clothing, dry goods, flowers, food,
furniture, hardware, household supplies, lumber, jewelry,
machinery, newspapers, office equipment, paint, periodicals,
pharmaceuticals, sporting goods, stationery, travel and tobacco.
(7) Shopping center, mall, plaza, mini-mall, subject to § 475-55 of this
chapter.
(8) Art gallery, museum, library or similar use.
(9) Home occupations.
(10) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
C. Uses permitted by conditional use. The following, as a principal use,
their accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the C-2 District
when a conditional use is granted by Borough Council, subject to and in
accordance with Article VII of this chapter:
(1) Agricultural uses, subject to § 475-25A of this chapter.
(2) Public utilities, subject to § 475-48 of this chapter.
(3) Indoor theater (except adult theaters) and place of amusement or
recreation.
(4) Professional office/research park, subject to § 475-56 of this
chapter.
(5) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
(6) Unconventional gas operations and related facilities.
(7) Hotel/motel accommodations.
D. Uses permitted by special exception. The following, as a principal use,
their accessory uses and no other, are permitted in the C-2 District
when a special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board,
subject to and in accordance with Article VII of this chapter:
(1) Commercial car wash.
(2) Automobile sales.
§ 475-20 KENHORST CODE § 475-20
1:524
(3) Automobile service station.
(4) Self-storage facilities.
(5) Manufacturing facilities.
(6) Printing, binding or publishing facilities.
(7) Warehouse facilities.
(8) Wholesale and distribution facilities.
(9) Salvage yards, subject to § 475-53 of this chapter.
(10)Kennels, subject to § 475-63 of this chapter.
(11) Metal processing facilities.
(12) Truck distribution center.
(13) Building conversion.
(14) Any use not provided for in the Borough.
(15) Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted uses when on
the same lot as the permitted use.
(16) Adult business uses, subject to § 475-54 of this chapter.
E. Area, yard and height regulations. Unless otherwise specifically
provided for within this chapter, each of the following minimum and
maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to each permitted use
in the C-2 Zoning District:
(1) Minimum regulations.
(a) Lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(b) Lot width: 100 feet.
(c) Building setback: 50 feet.
(d) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(e) Side yard:
[1] Total: 30 feet. (Note: Unless otherwise specified in this
chapter, the side yard setback shall not apply to a common
lot line extending from the common wall.)
[2] One side: 15 feet. (Note: Unless otherwise specified in this
chapter, the side yard setback shall not apply to a common
lot line extending from the common wall.)
(f) Improvement setback: 15 feet.
(g) Buffer yard (depth): 10 feet.
§ 475-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-20
1:525
(2) Maximum regulations.
(a) Building height: 40 feet.
(b) Building coverage: 40%.
(c) Lot coverage: 60%.
F. Zoning plan. Prior to the issuance of a zoning and/or building permit for
a nonresidential land use that is permitted in the C-2 District, the
applicant shall submit a zoning plan for approval by the Zoning Officer.
G. Supplementary regulations. All sections under Article V of this chapter
shall apply as supplementary guidelines and specifications for the C-2
District.
§ 475-20 KENHORST CODE § 475-20
1:526
ARTICLE V
Supplementary Regulations
§ 475-21. Access to structures.
Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a
public street and all structures shall be so located on lots which provide
safe and convenient access for emergency vehicles and required off-street
parking.
§ 475-22. Accessory uses or structures.
A. General provisions.
(1) Except as noted elsewhere in this chapter, no accessory building or
structure shall be permitted within any required front or side yard
and within five feet of the rear lot line. The minimum distance
between an accessory building or structure within a rear yard and
a side lot line shall be the side yard requirement of the applicable
zoning district or five, whichever is less.
(2) Except as noted elsewhere in this chapter, no accessory building or
structure shall exceed 12 feet in height, excepting detached
garages not to exceed 25 feet with setbacks half the building
height.
(3) Accessory buildings or structures customary to agricultural and
horticultural uses shall not exceed 25 feet in height.
(4) No permanent accessory building or structure shall be constructed
on any lot prior to the commencement of construction of the
principal building to which it is accessory.
(5) Section 475-22B and C indicate accessory uses and their
specifications for residential and nonresidential land uses.
(6) Except as noted elsewhere in this chapter, a building permit must
be issued by the designated person or firm authorized by Borough
Council for all proposed accessory structures and buildings.
B. Residential provisions.
(1) Unless otherwise specified within this chapter, detached garages,
greenhouses and other outbuildings are permitted as accessory
uses; provided, they are located within the building setback lines.
All such uses shall be erected, enlarged and/or demolished in
accordance with all applicable Borough building codes.
(2) Paved terraces, patios or open porches; provided, that such
terraces, patios or open porches comply with the front, side and
rear setback which are designated for the zoning district in which
the structure is located. The side yard setback shall not apply to a
common lot line extending from a common wall.
§ 475-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-22
1:527
§ 475-23. Home occupation regulations.
(3) Private noncommercial tennis courts shall not be located within the
front yard and/or closer than 15 feet from side or rear property
line. A tennis court shall not be located over a drainage field of a
sewage disposal system.
(4) Freestanding earth station satellite receiving dishes shall be
mounted at ground level (where possible) and shall not be located
within the front yard and/or closer than five feet from side or rear
property lines. All dishes must be active; dishes removed from
service must be physically removed within 30 days of inactivity.
(5) Utility sheds shall not be permitted in the front yard and within
three feet of the side or rear lot line. The minimum distance
between a utility shed within a rear yard and a side lot line shall be
three feet. All such utility sheds permitted under this section of this
chapter shall not exceed a floor area of 180 square feet and a
height of 15 feet.
C. Nonresidential provisions.
(1) No accessory building or structure for a nonresidential use shall be
permitted within any required front or side yard and within 10 feet
of any rear lot line.
(2) Storage facilities are permitted; provided, that such facilities meet
the requirements of § 475-30 and are located in areas which have
direct access to a street or driveway. The outdoor storage of
materials shall be screened from the view of adjacent properties.
(3) Living quarters are permitted only for proprietors, watchmen,
caretakers or similar employees.
(4) Restaurants, cafeterias and/or recreational facilities are permitted;
provided, they are intended for the use of employees only, unless
they are permitted as principal uses in the zoning district in which
they are constructed.
A. Home occupations are permitted by right within the M-1 and C-2
Zoning Districts.
B. Home occupations are permitted by conditional use within the R-1, R-2,
R-3, and R-4 Zoning Districts.
C. All dwelling units which propose a home occupation use shall have
direct access to a public street; provided, that the occupation is
secondary to the use of the property as a residence; and, further, that
the use of the dwelling does not change the character thereof and/or
have any exterior evidence of such secondary use other than a
permitted sign subject to the requirements specified under § 475-46,
Signs, of this chapter.
§ 475-22 KENHORST CODE § 475-23
1:528
§ 475-24. Building conversion standards.
D. The principal person engaged in the home occupation shall be a
resident of that dwelling.
E. The home occupation shall be limited to the principal person engaged
in the home occupation and one additional person to provide
secretarial, clerical or other assistance.
F. The home occupation shall be conducted within the principal
residential structure or an accessory structure to which the home
occupation is performed.
G. No more than one home occupational use shall be permitted per lot
and/or residential unit.
H. A home occupation shall not occupy more than 25% of the total floor
area of the residential dwelling unit or accessory structure to which the
home occupation is performed.
I. Unless otherwise permitted by Borough Council, all required parking
spaces shall be off-street. A minimum of two parking spaces in addition
to those required for the existing residential units shall be provided,
except that in the case of the office of a medical practitioner or dentist,
four spaces shall be provided.
J. A zoning permit issued by the Borough is required for all proposed
home occupations.
K. At the discretion of Borough Council, a land development plan may be
required for a home occupational use.
A. All building conversions shall be considered special exceptions,
regardless of if the proposed use is permitted by right or conditional
use.
B. All conversions of an existing structure shall meet all applicable
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for the proposed use unless a
variance is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize as a special exception the
conversion of any single-family detached dwelling into a dwelling for
not more than two families.
D. For residential conversions, the lot area per family shall not be reduced
to less than the minimum lot area as required for the zoning district in
which it is located.
E. For residential conversions, such conversion shall be authorized only
for a large building which is structurally sound and has relatively little
economic value or usefulness as a single-family detached dwelling or
other conforming land use.
§ 475-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-24
1:529
§ 475-25. Agricultural use regulations.
F. The yard, building, area and other applicable requirements for the
applicable zoning district shall not be reduced.
G. Provisions for adequate water supply and wastewater disposal shall be
designed in accordance with the requirements which are specified by
Kenhorst Borough. All uses shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage
disposal facilities and public water supply facilities.
H. Provisions for adequate access and off-street parking shall be made in
accordance with the standards which are specified under §§ 475-21,
475-42 and 475-43 of this chapter.
I. Such conversion shall not disrupt the character, harmony and integrity
of the neighborhood.
J. If such conversion is authorized, the Kenhorst Borough Zoning Hearing
Board may prescribe such further conditions with respect to the
conversion and use of such building as it deems appropriate.
K. Upon approval by the Zoning Hearing Board for a new use, a zoning
permit is required.
L. Permitting, in accordance with applicable Borough standards, of any
modifications to the structure or parcel is required prior to the
commencement of work.
A. The raising and ownership of horses, cattle, pigs, hogs, sheep, goats,
poultry, rabbits or similar animals shall be limited to a maximum of one
(1.0) animal unit per acre.
B. The display and sale of farm products shall be permitted, provided that
at least 75% of the quantity of products for sale has been produced on
the property on which they are offered for sale. The sale of farm
products shall be conducted in a structure or stand which shall not be
located closer than 20 feet from the applicable street right-of-way. In
addition, all off-street parking shall be designed in accordance with
§ 475-43 of this chapter.
C. All areas utilized for grazing purposes shall be completely fenced in.
D. The spreading of fertilizers, manure, sewage sludge, and/or biosolids
shall be conducted in a manner required and approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Kenhorst
Borough and public water supplier.
E. Intensive agricultural activities and uses shall be permitted, provided it
is located on a minimum of 20 acres of contiguous land area. All
intensive agricultural activities shall have a minimum setback of 300
feet from all property lines.257
§ 475-24 KENHORST CODE § 475-26
1:530
§ 475-26. Recreational use regulations.
The following standards and regulations shall apply to all government,
nonprofit, for-profit, private, or community recreational uses:
A. All active outdoor recreational land uses/areas shall be set back 50 feet
from all lot lines.
B. All passive outdoor recreational land uses/areas shall be set back 10
feet from all lot lines.
C. No buildings utilized for recreational activities shall be constructed
within 50 feet from any lot line.
D. No buildings or impervious surfaces shall be constructed on lands
which are classified as being wetlands or floodplains.
E. Parking facilities shall be required and designed in accordance with all
Borough standards and specifications.
F. All parking areas, driveways and/or streets shall be provided with a
lighting system which shall furnish adequate illumination at any point
and shall be designed to prevent glare which could be hazardous or
uncomfortable to drivers in the area. Lights shall be screened to
prevent spill or glare onto adjacent residential areas. In addition, the
standards indicated under § 475-41, Lighting, shall be applicable for all
design specifications.
G. All property lines adjacent to existing residential land uses shall be
adequately screened and buffered so as to protect the neighborhood
from inappropriate noise, light and other disturbances. The depth of the
buffer yard shall be a minimum of 50 feet in depth and shall be
consistent with the provisions specified under § 475-34A of this chapter.
H. Land areas which are not designated for buildings and impervious
surfaces shall be planted with an adequate all-season ground cover
which is consistent with § 475-34, Landscaping, of this chapter.
I. No driveway or access street shall be located within 50 feet from the
intersection of any Borough, state or private street. The intersections
and interior traffic circulation pattern shall be designed to prohibit
through traffic and minimize substantial traffic congestion and hazards.
All roads designed for interior circulation shall be constructed in
accordance with all applicable Borough standards and specifications.
J. A land development plan shall be required for all proposed recreational
sites in accordance with requirements adopted by the Borough.
257. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-27
1:531
§ 475-27. Design standards for nonresidential uses.
All proposed nonresidential uses shall be designed in accordance with all
land development requirements and procedures pursuant to all Borough
codes and ordinances.
§ 475-28. Environmental performance standards.
Notwithstanding the laws and regulations of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) and/or the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP), the environmental
performance standards listed under this section will be utilized by the
Kenhorst Borough Council and Planning Commission as supplemental
regulations for reviewing existing or potential environmental impacts within
the corporate limits of Kenhorst Borough.
A. Air management.
(1) Open burning is not permitted in Kenhorst Borough unless such
burning is consistent with the provisions and restrictions of all
codes, regulations and/or ordinances adopted by Kenhorst
Borough.
(2) No gases, vapors, odors, and/or particulates shall be emitted from
the facility which is detrimental to persons, property, animals or
vegetation. No toxic, radioactive or corrosive gases, vapors or
fumes shall be released into the atmosphere.
(3) No odors causing annoyance or discomfort to the adjacent
residents shall be detectable beyond the property lines of the site
on which such odors originate. The Kenhorst Borough Zoning
Officer and/or the designated person or firm authorized by Borough
Council shall determine if the odor is considered offensive and is a
nuisance.
(4) The Pennsylvania Air Pollution Control Act, as amended,258 in
conjunction with Chapter 131, "Ambient Air Quality Standards,"
and Chapter 123, "Standards for Contaminants," of Title 25,259 shall
be considered as minimum standards for the control of smoke,
dust, fumes and emissions.
B. Noise and vibration control.
(1) No continuous, static, fluctuating and/or intermittent noise in
excess of 50 decibels shall be permitted at the property line of the
site on which the source of the noise originates between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.260
258. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 4001 et seq.
259. Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chs. 123 and 131.
260. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-27 KENHORST CODE § 475-28
1:532
(2) The levels of all sound pressure testing shall be measured with a
sound level meter and an octave band analyzer that conforms to the
specifications published by the American Standards Associates.
(3) No physical vibration shall be perceptible without aid of
instruments at or beyond the lot lines with the exception of
temporary construction activity.
(4) Noise which is considered as loud, offensive, disruptive, excessive,
crude and/or is uncustomary for the land use from which it is
generated shall not be permitted.
C. Glare and heat control. Any operation producing intensive light, glare
and/or heat shall be performed within an enclosed building or behind a
solid fence in such a manner as to be completely imperceptible from
any point beyond the boundary lines.
D. Wastewater management.
(1) In no case shall potentially hazardous effluent or waste from any
operations be discharged.
(2) Effluent must meet all standards specified by the Borough and/or
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(3) In no case shall stormwater hookups, including but not limited to,
sump pumps, rain leaders, or floor drains, be connected to the
sanitary sewer system.
E. Solid waste management. Per Property Maintenance Code, as currently
adopted.261
F. Outdoor storage control.
(1) No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in
bulk above ground, except for tanks or drums of less than 600
gallons of fuel which is directly connected with engines, heating
devices or appliances located and operated at the same site as the
tanks or drums of fuel and which have been approved by the
appropriate agencies.
(2) The limits which are specified for fuel storage in this chapter shall
not apply to agricultural uses and activities. However, all such
requirements for the storage of fuel for agricultural uses shall be
approved and/or permitted by the appropriate agencies.
(3) All storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products stored
outdoors shall be enclosed by a security fence and planting screen
adequate to conceal the storage facilities from the view of adjacent
properties.
261. Editor's Note: See Ch. 341, Property Maintenance.
§ 475-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-28
1:533
§ 475-29. Temporary uses.
A temporary permit shall be issued for the authorization of temporary
uses necessary during construction or other special circumstances of a
discontinuing nature, including but not limited to mobile food facilities,
outdoor sales events, construction trailers, and exhibitions. The time period
(4) No materials or waste shall be deposited on site in such from or
manner by which it can be transported off the site by natural
causes or forces.
(5) No substance which has the potential to contaminate groundwater
or surface water shall be permitted to be stored outside unless the
owner can provide safeguards which are satisfactory to the
Borough and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
(6) Section 475-30, Outdoor storage, shall also be applicable for
nonresidential uses.
(7) Trailers which are parked on any property for a period of time
exceeding 30 consecutive days and are utilized for storage
purposes of any type shall be considered as a temporary structure
and shall be subject to the requirements specified under § 475-29
of this chapter.
G. Utility management and control.
(1) All uses requiring energy in the form of electric, diesel, gas, oil,
etc., shall comply with the most acceptable safety requirements
recognized by the Pennsylvania Bureau of Labor and Industry and
shall be so constructed and installed so as to be an integral part of
the architectural features of the site.
(2) Any utility which is viewed and regarded as offensive and unsightly
shall be concealed by coniferous planting.
H. Electromagnetic and radioactive radiation control.
(1) All electromagnetic radiation shall comply with the regulations of
the Federal Communication Commission (FCC); provided that no
electromagnetic radiation which interferes with radio or television
reception or the operation of other equipment beyond the lot lines
shall be produced.
(2) No injurious electromagnetic radiation or radioactive emission
shall be produced and all radioactive emissions shall be in
accordance with all pertinent federal and state standards.
I. Violations. Proprietors who have been cited for any violation(s) subject
to this section shall be responsible for applicable costs incurred by the
Borough of Kenhorst through background investigations, legal
proceedings, retributions and rectification measures.
§ 475-28 KENHORST CODE § 475-29
1:534
of the initial permit shall be 30 days. Once a temporary permit has expired,
a new permit must be obtained. The temporary use(s) shall be removed
completely within 30 days of the expiration of the permit without cost to the
Borough.
§ 475-30. Outdoor storage.
A. Outdoor storage of any type shall not be permitted unless such storage
conforms to the normal functions and procedures conducted on the
premises. Outdoor storage of any type shall be prohibited if such
storage is considered and/or construed as unsightly, malodorous,
hazardous to the environment and potentially detrimental to the health
and safety of the adjacent property owners. The use and location of
such outdoor storage shall be in accordance with all pertinent federal,
state and local codes.
B. Exterior fuel tanks or drums utilized for agricultural uses shall be
stored in approved aboveground containers not exceeding 600 gallons.
All such containers shall be directly connected with engines, heating
devices or appliances. All such containers and connections shall be
approved and/or permitted by the appropriate agencies.
C. Exterior fuel tanks or drums utilized for residential uses shall be stored
in approved aboveground containers not exceeding 300 gallons. All
such containers shall be directly connected with the appropriate
heating devices or appliances. All containers and connections shall be
approved and/or permitted by the appropriate agencies.
D. All storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products stored
outdoors shall be enclosed by a security fence and planting screen
adequate to conceal the storage facilities from the view of adjacent
properties.
E. No materials or waste shall be deposited on site in such form or manner
by which it can be transported off the site by natural causes or forces.
F. No substance which has the potential to contaminate groundwater or
surface water shall be permitted to be stored outside unless the owner
can provide safeguards which are satisfactory to the Borough and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
G. Biodegradable material which is considered and/or construed as being
unsightly, malodorous, offensive, disruptive or hazardous shall not be
kept, stored, stockpiled or spread on any property within the Borough.
H. The storage of agricultural equipment, functional classic or antique
automobiles and/or actively used building material shall be permitted in
all districts; provided, that such items are not located within the street
right-of-way and are not located within 10 feet of any adjacent property
line.
§ 475-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-30
1:535
§ 475-31. Prohibited uses.
No building or structure may be erected, altered, or used and no lot or
premises may be used for any activity which is continuously noxious,
injurious or offensive by reason of dust, smoke, odor, fumes, noise,
vibration, gas, effluent discharge, illumination or similar substances or
conditions.
§ 475-32. Front yard exceptions.
When an unimproved lot is situated between two improved lots with front
yard dimensions less than those required for the district in which the
unimproved lot is located, the front yard required for the unimproved lot
may be reduced to a depth equal to the average of the two adjoining lots
with the approval of Borough Council; provided, however, that this provision
shall only apply in cases where the improved lots in question are improved
as of the time of the adoption of this chapter and the improvements are
located within 100 feet of the unimproved lot. For the purposes of this
section, an unimproved lot shall be the same as a vacant lot and an
improved lot shall be one on which a principal building is erected.
§ 475-33. Flag lots.
Flag lots are permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following
development standards and conditions:
I. Equipment or motor vehicles which are considered by the Kenhorst
Borough and/or the designated person or firm authorized by Borough
Council as nonfunctional and without evidence of restoration work shall
be removed from the applicable property at the expense of the property
owner.
J. Any lot, or part thereof, exceeding the provisions of this section shall be
identified and categorized as a junkyard.
K. Trailers which are parked on any property for a period of time
exceeding 30 consecutive days and are utilized for storage purposes of
any type shall be considered as a temporary structure and shall be
subject to the requirements specified under § 475-29 of this chapter.
A. Flag lots shall only be permitted within residential developments. All
such lots shall be intended for single-family detached dwelling units.
B. A cumulative total of two flag lots shall be created as a result of the
subdivision(s). The residual tract shall be deed restricted from the
creation of future flag lots. In all cases, the applicant must demonstrate
that land cannot be subdivided to meet the minimum lot width
requirements of the zoning district, the tract of land cannot be further
subdivided in the future by normal or typical design, the tract of land
cannot be properly subdivided due to the presence of certain physical
development limitations associated with the site and that the
§ 475-30 KENHORST CODE § 475-33
1:536
§ 475-34. Landscaping.
configuration of the proposed lots will not limit the potential for
development on adjacent tracts of land in the future.
C. If the tract of land contains any residue or undeveloped land area, the
applicant shall provide the Borough with a sketch plan for further
review and comment.
D. The access strip or stem of a flag lot shall be fee simple and extend to an
existing public street. If required by the Borough, a five-foot buffer strip
shall be provided along the access strip. The buffer strip shall be
sufficiently landscaped in accordance with the standards specified
under § 475-34A of this chapter.
E. Driveways shall be located, designed and constructed in accordance
with all pertinent Borough standards.
F. The width of the access strip or stem shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
Additional width may be required by the Borough in order to overcome
problems associated with slope, drainage and/or sedimentation.
G. The lot area for each flag lot shall meet or exceed the minimum lot area
requirements for the applicable zoning district. The area of the access
strip or stem shall not be utilized to compute the area of the flag lot.
H. The building setback lines for the flag lot shall meet the minimum
required setbacks as specified by the applicable zoning district. The
setback lines shall be established at the flag portion of the proposed lot.
The front yard depth or setback shall be measured from the access strip
(extended through the lot) and from the rear property line of the lot
between the proposed flag lot and public street. All other setbacks shall
meet the rear yard setback requirements.
I. Flag lots may not be further subdivided or developed for any other
purpose and shall be deed restricted from further subdivision and
development.
A. Buffer yards.
(1) Where district regulations require buffer yards, screening and/or
planting strips, the applicant shall submit a landscaping plan to the
Borough for review and approval.
(2) The landscaping plan shall show the location and arrangement of
each buffer yard, the species, placement and size of all plant
material selected and the type, placement and size of all fences to
be placed in such buffer yards.
(3) The type and density of planting shall adequately provide the
screening effect required.
§ 475-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-34
1:537
(4) The plant materials utilized shall be selected from the approved list
identified under § 475-34D of this chapter.
(5) All plant materials shall be permanently maintained by the
property owner and any plant material which does not live shall be
replaced within six months.
(6) Any portion of a site which is not utilized for buildings, accessory
structures, loading or parking spaces, aisles, sidewalks and
designated storage areas shall be planted with an all-season
ground cover and shall be landscaped according to an overall plan.
(7) All buffer yards shall be maintained and kept clean of debris,
rubbish, weeds and tall grass. Depending on the land use activity
and intensity, the Borough may require that a fence be installed
within the buffer yard or along the internal portion of the buffer
yard. The fence shall be consistent with the standards specified
under § 475-35 of this chapter.
(8) Borough Council shall have the right to modify any of the above
specifications if the applicant can demonstrate that the existing
conditions of the site exceed all applicable requirements listed
under this section.
B. Developments requiring landscaping plans.
(1) All residential developments containing three or more dwelling
units or nonresidential development greater than one gross acre
shall submit a landscaping plan to the Borough of Kenhorst for
review and approval.
(2) The landscaping plan shall show the type, size and arrangement of
all species selected.
(3) The materials utilized shall be selected from the approved list
identified under § 475-34D of this chapter.
(4) All new residential buildings shall provide a minimum of two
selected canopy, flowering or evergreen trees per lot.
(5) All new nonresidential developments shall provide a minimum of
three selected canopy, flowering and/or evergreen trees per gross
acre.
(6) All selected plant materials shall be planted a minimum of 10 feet
outside of the legal right-of-way of all existing and proposed
streets.
(7) All selected plant materials shall be located so as not to interfere
with the installation and maintenance of sidewalks, drainage
facilities and/or utilities.
§ 475-34 KENHORST CODE § 475-34
1:538
(8) The strategic placement of trees throughout the development to
serve as a buffer against the wind and sun is encouraged for energy
conservation purposes.
(9) All plant materials shall be located so as not to create a potential
traffic hazard.
(10) The Borough shall have the right to waive or modify any of the
above specifications if the applicant can demonstrate that the
existing conditions of the site exceeds all applicable requirements
listed under this section.
(11) Invasive plants and species are not permitted.
C. Building tree requirements.
(1) All new residential buildings require two trees.
(2) All new commercial buildings require three trees planted five per
100 square foot, minimum 5% occupancy of the property.
D. Street trees. The following trees, hedges and/or shrubs may be utilized
to meet the standards and specifications of § 475-34A and B. Species
selection shall be based upon the existing physical and natural
conditions of the site.
(1) Canopy trees are permitted, provided they are a minimum of two
inches in caliper as measured 12 inches from the ground. The
following is an approved list:
Acer ginnala - Amur maple
Acer platanoides - Norway maple
Acer rubrum - Red maple
Quercus alba - White oak
Quercus borealis - Red oak
Quercus coccinea - Scarlet oak
Quercus palustris - Pin oak
Quercus phellos - Willow oak
(2) Flowering trees are permitted provided they are a minimum of 10
feet in height. The following is an approved list:
Amelanchier canadensis - Shadblow serviceberry
Cornus florida - Flowering dogwood
Cornus mas - Cornelian cherry
Laburnum vossi - Golden chain
Magnolia soulangiana - Saucer magnolia
Malus baccata - Siberian crab
§ 475-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-34
1:539
§ 475-35. Fences, walls and hedges.
Malus floribunda - Japanese flowering crab
Oxydendrum arboreum - Sourwood
(3) Buffer trees are permitted provided they are a minimum of six feet
in height. The following is an approved list:
Picea ables - Norway spruce
Picea omorika - Serbian spruce
Picea pungens - Colorado spruce
Pinus nigra - Austrian pine
Pseudotsuga menziesii - Douglas fir
(4) Hedges or hedgerows are permitted for buffer and screening
purposes provided they are a minimum of four feet in height. The
following is an approved list of hedges:
Crataegus crus-galli - Cockspur Thorn
Crataegus intricata - Thicket hawthorn
Crataegus phaenopyrum - Washington hawthorn
Euonymus alatus - Winged euonymus
Forsythia intermedia - Border forsythia
Rhamnus frazula columnaris - Tailhedge buckthorn
Syringa vulgaris - Common lilac
Viburnum sieboldii - Siebold viburnum
Viburnum tomentosum - Doublefile viburnum
E. Guarantee/performance bond.
(1) Any tree or shrub which dies within 18 months of planting shall be
replaced. Any tree or shrub which, within 18 months of planting or
replanting, is deemed, in the opinion of the Borough, to have grown
in a manner uncharacteristic of its type, shall be replaced.
(2) Substitutions for certain species may be permitted only when
approved by the Kenhorst Borough Planning Commission and
Council.
(3) The developer or landowner shall deposit with the Borough a sum
of money equal to the amount necessary to cover the cost of
purchasing, planting, maintaining and replacing all vegetative
materials for a period of 18 months. This condition shall be satisfied
through an executed agreement between the Borough and
developer.
§ 475-34 KENHORST CODE § 475-35
1:540
§ 475-36. Corner lot restrictions.
A. Unless otherwise stipulated within this chapter, fences, walls and/or
hedges may be permitted within and along the periphery of any
required yard; provided:
(1) No fence, wall and/or hedge is to be erected or planted within or
encroaching upon the street right-of-way.
(2) No fence or wall, except a security fence or decorative retaining
wall, shall exceed six feet in height. All proposed fences and walls
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
specifications and proceedings of the designated person or firm
authorized by Borough Council.
(3) Security fences, cyclone fences, exceeding six feet in height, shall
only be permitted for nonresidential land uses. The tops of security
fences exceeding six feet in height may also utilize barb wire. All
such security fences shall be adequately screened with suitable
landscaping from the view of any adjacent properties.
(4) All security fences exceeding six feet in height shall be reviewed
and approved by Borough Council.
B. A safety screen shall be provided on all sides of hazardous or dangerous
areas as identified in § 475-47 of this chapter or as otherwise
determined by Borough Council. Borough Council may require a fiftyfoot
buffer strip upon which no building may be located.
A. Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all street intersections. Within
such triangles, nothing, except street signs, traffic lights or signs, utility
poles and mail boxes, shall impede vision above a height of 2.5 feet from
the center-line grades of the intersecting streets. Such triangles shall
be established from a distance of 75 feet from the point of intersection
of the center lines of the intersecting streets, except that a clear sight
triangle of 150 feet shall be provided for all intersections with collector
and arterial highways.
B. On every corner lot, a yard equal in depth to the front yard requirement
of the zoning district in which the corner lot is located shall be provided
on each side of the lot which is adjacent to a street.
C. In cases in which a preexisting lot of record is changed into a corner lot
as the result of an adjacent subdivision or land development, the front
yard of the preexisting lot shall only be established along the public
street to which it originally had access. All other setbacks shall conform
to the applicable requirements for the zoning district in which the
preexisting lot is located.
§ 475-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-37
1:541
§ 475-37. Projections into yards.
Unless otherwise specified within this chapter, all structures must comply
with the front, side and rear setbacks which are designated for the zoning
district in which the structure is located.
§ 475-38. Accessory building setback exceptions.
On any lot on which a principal building existed at the effective date of this
chapter, any accessory building to such existing principal building which
is constructed after the effective date of this chapter does not have to be
set back farther from any street right-of-way or lot line than that principal
building.
§ 475-39. Height exceptions.
§ 475-40. Swimming pools.
Swimming pools shall be defined per the building code adopted by the
Borough. Such swimming pools may be entirely or partially aboveground.
Swimming pools shall be classified as an accessory use. The following
standards shall supplement those standards provided in § 475-22 of this
chapter.
A. The building height limitations contained within this chapter shall not
apply to chimneys, spires, belfries, cupolas, farm buildings, silos,
greenhouse ventilators, antennas (not in combination with support
towers), water tanks and other similar appurtenances usually required
to be placed above the roof level, provided they are not intended for
human occupancy.
B. The maximum height of the structures which are specified under
Subsection A, above, shall be 50 feet, provided compliance with the
Airport Hazard District can be demonstrated. In no case shall height of
the structure, or the building in combination with a structure, be
greater than the distance to the closest lot line.
C. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, no building in the Borough,
other than a farm building, shall exceed 35 feet in height.
D. Accessory buildings or structures customary to agricultural and
horticultural uses shall be exempt from the building height and open
area requirements specified in this chapter, provided compliance with
the Airport Hazard District can be demonstrated. The height of the
accessory building or structure above its base shall be less than the
shortest distance from such base to any lot line.
E. The height exceptions specified in this chapter shall be consistent with
the development standards specified by all applicable regulations
adopted by Kenhorst Borough.
§ 475-37 KENHORST CODE § 475-40
1:542
§ 475-41. Lighting.
§ 475-42. Off-street loading areas.
A. The pool filters, pumps and other mechanical or structural equipment
shall not be permitted within the front yard, the side yard setbacks and/
or within 10 feet of the rear lot line.
B. Any floodlighting or other illumination used in conjunction with the pool
shall be shielded and directed away from adjacent property owners.
C. Per the International Building Code adopted by the Borough,262 the pool
shall be completely enclosed by a fence or wall not less than four feet in
height. If the enclosure is a fence, the vertical and horizontal interfaces
shall be no more than two inches apart. All gates shall be equipped with
locks.
D. Per the International Building Code adopted by the Borough,
aboveground pools over four feet in height do not need to be enclosed
by a fence or wall, but the ladders serving the pool shall be locked in an
inaccessible position at least four feet above the ground or removed and
locked up elsewhere.
E. The pool shall not occupy more than 50% of the minimum yard area in
which it is located.
A. When the property on which any activity is conducted is illuminated at
night, such illumination shall be so designed and located that the light
sources are shielded from adjoining residences and streets.
B. No direct beams of light shall be directed toward adjacent properties or
toward public roads, except from streetlights intended for the lighting
of streets, the location of which have been approved by the Borough
and the appropriate utility company.
C. No lighting shall be utilized in such a manner to produce a light
intensity greater than 10 footcandles beyond the lot boundaries when
the adjacent land is included within a residential zoning district.
A. Paved off-street loading and unloading spaces, with proper access from
a street, common driveway or alley shall be provided on any lot on
which a building for trade or business is hereafter erected or
substantially altered. All such areas for the loading and unloading of
vehicles and for the servicing of establishments or shops by refuse
collection, fuel and other service vehicles shall be of such size, design
and arrangement that they may be used without blocking or otherwise
interfering with the use of automobile accessways, parking facilities or
pedestrianways. All loading areas shall be paved. Loading areas shall
not be located within required front yards and shall not be located
within 10 feet of any side or rear lot line.
262. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 475-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-42
1:543
§ 475-43. Off-street parking facilities.
B. All such spaces shall have dimensions not less than 12 feet by 45 feet
with a clearance of not less than 14 feet in height. The spaces shall not
be located within any public right-of-way or within any other designated
parking area.
C. Unless otherwise required by this chapter or permitted by Borough
Council, a minimum of one off-street loading space shall be required for
each nonresidential use.
D. Unless otherwise permitted by the Borough Council, the total number
of required off-street loading spaces shall be specified as follows:
(1) Office building. One space for the each 20,000 square feet of gross
floor area.
(2) Warehousing or wholesaling establishment. One space for each
10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(3) Other nonresidential uses. One space for the each 20,000 square
feet of gross floor area.
E. For any building or land use not covered above, or for any combination
of uses set forth above, the designated person or firm authorized by
Borough Council shall apply the standard for the number of required
off-street loading spaces.
F. Unless otherwise permitted by Borough Council, all required off-street
loading areas and access drives shall be paved. They shall have marked
parking spaces, shall be graded to provide convenient access and
proper drainage and shall be maintained in usable condition. The
maximum grade of areas used for loading spaces shall not exceed 5%,
and the maximum grade of access drives shall not exceed 10%. Surface
water shall not be concentrated onto public sidewalks and other
premises.
A. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided whenever:
(1) A building is constructed or new use established.
(2) The use of an existing building is changed to a use requiring more
parking facilities.
(3) An existing building is altered so as to increase the amount of
parking spaces required.
B. Standards for off-street parking:
(1) Each parking space shall have a minimum area of 200 square feet
with minimum dimensions of 10 feet by 20 feet. In addition,
appropriate driveways, aisles and maneuvering space shall be
provided to permit safe and convenient access to and use of the
§ 475-42 KENHORST CODE § 475-43
1:544
area provided for parking purposes. Proper access from a street,
alley or driveway shall be provided.
(2) Parking spaces for residential uses shall be located on the same lot
as the use served. Parking spaces for other uses shall be provided
for on the same lot as the use being served or in parking facilities
within 300 feet of the use, except in the case of a shopping center
or similar grouping of buildings on a lot, in which case all parking
areas shall be provided entirely within the lot lines of the property.
(3) All off-street parking spaces designated for residential units shall
be located behind the street right-of-way line.
(4) All parking spaces and means of access, other than those relating
to a dwelling, shall be adequately illuminated during night hours of
use. The illumination must be designed and located so that the light
sources are shielded from adjoining residences and public and
private streets. The illumination shall not be of excessive
brightness and shall not produce a glare noxious at or beyond the
boundaries of the parking area.
(5) Common or joint parking facilities for two or more uses may be
established; provided, that the number of spaces provided is not
less than the sum of the spaces required for each individual use.
(6) All common parking areas and access drives shall be paved. They
shall have marked parking spaces, shall be graded to provide
convenient vehicular access and proper drainage and shall be
maintained in usable condition. The maximum grade of areas used
for parking shall not exceed 5%, and the maximum grade of access
drives shall not exceed 10%. Surface water shall not be
concentrated onto public sidewalks and other premises.
(7) The Borough may permit a gravel or stone off-street parking area if
the applicant can provide evidence that the proposed land use
activity is not compatible or does not require a paved off-street
parking area. As part of the request, the applicant shall submit a
stormwater management plan, a grading plan and an erosion/
sedimentation control plan to the Borough for review and
comment.
(8) No areas necessary to fulfill the off-street parking requirements of
this chapter shall be used for the sales, dead-storage, repair,
dismantling or servicing of vehicles.
(9) Off-street parking facilities existing at the effective date of this
chapter shall not be subsequently reduced to an amount less than
that required under this chapter for a similar new building or use.
(10) The width of aisles in parking areas shall be no less than listed in
the following table:
§ 475-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-43
1:545
Aisle Width
Angle of Parking
One-Way
(feet)
Two-Way
(feet)
90° 24 24
60° 18 N/A
45° 15 N/A
30° 12 N/A
(11) When the required number of parking spaces is computed and a
fraction of a parking space results, any fraction which is below 1/4
may be disregarded and any fraction which is over 1/4 shall
necessitate the provision of a full parking space.
(12) The design of parking areas for all uses shall be such to prevent the
backup of vehicles on a public street.
(13) Where parking requirements are determined by the number of
seats and no permanent seats are provided, only temporary seats,
the number of parking spaces to be provided shall be based upon
the capacity for temporary seats in normal usage.
(14) Parking areas shall be arranged so that no portion of any vehicles
parked within a designated parking space can extend over any
property line of the lot on which it is parked.
(15) Parking areas for nonresidential uses which are designed to
contain more than three vehicles shall be screened from the view of
persons on any land zoned R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 which is adjacent
to the land on which the nonresidential parking area is located.
(16) Parking areas and access drives for nonresidential uses shall be
located a minimum of 10 feet from a lot line and street right-of-way
line and the area between the parking area and the lot line or street
right-of-way line shall be landscaped in accordance with the
standards specified under § 475-34 of this chapter. Consideration
should be given to providing landscaping within the interior of the
off-street parking facility.
(17) Nonconforming parking areas. No major repairs, substantial
alterations or extensions to any building shall be permitted unless
the plans for such change shall provide for bringing the entire
property into conformance with all of the provisions of this section
as if an application were being made for a permit to erect or
construct all of the existing and proposed buildings and structures
on undeveloped ground.
(18) The parking of commercial or nonresidential vehicles shall be
permitted in all zoning districts within the Borough; provided, they
are not located within any street right-of-way or within the
§ 475-43 KENHORST CODE § 475-43
1:546
applicable front, side or rear yard setback. All such vehicles must
be located within an enclosed building or must be located more
than 25 feet from any property line. The building or parking area
must be screened with suitable landscaping in order to conceal its
view from any adjacent residential use.
(19) The parking of major recreational vehicles or equipment including,
but not limited to, boats, boat trailers, campers, coaches, motorized
dwellings or similar equipment shall be permitted in all zoning
districts within the Borough; provided, they are not located within
any street right-of-way or within the applicable side or rear yard
setback. Unless otherwise approved and permitted by Kenhorst
Borough, all such vehicles or equipment shall not be utilized for
living, sleeping and/or household purposes.
(20) The number of off-street parking spaces to be provided for each use
shall be sufficient to accommodate all employee, visitor, and
customer parking. Minimum off-street parking requirements shall
conform to the specifications under § 475-43C of this chapter.
(21) Chapter 410, Subdivision and Land Development, provides
additional design standards and specifications for off-street parking
facilities.
C. Off-street parking requirements. Off-street parking requirements shall
be required as follows:
(1) Residential uses: two spaces per dwelling unit.
(2) Group home: one space for each resident.
(3) Student housing: one space for each occupant.
(4) Wholesaling, warehouse or industrial use: one space per two
employees for the combined employment of the two largest
successive shifts.
(5) Restaurant, tavern or similar use: one space for each four seats,
plus one space for each employee on the largest shift.
(6) Retail and service establishments: one space for each 150 square
feet of gross floor area.
(7) Office buildings: one space for each 400 square feet of gross floor
area.
(8) Motel, hotel, tourist home or similar establishments: one space for
each rental unit, plus one space for each employee on the largest
shift.
(9) Medical, dental, and paramedical offices and clinics: 1 1/2 spaces
for each patient exam area, plus one space per each employee.
§ 475-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-43
1:547
§ 475-44. Driveways.
(10) Nursing home or home for the aging: one space for each employee,
plus one space for each four beds.
(11) Funeral home: one space for each four seats.
(12) Roadside farm stand: not less than five spaces.
(13) Drive-in eating establishment (no indoor seating provided): one
space for each 2,000 square feet of lot area or one space for every
25 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater, plus one
space for each employee on the largest shift.
(14) Bowling alley: five spaces per alley.
(15) Auditorium, gymnasium, theater, municipal building, place of
worship, club or lodge, cafeteria utilized for public assemblage, or
other place of public assemblage: one space for every three seats.
(16) Library or museum: one space per 300 square feet of gross floor
area.
(17) Nursery schools: one space per employee, plus one space for
loading and unloading of children for each five children
accommodated in the school.
(18) Elementary and junior high schools: one space per employee, plus
10 spaces per classroom. Refer to Subsection B(14), above, for
additional requirements.
(19) High schools: one space per four students, plus one space for each
employee. Refer to Subsection B(14), above, for additional
requirements.
(20) Skating rinks, swimming pools, dance halls, indoor recreational
establishments: one space per 50 square feet devoted to patron
use.
(21) Motor vehicle service station or repair garage: two parking spaces
per service bay.
(22) For any building or use not covered above or for any combination of
uses set forth above, the designated person or firm authorized by
Borough Council shall apply the standard for off-street parking
spaces in the above schedule deemed to most closely approximate
the proposed building or use.
A. No driveways shall be located, designed and constructed so as to create
a drainage or sedimentation problem on an adjacent property or street.
B. All driveways shall be so constructed and maintained that the materials
of which the driveways are made will not wash nor be deposited upon
public roads.
§ 475-43 KENHORST CODE § 475-44
1:548
§ 475-45. Highway frontage development.
C. Driveways serving single-family residential dwelling units shall not
exceed 15% in grade.
D. Driveways serving multifamily residential dwelling units and
nonresidential developments shall not exceed 10% in grade and shall be
paved.
E. All driveways shall be located, designed, maintained and constructed as
to provide optimum and safe sight distance at their intersection with
the street.
F. Driveway entrances shall not intersect streets at angles of less than 60°
nor more than 120°.
G. All driveways shall be located, designed, maintained and constructed in
accordance with all pertinent standards and specifications for
driveways which have been adopted by the Borough of Kenhorst. Where
provisions are not specified or applicable, the Kenhorst Borough
Council shall provide a set of design requirements.
H. A highway occupancy permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation shall be required for all proposed driveways entering
onto a state road.
A. All areas for off-street parking, off-street unloading and loading and the
storage or movement of motor vehicles shall be physically separated
from the public street or highway by a raised curb, planting strip or
other suitable barrier against unchanneled motor vehicle entrance or
exit, except for necessary accessways or access roads which supply
ingress and egress from such facilities.
B. Each use with less than 100 feet of frontage on a public street shall
have not more than one accessway to each such street. No use with 100
feet or more frontage on a public street shall have more than two
accessways to any one street for each 300 feet of frontage. Where
practicable, movement into and out of parking areas shall avoid direct
access to or from an arterial street or major collector.
C. Where there is more than one driveway to a parking area, the
driveways, whenever possible, shall be limited to one-way travel either
as an entrance to or an exit from the parking area. The width of such
entrances and exits, measured at the street line, shall be as follows:
(1) One-way travel: 12 feet minimum and 26 feet maximum.
(2) Two-way travel: 24 feet minimum and 36 feet maximum.
D. In all cases, the radius of the edge or the driveway apron shall be at
least 15 feet and no more than 50 feet.
§ 475-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-45
1:549
§ 475-46. Signs.
E. The location and width of exit and entrance driveways shall be planned
so as not to interfere with the use of adjacent property and with
pedestrian and vehicular traffic on adjacent streets. The center line of
the access driveway onto or from any public street shall be located at
least 50 feet from the intersection of any street right-of-way lines.
A. Area standards for signs.
(1) The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering,
wording and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the
background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are
displayed, but not including any supporting framework and bracing
which are incidental to the display.
(2) The area of a sign, painted upon or applied to a building, shall be
considered to include all lettering, wording and accompanying
designs or symbols, together with any backing associated with the
sign.
(3) Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to
or painted on a surface, building, wall or window, the area shall be
considered to be that of the smallest rectangle or other shape
which encompasses all of the letters and symbols.
B. Permitted signs, all zoning districts. These signs are permitted in all
zoning districts and are subject to the following standards, provisions
and specifications:
(1) Official traffic control signs and other official, federal, state, county
or Borough government signs.
(2) Temporary signs announcing a campaign, drive or event of a civic,
philanthropic, educational or religious organization; provided, such
sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and shall be removed
immediately upon the completion of the campaign, drive or event.
(3) Business signs offering the sale or rental of the premises upon
which the sign is erected; provided it meets the requirements of the
realty sign requirements.
(4) Temporary signs of contractors, developers, architects, engineers,
builders and artisans, or businesses erected and maintained on the
premises; provided, that the area of such sign shall not exceed 12
square feet; and, provided, that such sign shall be removed upon
completion of the work but in no case shall be permitted for more
than 30 consecutive days in a calendar year.
(5) Trespassing signs, signs indicating the private nature of a road,
driveway or premises, signs controlling fishing or hunting on the
§ 475-45 KENHORST CODE § 475-46
1:550
premises; provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed
two square feet.
(6) All signs must be located to comply with the requirements for clear
sight triangles, as specified under § 475-36A of this chapter.
(7) Signs directing patrons, members of audience to temporary
exhibits, shows or events and signs erected in conjunction with a
political election; provided, that such sign shall not exceed six
square feet, shall be removed within one week after the date of the
exhibit, show, event or election, shall not be posted earlier than two
weeks before the date of the exhibit, show or event and that
political signs shall not be posted earlier than one month prior to an
election.
(8) Signs expressing the opinion of the owners or occupants of the
property on which signs are placed; provided, that no such sign
shall be obscene or shall cause threat to the health or safety of the
public, no such sign shall exceed 10 square feet and not more than
one such sign shall be erected on any one street frontage.
C. Permitted signs, residential districts. The following signs are permitted
within the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zoning Districts:
(1) Home occupation or name sign displaying the name and address of
the occupant or the profession or activity of the occupant of a
dwelling; provided, that not more than one such sign shall be
erected for each permitted use or dwelling; and, provided, that the
area of such sign shall not exceed two square feet; and, provided,
that such sign shall be fixed flat on the main wall of such building or
may be erected in the front yard, but not within 10 feet of the
cartway.
(2) Sign, bulletin, announcement board or identification sign for
schools, churches, clubs, nonprofit groups, divisions of
government, multifamily dwellings or other principal uses and
buildings other than dwellings on the same lot therewith for the
purpose of displaying the name of the institution and its activities
or services; provided, that the area of any such sign shall not
exceed 12 square feet and not more than one such sign shall be
erected on any one street frontage.
(3) Signs offering the sale of farm products, nursery products or
livestock produced or raised on the premises; provided that the
area of any such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet and not more
than one such sign shall be erected on any one street frontage.
(4) Signs denoting membership in agricultural associations,
cooperatives or indicating specialization in a particular breed of
cattle, hogs, etc., or in a particular hybrid or strain of plant;
provided, that such sign is limited to six square feet and not more
than one sign per 10 feet of road frontage.
§ 475-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-46
1:551
D. Permitted signs, multifamily residential developments. The following
signs are permitted within multifamily residential developments:
(1) Multifamily dwelling premises shall not be advertised by temporary
real estate signs for more than 12 months after the building is
constructed.
(2) Directional signs, not to exceed two square feet each, erected
within the project itself to direct persons to a sales or rental office
or sample apartment.
(3) Permanent identifying signs for the purpose of indicating the name
of the multifamily project and for the purpose of identifying the
individual buildings within the projects. Not more than one sign for
each entrance to the project from a public street to identify the
name of the project shall be permitted and no such sign shall
exceed 10 square feet in size. Signs to identify the individual
buildings within the project shall not exceed two square feet in
size.
E. Permitted signs, mixed-use and nonresidential districts. The following
signs are permitted in the M-1, C-1 and C-2 Zoning districts and no
other:
(1) Business or commercial wall or freestanding signs on the same lot
as the use to which it relates; provided, that the total of such signs
shall be limited to two square feet for each lineal foot of horizontal
building facade length, but not to exceed an aggregate area of 160
square feet. No more than two freestanding sign structures shall be
permitted per lot.
(2) Special temporary promotional devices, signs or displays shall be
permitted on the outside of a building; provided, they are not on
display for a total period of 30 cumulative days in any given year.
(3) Off-site advertising signs may be erected and maintained within the
C-1 and C-2 Zoning Districts. The following standards and
specifications shall apply:
(a) All off-site advertising signs shall have a maximum display area
of 300 feet per sign face with a maximum width of 25 feet,
inclusive of any border, and shall have no more than one in
each direction.
(b) Two sign faces may be utilized only in the back-to-back
arrangement, in which case, they shall be parallel and directly
opposite sign faces oriented in opposite directions located not
more than 15 feet apart.
(c) All off-site advertising signs shall be constructed on a steel
unipole support meeting the industry-wide standards and shall
be designed and certified as accurate and of sound
§ 475-46 KENHORST CODE § 475-46
1:552
construction quality by a registered and certified professional
engineer, whose signature and seal shall appear on the face of
said plan, along with said certification.
(d) All off-site advertising signs shall conform to the building
height restrictions of the district controlling the location of the
structure. The height shall be measured from the bed of the
street, road, highway or alley to the highest part of the sign or
supporting structure.
(e) No off-site advertising sign shall be erected within 1,000 feet of
any other off-site advertising sign on the same side of any
street, road, highway or alley.
(f) No off-site advertising sign shall be erected closer than 20 feet
to the cartway or as specified by the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation.
(g) All off-site advertising signs shall be maintained in good and
safe structural condition. The painted portion of all off-site
advertising signs shall be kept in good condition.
(h) All newly erected off-site advertising signs shall conform to all
applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations.
(i) The general area in the vicinity of all off-site advertising signs
shall be kept free and clear of sign material, debris and adhere
to any and all Borough ordinances now in effect or as
hereinafter amended, including Chapter 341, Property
Maintenance, of the Code of the Borough of Kenhorst.263
(j) Off-site advertising signs may be illuminated; provided, that
the lighting shall be arranged in a manner which shall protect
neighboring properties and streets or roadways from direct
glare, beams or rays and shall not be of such intensity or
brilliance to cause impairment of the vision of any driver or
operator of any vehicle nor create hazardous interferences of
any kind.
(k) No off-site advertising signs shall be erected within 150 feet of
any street intersection. No off-site advertising sign shall be
erected or placed in any manner so as to interfere with or
impede the unobstructed vision of a motor vehicle operator
attempting to enter on or exit from any intersection with a
public or private roadway, or any driveway or parking facility.
F. Permit requirements.
(1) No sign shall be erected or maintained without the owner thereof
having first obtained a permit from the Borough, which shall be
263. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-46
1:553
issued by the Zoning Officer and/or the designated person or firm
authorized by Borough Council, only upon receipt of a written
application completed in duplicate, signed by the applicant and
accompanied by five copies of a plan of the property or tract
of land, prepared to scale, depicting dimensional limits of the
sign face, the perimeter boundaries as taken from the deed for
said tract, identifying the current owner of the tract, all adjacent
owners, the next closest intersecting public roadways and any
driveways or parking areas within 150 feet of the site, the proposed
location of the sign area to be transferred in fee or controlled by
lease and any and all easements or utility installation affecting such
site and accompanied by five copies of a plan of the sign prepared
to scale depicting the supporting structure and the specifications
of the materials and methods of construction and maintenance
to be employed, signed and certified by a registered licensed
professional engineer.
(2) Permit applications shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer and/or
the designated person or firm authorized by Borough Council for
compliance with this chapter and upon approval by both, a permit
shall be issued to remain in effect for a period of three years from
the date of issuance of the permit, subject to renewal for additional
three-year intervals upon written reapplication and presentation of
documentation establishing applicant's continued compliance with
the terms and conditions of this chapter concerning weed control,
maintenance, illumination and other terms not to include the
location of the site itself, but to include any terms or conditions
appearing on the face of the permit.
(3) Permit applications shall be accompanied by a check or cash in full
satisfaction of an initial application fee to be established by
resolution of Borough Council.
G. Supplementary sign regulations. The following supplementary sign
regulations shall apply to all zoning districts in the Borough:
(1) Projection. No sign shall project more than 12 inches from the
building facade to which it is attached. No freestanding sign may
project beyond the lot line or beyond a street right-of-way.
(2) Height. No sign that is a part of or is supported by a building shall
be erected upon the roof of such building, nor shall such sign
extend above the height of the building. Freestanding signs shall
meet the height requirements of the particular district in which
they are located.
(3) Clearance. No sign structure erected directly upon the ground
shall have less than three feet of clear space between such sign and
the ground; however, necessary supports may extend through such
open space.
§ 475-46 KENHORST CODE § 475-46
1:554
(4) Illumination. Signs may be lighted with nonglaring lights or may be
illuminated by shielded floodlights; provided, that lighting is
screened from adjacent properties, and meets PA DOT
requirements for lighted signs.
(5) Placement. No signs shall be permitted which are posted, stapled
or otherwise permanently attached to public utility poles or trees
within a street right-of-way. No portion of any freestanding sign
shall be located within five feet of any side lot line.
(6) Construction. All signs, except temporary signs, shall be
constructed of durable material and kept in good condition and
repair. Any sign which is allowed to become dilapidated may, after
30 days' notification, be removed by the Borough at the expense of
the owner or lessee of the property on which it is located.
(7) Modification of an existing sign. Any sign that is proposed to be
modified or altered, with the sole exceptions of changing messages
on an electronic or bulletin board style sign, shall be required to
obtain a sign permit for the modification prior to the
commencement of construction.
(8) No lighted signs of intermittent flashing animated or rotating types
shall be permitted.
(9) No sign other than those permitted by ordinance shall be erected
or maintained. Upon termination or abandonment of any building
or land use, all signs pertaining to that use must be removed within
60 days of said termination or abandonment.
(10)No sign shall be mounted or located in such a manner as to block or
restrict the operation of any door or window or to block or restrict
the movement into or out of any exit or entrance of a building or
driveway.
(11) A sign affixed to any vehicle or other object in such a manner that
the carrying of such sign or signs no longer is incidental to the
primary purpose of the vehicle or objects but becomes a primary
purpose in itself shall be prohibited.
H. Off-premises signs permitted. The following signs, which do not pertain
to the business or activity conducted on the premises upon which the
sign is located, are permitted in all districts with the express permission
of the property owner:
(1) Signs upon which are used for directing patrons, members or
audiences to service clubs, churches or nonprofit organizations
may be erected, subject to the following requirements:
(a) A sign shall indicate only the name of the organization and the
direction to the facility.
§ 475-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-46
1:555
§ 475-47. Hazardous areas.
(b) Only one such sign shall be erected prior to each intersection
turning movement to reach such facility.
I. Realty signs.
(1) Each parcel shall be permitted a maximum of one freestanding
realty sign advertising the parcel for sale.
(2) The maximum realty sign size is 36 inches by 48 inches.
(3) No realty signs may be affixed to a building without obtaining a
sign permit from the Borough.
(4) All realty signs not located on the parcel for sale shall be
considered temporary in accordance with § 475-29. Any realty sign
off premises will require a permit from the Borough.
J. Nonconforming signs, once removed, shall be replaced only with
conforming signs; however, nonconforming signs may be repainted or
repaired, provided that such repainted or repaired sign does not exceed
the dimensions of the existing sign. When the cost of repair or
restoration of any nonconforming sign shall exceed 50% of its original
value, said nonconforming sign shall be replaced with a conforming
sign.
K. Interference with traffic and safety. No sign shall be erected, placed or
maintained upon any public right-of-way, and no sign shall be erected,
placed or maintained so that it impedes, interferes with or distracts
from the operation of any traffic control light or sign, official traffic
directional sign or other traffic safety control device or general traffic
safety.
(1) No sign shall be located to obscure a motorist's view of roadway,
intersections, railway crossings, traffic signals, stop signs or other
warning devices.
(2) All signs shall be erected in conformance with the Federal Highway
Beautification Act.264
A. The Borough Planning Commission may identify areas of the Borough
such as, but not limited to, mine holes, quarries, sinkholes, waterways,
areas of naturally occurring physical features, areas of naturally
occurring minerals or chemicals, areas containing hazardous,
contaminated or toxic waste, waste disposal areas and/or waste storage
areas which are considered hazardous or contaminated. These areas
could endanger the public health, safety or welfare by presenting
potential hazards to life, health or property if development occurs in the
vicinity of such hazardous areas.
264. Editor's Note: See 23 U.S.C. § 131.
§ 475-46 KENHORST CODE § 475-47
1:556
§ 475-48. Public utility standards.
§ 475-49. Multifamily developments.265
Multifamily developments containing townhouses and/or apartments are
permitted by conditional use within the R-4 and M-1 Zoning Districts. If
a conditional use is granted by Borough Council, the following conditions
shall also apply:
B. The hazardous areas shall continue to be considered as such until, after
recommendation by the appropriate state, federal or county agency, the
Borough determines that the hazards have been eliminated or adequate
safeguards against such hazards have been provided.
C. Except as noted, no occupied building or well shall be located within
300 feet of an identified hazardous area.
D. An occupied building or well may be located within 300 feet of an
identified hazardous area; provided that a sufficient number of
excavations, borings and/or groundwater tests have been conducted
within the area. The test results shall conclusively determine that the
soil, geology and/or groundwater conditions are not considered
hazardous to the occupant(s). The accuracy of all test results and/or
conclusions shall be certified by a qualified professional.
E. All wells located within 300 feet of the hazardous area shall be retested
every two years by a certified laboratory to determine if the water is
potable. All costs incurred for the sampling and laboratory analysis
shall be incurred by the property owner. A copy of the certified results
shall be submitted to the Borough.
A. This chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed buildings or
extension thereof used or to be used by a public utility corporation or
communication corporation if, upon petition of the corporation, the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or Federal Communication
Commission shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or
proposed situation of the building in question is reasonably necessary
for the convenience or welfare of the public.
B. The Kenhorst Borough Planning Commission and Council shall have the
right to require that a land development plan be prepared by and
submitted by the representatives of the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission or Federal Communication Commission.
C. The land development plan shall be prepared to meet the goals,
objectives and requirements specified within the Borough
Comprehensive Plan, this chapter and Chapter 410, Subdivision and
Land Development.
265. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-49
1:557
A. The minimum amount of land within a multifamily development shall be
one acre.
B. The development shall be served by public sewage disposal facilities
and public water supply facilities.
C. The overall density of any multifamily development shall not exceed 12
dwelling units per acre.
D. The maximum building height shall be 40 feet.
E. A minimum of 30% of the gross area of the development shall be set
aside and dedicated as common open space. No more than 50% of the
required common open space shall be located on lands which are
wetlands and/or floodplain. No parts of the required common open
space shall be occupied by areas designated for utilities, drainage
facilities, easements and/or rights-of-way.
F. The common open space areas shall be suitable for the designated
purpose and contain no structure or parking facility, except as related
to and incidental to open space uses. Common open space areas may be
reserved for private use or dedicated to the Borough if acceptable to
the Borough. For land which is not dedicated to the Borough, written
agreements satisfactory to and approved by the Borough shall be made
for the perpetual preservation and maintenance of the undedicated
common open space areas.
G. In lieu of land being designated as common open space within the
proposed development, the applicant may offer a financial contribution
to the Borough of Kenhorst for the maintenance of its existing
recreational facilities. The amount of the fee shall be mutually
negotiated and agreed upon by the applicant and the Borough.
H. A system for pedestrian circulation throughout the development shall
be provided.
I. The maximum length of a proposed apartment building shall be 150
feet.
J. The total number of townhouses or other residential units in
combination with townhouses shall not exceed eight contiguous
residential dwelling units.
K. No apartment building shall be located within 50 feet of any property
line of the development. The horizontal distance between groups of
apartment buildings shall be a minimum of 50 feet between the closest
structural points.
L. No townhouse building shall be located within 20 feet of any property
line of the development. The horizontal distance between groups of
townhouse buildings shall be a minimum of 40 feet between the closest
structural points.
§ 475-49 KENHORST CODE § 475-49
1:558
§ 475-50. Single-family semidetached developments.266
Single-family semidetached developments are permitted by right within the
R-3 and R-4 Zoning Districts. The following conditions shall apply to singlefamily
semidetached developments:
M. No apartment building shall be located within 50 feet of any street
right-of-way line.
N. No townhouse building shall be located within 30 feet of any street
right-of-way line.
O. The minimum width of a townhouse shall be 20 feet.
P. No more than 30% of the total area of the development shall be covered
by buildings. No more than 50% of the total area of the proposed
development shall be covered by impervious surfaces.
Q. Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be completely
screened from view on three sides and all trash and rubbish shall be
contained in verminproof containers.
R. Common parking areas shall not be designed or located to require cars
to back into streets in order to leave the parking areas. All dead-end
parking lots shall provide adequate areas in which emergency and
commercial vehicles can safely maneuver.
S. Common parking areas and access drives shall be located a minimum of
10 feet from all structures and from the exterior lot lines of the
proposed development. Common parking areas shall be a minimum of
10 feet from all street rights-of-way.
T. Entrance and exitways to parking areas shall have a minimum width of
12 feet for each lane of traffic entering or leaving the areas.
U. Parking areas shall be designed to prevent through traffic to other
parking areas. No more than 60 parking spaces shall be accommodated
in any one parking area. All common parking areas shall be sufficiently
screened and landscaped in accordance with the standards specified
under § 475-34A, Buffer yards, of this chapter.
V. Entrances to and exits from common parking areas shall be located a
minimum of 100 feet from the point of intersection of the nearest street
curblines.
A. Single-family semidetached developments shall comply with the
minimum and maximum dimensional requirements specified below. All
minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall be imposed on
each individual dwelling unit.
266. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-50
1:559
§ 475-51. Two-family detached dwelling developments.
Two-family detached developments are permitted by conditional use in the
R-3 and R-4 Zoning Districts. The following conditions shall apply to twofamily
detached developments:
(1) Minimum regulations:
(a) Lot area: 3,000 square feet.
(b) Lot width: 40 feet.
(c) Building setback: 30 feet.
(d) Rear yard: 20 feet.
(e) Side yard:
[1] Total: 10 feet.
[2] One side: five feet.
(2) Maximum regulations:
(a) Building height: 35 feet.
(b) Lot coverage: 25%.
(c) Paved area: 40%.
B. The side yard setback shall not apply to a common lot line extending
from the common wall.
C. In addition to these standards and specifications, all proposed
developments containing single-family semidetached dwellings shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with all pertinent Borough
ordinances.
A. Two-family detached developments shall comply with the minimum and
maximum requirements specified below:
(1) Minimum regulations.
(a) Lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(b) Lot width: 80 feet.
(c) Building setback: 30 feet.
(d) Rear yard: 20 feet.
(e) Side yard:
[1] Total: 16 feet.
[2] One side: eight feet.
§ 475-50 KENHORST CODE § 475-51
1:560
§ 475-52. Tourist, bed-and-breakfast, rooming or boarding
houses.267
Tourist, bed-and-breakfast, rooming or boarding houses are permitted by
right within the M-1 Zoning District and by conditional use within the R-4
Zoning District. If permitted, the following conditions shall also apply:
§ 475-53. Salvage yard standards.
Salvage yards are permitted by special exception in the C-2 Zoning District.
If a special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board, the following
conditions shall apply:
(2) Maximum regulations.
(a) Building height: 35 feet.
(b) Lot coverage: 25%.
(c) Paved area: 40%.
B. In addition to these standards and specifications, all proposed
developments containing two-family detached dwellings shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with all pertinent Borough
ordinances.
A. A tourist, bed-and-breakfast, rooming or boarding house shall be
permitted only in a single-family detached dwelling and shall be owneroccupied
and on a single lot of record.
B. A tourist, bed-and-breakfast, rooming or boarding house shall not have
more than five rental units and shall not house more than 10 guests.
C. Each house shall contain complete washing and bathing facilities and a
central kitchen with complete cooking facilities. No cooking facilities of
any kind shall be permitted in any rental unit.
D. A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be required for each
occupant and guest of the house.
E. The applicant shall provide documentation to Borough Council that all
plumbing, heating, electrical, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and similar
facilities comply with all applicable ordinances, regulations and laws of
Kenhorst Borough and/or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. All salvage yards shall be enclosed with a fence a minimum of 15 feet in
height with gates. Gates shall be securely locked, except during
business hours when an adult attendant is on the premises.
267. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-53
1:561
§ 475-54. Adult business uses.268
Adult business uses have been defined under § 475-9 of this chapter. Adult
business uses are permitted as a special exception in the C-2 Zoning
District. If a special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board, the
applicant is subject to all of the conditions and standards specified below:
B. No operation, activity, use or occupation of any type for the salvage
yard shall be carried on within 100 feet of any property line and/or
within 100 feet of any street right-of-way.
C. A fifty-foot-wide buffer yard shall completely surround all areas used for
the storage of salvage material. The buffer yard shall sufficiently screen
all stored salvage material and fencing from the view of adjacent
property owners. No materials of any nature shall be stored within this
buffer yard; in addition, the buffer yard shall meet all pertinent
standards specified under § 475-34A of this chapter.
D. All salvage shall be stored and arranged so as to permit access by
firefighting equipment and to prevent any accumulation of stagnant
water. No materials of any nature shall be piled to a height of more than
six feet from the ground.
E. All liquids and/or fluids shall be drained from any junk or scrapped
automobiles. Liquids and/or fluids in an amount not exceeding 10
gallons may be stored aboveground in approved containers. Gasoline
which is kept on the premises shall not exceed 1,000 gallons and shall
be stored aboveground in a manner approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP), Underwriter
Laboratories and/or the State Fire Marshal. No garbage and/or organic
waste shall be permitted to be stored on any salvage yard.
A. No adult business use shall be located within 1,000 feet of any other
existing adult business use, as measured from the property lines on
which the adult business use is proposed to be located.
B. No adult business use shall be located within 200 feet (measured from
the property line) of any residential zoning district.
C. No adult business use shall be located within 500 feet (measured from
the property line) of any churches, monasteries, chapels, convents,
rectories, public playgrounds, public parks, public swimming pools,
public libraries.
D. No adult business use shall be located within 1,000 feet (measured from
the property line) of any schools up to or including the 12th grade or
equivalent, and their adjacent recreation areas.
268. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-53 KENHORST CODE § 475-54
1:562
E. No adult business use shall be located within 1,000 feet (measured from
the property line) of any private or public preschool and/or day-care
center.
F. An adult business use shall not be considered as a use which is
permitted as a home occupation, as defined and permitted under
§ 475-23 of this chapter.
G. All storage and displays shall be located in the building.
H. All business transactions that are conducted on the premises shall be in
an enclosed building. All adult business uses shall operate between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
I. Applications for adult business uses shall be accompanied by a site
plan. The minimum information required on the site plan shall include
the adult business use intended, the location and elevation of all
buildings, structures, walls, fences and landscaping on the site, the offstreet
parking areas and traffic circulation patterns, and the location,
dimensions and content of all signs, displays and advertising.
J. Applications for adult business uses shall include a statement providing
specific information on each individual, partner, store manager(s),
corporate officer, corporate director or corporate stockholders owning
more than 3% of the issued and outstanding stock of a corporate
applicant, comprising the applicant to include the complete name,
address and telephone number.
K. In the event of the proposed sale, resale or reassignment of interest of
an adult business use established under the terms of this chapter,
Borough Council shall be notified of such proposed change of
ownership. Such notification shall include the documentation required
in Subsection I of this section. Failure to notify the Board shall
constitute grounds for the termination or revocation of the conditional
use permit.
L. In addition to other applicable regulations of Kenhorst Borough and
state laws, the following shall apply to all adult business use signs and
other visible messages:
(1) Sign messages shall be limited to written descriptions of material
or services available on the premises.
(2) Sign messages shall not include any graphic or pictorial depiction
of material related to specific sexual activities or anatomical areas.
(3) Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials related to
specific sexual activities or anatomical area shall not be shown or
exhibited so as to be visible to the public from the exterior of the
building.
(4) Adult business uses shall be limited to two square feet in sign area,
with lettering on said signs not exceeding four inches in height.
§ 475-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-54
1:563
§ 475-55. Shopping centers.
Shopping centers are permitted by right in the C-2 Zoning District and shall
be subject to all conditions and standards specified below:
(5) The entrance of the adult business should include a sign warning
all individuals that the premises is classified as an adult business.
A. Shopping centers shall consist of harmonious land uses, structures and
services.
B. Permitted uses shall include retail business establishments, personal
business establishments, business, professional or banking offices,
restaurants, cafes or similar use and accessory uses associated with
shopping centers.
C. Shopping centers shall be in single ownership or under a guaranteed
unified management control. The shopping center must have at least
one on-site manager or a designated individual whose office and
residence is located within a reasonable distance of Kenhorst Borough
as determined appropriate by Borough Council. The owner shall
provide the Borough with a complete list of on-site managers or
designated individuals on an annual basis. The list shall include the
name, address and telephone number of each on-site manager or each
designated individual.
D. All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least 200 feet
from any other intersecting street and shall be designed to
accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner. The developer shall
be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control
devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or
deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation or the Borough. The developer will also be
responsible for any pertinent traffic studies that may be required by the
Borough of Kenhorst, County of Berks, and/or the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
E. Interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic
congestion at points of ingress and egress. Areas designated for the
loading or unloading of trucks and/or other commercial vehicles shall
be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering
with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities.
F. Lighting for buildings, signs, accessways and parking areas shall be
arranged so they do not reflect towards any public street or residential
zoning districts.
G. All principal buildings and structures for the shopping center shall be
located a minimum of 50 feet from any street right-of-way and a
minimum of 50 feet of any property line.
§ 475-54 KENHORST CODE § 475-55
1:564
§ 475-56. Professional office/research park.
Professional office/research parks are permitted by conditional use in the
C-2 Zoning District. All professional office/research parks shall be subject
to all pertinent conditions and standards specified below:
H. All lot lines shall be screened by a buffer yard with a minimum depth of
30 feet. The buffer yard shall be consistent with standards specified
under § 475-34A, Buffer yards, of this chapter.
I. Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened.
All containers shall be airtight, verminproof and have adequate storage
capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste. No such
storage area will be permitted within 30 feet from any lot line.
J. All signs shall be consistent with § 475-46 of this chapter.
K. All proposed shopping centers shall conform to the area, yard and
height regulations that are specified under § 475-19E of this chapter.
L. All proposed shopping centers, including all expansions, additions and/
or revisions are subject to the policies and provisions regarding land
development specified in the Chapter 410, Subdivision and Land
Development.
A. Office/research parks shall consist of harmonious land uses, structures
and services.
B. Permitted uses shall include business, professional or governmental
offices, laboratory and research facilities and accessory uses associated
with office/research parks.
C. Retail business and service establishments are permitted; provided,
they are designed and intended primarily to serve the employees within
the office/research park. These uses shall not exceed 5% of the gross
floor area of the office/research park.
D. All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least 200 feet
from any other intersecting street and shall be designed to
accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner. The developer shall
be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control
devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or
deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation or the Borough. The developer will also be
responsible for any pertinent traffic studies that may be required by
Kenhorst Borough, Berks County and/or the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation.
E. Interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic
congestion at points of ingress and egress. Areas designated for the
loading or unloading of trucks and/or other commercial vehicles shall
§ 475-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-56
1:565
§ 475-57. Wetlands.
be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering
with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities.
F. Lighting for buildings, signs, accessways and parking areas shall be
arranged so they do not reflect towards any public street or residential
zoning districts.
G. All principal buildings and structures for the professional office/
research park shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any property
line and a minimum of 50 feet of any street right-of-way.
H. All lot lines shall be screened by a buffer yard with a minimum depth of
30 feet. The buffer yard shall be consistent with standards specified
under § 475-34A, Buffer yards, of this chapter.
I. Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened.
All containers shall be airtight, verminproof and have adequate storage
capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste. No such
storage area will be permitted within 30 feet from any lot line.
J. All signs shall be consistent with § 475-46 of this chapter.
K. All proposed office/research parks shall conform to the individual area,
yard and height regulations that are specified under § 475-19E of this
chapter.
L. All proposed office/research parks, including all expansions, additions
and/or revisions are subject to the policies and provisions regarding
land development specified in Chapter 410, Subdivision and Land
Development.
A. The United States Army Corps of Engineers, in conjunction with the
Pennsylvania United States Environmental Protection Agency, have
defined the term "wetlands" as those areas that are inundated or
saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support,
a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and
similar areas. The three major characteristics of wetlands include
vegetation, soil and hydrology.
B. All land designated as "wetlands" within Kenhorst Borough are
regulated by state and federal agencies and are subject to their
regulations, controls and restrictions.
C. For all subdivision and land development applications, the Borough
shall determine whether a wetlands delineation will be required by a
qualified professional. Delineated wetlands shall be accompanied by a
technical report and data forms.
§ 475-56 KENHORST CODE § 475-57
1:566
§ 475-58. Floodplain Overlay District.
§ 475-59. Alternative energy systems.
D. Unless a jurisdictional determination has been completed by either the
Army Corps of Engineers, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and/or United States Environmental Protection Agency, a
twenty-five-foot buffer zone shall be applied to all areas delineated as
wetlands. Within this twenty-five-foot buffer zone, no earth disturbance
or land development activity shall be permitted.
E. If the applicant disputes any provisions specified under this section, the
applicant shall be responsible for a jurisdictional determination
conducted by either the Army Corps of Engineers, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and/or United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
F. All pertinent costs incurred as a result of the jurisdictional
determination shall be the responsibility of the applicant or developer
and not the Borough.
A. The Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs) shall be an overlay to the
existing underlying districts as depicted on the latest update to the
Kenhorst Borough Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. As such, these provisions regulating
floodplain management shall be a supplement to the underlying district
provisions.
B. The purpose of establishing provisions for floodplain management is to
promote and protect the general health, welfare and safety of the
community, encourage the utilization of appropriate construction
practices, minimize potential hazards to public health, reduce financial
burdens imposed on the community and government and to regulate all
development within the one-hundred-year floodplain.
C. The Borough of Kenhorst has adopted a floodplain ordinance, Chapter
241, Floodplain Management. The purpose and intent of this floodplain
ordinance is to provide controls, regulations and procedural
requirements for activities within the floodplain.
D. For the purposes of this chapter, all activities within the floodplain shall
conform with the requirements outlined under Chapter 241, Floodplain
Management, as amended.
A. Solar energy systems.
(1) The use of solar energy systems, including solar collectors, storage
facilities, distribution components, heating and cooling facilities, is
a permitted use in all zoning districts.
§ 475-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-59
1:567
(2) All developments and/or structures shall be oriented to the fullest
extent possible to maximize the use of passive and/or active solar
applications as would be appropriate for the site.
(3) Detached solar collectors used solely for such purposes shall be
considered permissible accessory structures in districts.
(4) The solar collector shall be used as part of the functioning solar
energy system.
(5) Abandonment and removal. Any solar panel (roof or ground) that
has not been in active and continuous service for a period of one
year shall be removed from the property to a place of safe and legal
disposal.
(6) The design of solar energy systems shall, to the extent reasonably
possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping
that will blend the facility into the natural setting and existing
environment.
(7) Setbacks, placement and height restrictions:
(a) Ground-mounted solar energy systems.
[1] A solar energy system must comply with all height
requirements for the zoning district where the solar
energy system is to be installed.
[2] All ground arrays shall be set back a distance of 1.1 times
the structure height from all property lines, building
setbacks, whichever is greater, or comply with the
required residential district or be in conformance with the
bulk standards in nonresidential districts as provided
herein.
[3] All exterior electrical and/or plumbing lines must be
buried below the surface of the ground and be placed in a
conduit if more than six feet from structure.
[4] Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not be located
in the required front yard setback.
[5] Ground arrays shall be located so that any reflection is
properly buffered from an adjoining property or roadway.
[6] The surface area of a ground-mounted system, regardless
of the mounted angle, shall be calculated as part of the
overall lot coverage. Of the allowable lot coverage, the
surface area of a ground-mounted system shall not
constitute more than 25% of the allowable lot coverage.
(b) Roof-mounted solar energy systems.
§ 475-59 KENHORST CODE § 475-59
1:568
[1] Permitted roof-mounted solar panels shall include
integrated solar panels as the surface layer of the roof
structure with no additional apparent change in relief or
projection, or separate flush-mounted solar panels
attached to the roof surface, unless solar pitch or system
efficiency dictates the need for relief to the satisfaction of
the Code Enforcement Officer.269
[2] The height of roof-mounted systems on the principal
buildings or accessory buildings shall not extend more
than three feet above the finished roof peak to which it is
mounted. In no instance shall any part of the system
extend beyond the edge of the roof.
[3] Solar roof-mounted panels shall be placed such that
concentrated solar radiation or glare shall not be directed
onto nearby properties or roadways.
B. Wind energy systems.
(1) Wind turbines for residential use shall be permitted as an accessory
use within all zoning district(s). However, zoning and building
permits must be obtained prior to the construction of the same, and
the same shall comply with the following:
(a) One personal wind turbine or windmill shall be permitted per
property.
(b) Personal wind turbines shall not be permitted within the front
yard of any property as defined by the Zoning Ordinance unless
permitted by Borough Council.
(c) Wind turbines shall not create noise which is perceptible
beyond the property line.
(d) The height of the wind turbine shall be a minimum of 15 feet
from the ground surface to the tip of the blade, and the turbine
height nor any position of the structure shall not be greater
than the shortest horizontal distance to any property line, but
cannot exceed 50 feet in height unless permitted by Borough
Council.
(e) Zoning and building permit applications for a wind turbine
shall include a statement from a registered professional
engineer indicating that acceptable structural engineering
principles have been applied to the proposed construction of
the unit which will result in a satisfactory level of safety. Such
statement shall address the forces on the foundation (including
live and dead loads), allowable and actual forces on cables,
269. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-59
1:569
§ 475-60. Filling, excavating and grading.
rods and braces, soil-bearing pressures, wind-loading forces
and the safety factor against overturning.
(2) A clearly visible warning sign concerning voltage must be placed at
the base of all pad-mounted transformers and substations.
(3) Visible, reflective, colored objects, such as flags, reflectors, or tape
shall be placed on anchor points of guy wires and along the guy
wires up to a height of 10 feet from the ground.
(4) Wind turbines shall not be climbable up to 15 feet above ground
surface.
(5) All access doors to wind turbines and electrical equipment shall be
locked or fenced, as appropriate, to prevent entry by nonauthorized
persons.
(6) Setbacks.
(a) Wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest occupied
building a distance of not less than the maximum setback
requirements for that zoning district where the turbine is
located or 1.1 times the turbine height/structure height,
whichever is greater. These setback distances shall be
measured from the center of the wind turbine base to the
building envelope of the occupied building.
(b) Wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest occupied
building located on a nonparticipating landowner's property a
distance of not less than five times the highest point of the
wind turbine to the nearest point on the building envelope of
the occupied building.
(c) All wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest property
line a distance not less than the maximum setback
requirements for that zoning district where the turbine is
located or 1.1 times the turbine height, whichever is greater.
The setback distance shall be measured to the center of the
wind turbine base.
(d) All wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest public road
a distance not less than 1.1 times the turbine height, as
measured from the right-of-way line of the nearest public road
to the center of the wind turbine base.
(7) The facility owner shall, at its expense, complete removal of any
wind turbines, within 12 months after the end of the useful life. The
wind turbines will be presumed to be at the end of its useful life, if
no electricity is generated for a period of 12 months.
§ 475-59 KENHORST CODE § 475-60
1:570
§ 475-61. Cellular and wireless communications.
§ 475-62. Blasting requirements.
A. All activities which require the moving of earth or the filling or
excavating of an area shall submit a plan to the Borough showing site
grading and erosion control measures. If required by the Borough, an
erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the Berks
County Conservation District for its review.
B. The existing grade of an area shall not be increased so that unstable
slopes are created.
C. The surface area of any yard adjacent to a building or structure shall be
graded so that the surface water will be drained away from such
structure.
D. Topsoil shall not be stripped from any site within Kenhorst Borough,
unless it is directly affiliated with the subdivision and/or development of
land. Unless otherwise permitted by the Kenhorst Borough Council,
topsoil shall not be removed from any site or development within the
Borough of Kenhorst.
E. The on-site burial of trees, stumps or construction materials is
prohibited. Trees and stumps may be chipped and spread on the site or
hauled from the site for proper disposal.
A. All cellular and wireless communication companies shall provide
written notice to the Kenhorst Borough Council of the intent to provide
service and/or structures within the Borough.
B. The cellular and wireless communication company shall research the
feasibility of locating any facilities on municipal or community-owned
lands prior to executing any agreements with any landowner.
C. All development shall be consistent with the development standards
and guidelines specified by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, Bureau of Aviation.
D. The Borough of Kenhorst has adopted a Telecommunication Facility
Ordinance. This ordinance shall be referenced as Chapter 424,
Telecommunications Towers and Antennas, of the Code of the Borough
of Kenhorst. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide
controls, regulations and procedural requirements for
telecommunications facilities within the Borough.
E. For the purposes of this chapter, all telecommunications facilities shall
conform with the requirements outlined under the Kenhorst Borough
Telecommunication Facility Ordinance, as amended.
§ 475-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-62
1:571
§ 475-63. Kennels.
A. All general blasting and/or detonation operations shall conform with the
regulations enforced by the aforesaid agencies of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the federal government.
B. Blasting shall be permitted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, and shall not be permitted on Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays.270
C. Written notice of all blasting operations shall be given at least 24 hours
prior to the commencement of blasting to the Borough and to the
occupants of all properties within a radius of 1,000 feet of the location
of blasting. In addition, notice shall be given to the regional fire
department, police department and all sensitive business ventures.
D. All blasting operations shall be conducted by a licensed blaster. A copy
of all applicable licenses and certificates of insurance shall be provided
to Kenhorst Borough at least 24 hours prior to the commencement of
blasting.
E. The storage of explosives shall not be permitted within the Borough of
Kenhorst.
A. A kennel shall be considered as a commercial establishment, structure,
lot or portion of a lot in which five or more domesticated pets more than
six months old are kept for the purpose of breeding, boarding, sale and/
or show.
B. The minimum area for a kennel operation shall be 10 acres.
C. No animal shelter shall be located within 100 feet (measured from the
property line) of any property line. No animal runs shall be permitted
within 50 of any property line.
D. The sewage disposal system and water supply system shall be sized and
permitted for the proposed use. The storage of any manure or animal
waste shall be kept in an enclosed structure and located at least 200
feet of any property line. A plan for manure management shall be
submitted to the Borough for approval.
E. Retail sales of related items shall be limited to a maximum floor area of
1,000 square feet. Shows and/or competitions which occur on the
property shall be limited to one per year.
F. The perimeter of the kennel operation shall be enclosed with a fence
with minimum height of eight feet with gates.
G. No animal which is kept on site shall be permitted outside between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
270. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-62 KENHORST CODE § 475-64
1:572
§ 475-64. Mobile home foundation requirements.
§ 475-65. Environmental and historical assessment statement.
A. Each mobile home shall be provided with a permanent concrete or
masonry foundation that will not heave, shift, settle or move due to
front action, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting on
the foundation. The foundation shall be of adequate size, material and
construction so as to be durable and adequate for the support of the
maximum anticipated loads during all seasons of the year. An open
space between a mobile home floor and a mobile home foundation shall
be permanently enclosed to prevent unauthorized entry and to conceal
supports and utility connections. Every mobile home shall be anchored
to the wind forces and uplift. The anchorage shall be adequate to
withstand wind forces and uplift as specified for buildings and
structures in the current building code of the Borough.271
B. The application for placement of the mobile home shall be accompanied
by specifications for the foundation and anchoring and calculations
indicating that the foundation and anchoring are adequate to meet the
standards of this section.
A. Applicability.
(1) An environmental and historical assessment statement shall be
required for any subdivision plan creating three or more lots.
(2) The assessment statement shall be prepared by a qualified
professional. Qualifications of the professional shall be submitted
by the Borough.
(3) For the environmental assessment, the study and statement shall
be completed by a professional engineer, wetlands scientist,
biologist, or related disciplines hired by the applicant.
(4) For the historical assessment, the study and statement shall be
completed by an expert in historic preservation, historical
architecture, or related disciplines hired by the applicant.
B. Content of assessment statements. The purpose of the assessment is to
determine the impact of the project on the existing site and the
resultant changes the proposal will have on the immediate site and
surrounding area. In the preparation of this document, only factual
information, not subjective qualitative statements, shall be presented.
(1) Overall description. Describe the proposed or recommended
actions, its purposes, where it is to be located, when it is proposed
to take place and its interrelationship with other projects or
proposals, including information and technical data sufficient to
permit assessment of environmental impact by reviewing agencies.
271. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 475-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-65
1:573
(2) Environmental description. Include a comprehensive description of
the existing environmental characteristics without the proposal
and the probable future environment with the proposals. This
description should focus both on the environmental details most
likely to be affected by the proposal and on broader regional
aspects of the environment, including ecological interrelationships,
existing land use, and wildlife habitat. Particular attention should
be given to the potential effects of past or present use of this site as
a dumping ground, repository of toxic or hazardous wastes, or
other potential sources of contamination.
(3) Historical description. Include a comprehensive description of the
historic resources in and around the site that will or may be
impacted. The description should focus on both registered and
unregistered buildings, sites, and areas. Particular attention should
be given to potential noise, light and aesthetic impacts from the
proposal.
(4) The environmental and historical impact of the proposed action.
These impacts are defined as direct or indirect changes in the
existing environment, historical structures and character of the
area, either beneficial or detrimental. These impacts should be
quantified. This discussion should include the impact not only upon
the natural environment but upon land as well. Provide separate
discussions for such potential impacts as man-caused accidents
and natural catastrophes and their probabilities and risks. Specific
mention should also be made of unknown or partially understood
impacts.
(5) Mitigating measures included in the proposed action. Include a
discussion of measures which are proposed to be taken or which
are required to be taken to enhance, protect or mitigate impacts
upon the environment, including any associated research or
monitoring. The beneficial and adverse effects of the alternatives
should be discussed, along with the reasons for rejection. Where
appropriate, consideration should be given to alternate
construction methods which may avoid degradation.
C. Detailed environmental assessment. The applicant shall prepare an
Existing Conditions Map of the parcel, which shall identify and
calculate the areas composed of the following resources:
(1) Natural resources.
(a) Special flood hazard areas (one-hundred-year);
(b) Wetlands;
(c) Watercourses, including lakes, ponds and streams;
(d) Areas of steep slope, including areas of very steep slopes (25%
and over) and areas of steep slopes (between 15% and 25%);
§ 475-65 KENHORST CODE § 475-65
1:574
(e) Woodlands;
(f) Wetland margins (the areas within 100 feet of a wetland).
(2) Man-made resources.
(a) Existing and proposed roadways;
(b) Existing and proposed rights-of-way (including utility and
access rights-of-way).
D. Detailed historic resource assessment. The applicant shall prepare a
written report with supporting plans, maps and photographs to clearly
document and describe the following:
(1) Background information.
(a) A general site description, including topography, watercourses,
vegetation, landscaping, existing drives and other site
features.
(b) General description of all historic resources located on the
subject tract, on tracts immediately adjacent to the subject
tract or within 100 feet of the subject tract.
(c) Physical description of all historic resources.
(d) Statement of the significance of each historic resource, both
relative to the Borough and region in general.
(e) Sufficient numbers of photographs to show every historic
resource.
(f) Narrative description of the historical development of the
subject tract.
(2) Proposed alterations.
(a) General description of project, including timetable or phases.
(b) Description of impact on each identified historic resource, with
regard to architectural integrity, historic setting and future
use.
(c) General description of effect and noise, traffic, blasting and
other demolition or excavation activities and any other impacts
generated by the proposed change on each historic resource.
(3) Mitigation measures. A plan for mitigating the project's impact on
historic resources, including design alternatives, buffering,
landscaping and any other appropriate measures permitted under
the terms of this chapter and other ordinances shall be submitted
for review and approval by Planning Commission.
§ 475-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-66
1:575
§ 475-66. Demolition by neglect.
No building or structure shall be demolished by neglect. Demolition by
neglect includes leaving a building or structure open, vulnerable to
vandalism, decay by the elements, or as otherwise defined in the property
maintenance code adopted by the Borough.272 Demolition by neglect will
be considered to be the readily observable deterioration of a building or
structure due to lack of routine maintenance. Unoccupied structures should
be tightly sealed and/or secured by fencing. If a building or structure
becomes partially or wholly demolished by neglect, the Borough may,
however is not obligated to, enter the property to either seal and secure
or demolish the building or structure upon thirty-day notification to the
property owner when the owner has not attempted to correct the violation.
§ 475-67. Group homes.
Group homes are facilities, associated with an institution of higher
education, which are designed or used as a residence for students enrolled
at said institution of higher learning. Group homes are subject to the
following regulations:
§ 475-68. Student housing.
A. Off-street parking shall be provided as set forth in § 475-43C of this
chapter.273
B. A nonstudent, full-time resident manager is required to live on the
premises.
C. The facility must be officially recognized or owned by the college or
university.
D. The frequency and duration of organized outdoor activities and social
events shall be limited to a maximum of one per calendar quarter to
minimize adverse impacts on neighboring properties.
A. The occupancy of a dwelling shall be regulated by the definition of
"family."
B. A student home shall meet the same regulations as apply to the type of
dwelling unit, in addition to the student home regulations.
C. The owner of any existing student home shall register its location with
the Zoning Officer. Failure to register will be cause for eviction.274
D. All student homes are subject to the provisions of Chapter 362, Rental
Property.
272. Editor's Note: See Ch. 341, Property Maintenance.
273. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
274. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-66 KENHORST CODE § 475-68
1:576
E. Where a student home is lawfully nonconforming because it is occupied
by three or less college or university students, the use shall only be
allowed to continue in such nonconforming manner if the owner
registers such nonconformity with the Zoning Officer within 60 days
after the enactment of this chapter or the amendment that made the
use nonconforming.275
F. For all new student housing, the zoning application shall include a site
plan and architectural plans, drawn to scale. All new student housing
plans and all applications to register existing student housing with the
Zoning Officer shall also demonstrate the location and dimensions of
off-street parking, private entrances, and walkways, the dimensions and
square footage of each room and storage space and shall indicate the
intended use of each room.276
G. The housing arrangement must meet the standards for the Borough of
Kenhorst building, housing and fire codes as required for residential
rental properties. The owner must verify to the Zoning Officer on an
annual basis that the building meets all of the plumbing, electrical,
heating, building, fire and similar standards set by the Borough and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.277
H. The owner of any student housing dwelling must be able to demonstrate
to the Zoning Officer each year that there is sufficient off-street parking
to allow for the number of spaces required by § 475-43C of this chapter.
Student housing units are limited in occupancy to the number of offstreet
parking spaces per student/occupant of the dwelling unit as
provided in § 475-43C of this chapter. In the event an existing student
home is nonconforming as it relates to parking criteria, the owner shall
have one year from the adoption of this chapter to demonstrate parking
that complies with this chapter.278
I. No cooking facilities of any kind shall be located in any room except the
central kitchen.
J. Every bedroom shall be at least 70 square feet of floor area and there
shall be no more than two occupants per bedroom.
K. No basement or cellar shall be used as a habitable bedroom unless
appropriate relief is granted pursuant to the Borough Rental
Ordinance.279
275. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
276. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
277. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
278. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
279. Editor's Note: See Ch. 362, Rental Property.
§ 475-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-68
1:577
§ 475-69. Building conversions.
§ 475-70. Airport Hazard District.
L. No student home shall be located within 500 linear feet of any other lot
on which is established a student home, except by variance, measured
by the shortest distance between the two lots where the proposed
student home is located (including but not limited to each existing
student home use located in any district which is of a different
designation than the district in which the new student home use is
proposed).
M. A single-family detached dwelling used as a student home shall have a
floor area of at least 1,000 square feet, exclusive of basements, garages
and accessory buildings.
N. A student home shall meet the area and bulk requirements for the type
of dwelling in the applicable zoning district where such use is proposed.
O. The owner of a student home, or the agent or manager of the student
home, shall annually register the student home per the provisions of the
Borough Rental Ordinance.
P. Except as noted above relative to nonconformities, student housing
shall not be permitted in any zoning district except as explicitly set
forth in this chapter.
A. All building conversions shall be considered special exceptions,
regardless of if the proposed use is permitted by right or conditional
use.
B. All conversions of an existing structure shall meet all applicable
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for the proposed use unless a
variance is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. Upon approval by the Zoning Hearing Board for a new use, a zoning
permit is required.
D. Permitting in accordance with Borough standards of any modifications
to the structure or parcel are required prior to the commencement of
work.
A. Relationship to other provisions. The provisions of this section create
an overlay zoning district which is applicable within airport surface
zones in all other zoning districts established by this chapter. To the
extent the provisions of this section are applicable and more restrictive,
they shall supersede conflicting provisions within all other sections of
this chapter and all other ordinances of Kenhorst Borough. However, all
other provisions of all other sections of this chapter and all other
ordinances of Kenhorst Borough shall remain in full force.
§ 475-68 KENHORST CODE § 475-70
1:578
B. Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section,
shall have the meanings given to them in this subsection, unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
AIRPORT ELEVATION — The highest point of an airport's usable
landing area measured in feet above sea level.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure or object, natural or man-made, or
use of land which obstructs the airspace required for flight or aircraft
in landing or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA — Any area of land or water upon which an
airport hazard might be established if not prevented as provided for in
this section.
APPROACH SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface longitudinally
centered on the extended runway center line and extending outward
and upward from each end of the primary surface. An approach surface
is applied to each end of the runway based on the planned approach.
The inner edge of the approach surface is the same width as the
primary surface and expands uniformly depending on the planned
approach. The approach surface zone.
CONICAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface extending
outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at
a slope of 20 feet horizontally to one foot vertically for a horizontal
distance of 4,000 feet.
FAA — Federal Aviation Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation.
HEIGHT — For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones
set forth in this section and shown on the Zoning Map, the datum shall
be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary plan 150 feet above
the established airport elevation that is constructed by swinging arcs of
various radii from the center of the end of the primary surface and then
connecting the adjacent arc by tangent lines. The radius of each arc is
based on the planned approach.
LARGER-THAN-UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for
and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than
12,500 pounds' maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any preexisting structure, object of natural
growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this
section or an amendment thereto.
NON-PRECISION-INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an
existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation
facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation
equipment, for which a straight-in non-precision-instrument approach
procedure has been approved or planned.
§ 475-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-70
1:579
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth, or other object, including a
mobile object which exceeds a limiting height set forth by this section.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing
System (ILS) or a Precision Approach Radar (PAR). It also means a
runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so
indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other planning
document.
PRIMARY SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface longitudinally
centered on the runway, extending 200 feet beyond the end of paved
runways or ending at each end of turn runways. The elevation for any
point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest
point on the runway center line.
RUNWAY — A defined area of an airport prepared for landing and
takeoff of aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE — An object, including a mobile object, constructed or
installed by man, including but without limitation, buildings, towers,
cranes, smokestacks, earth formation and overheard transmission lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface that
extends outward and upward from the edge of the primary surface to
the horizontal surface at a slope of seven feet horizontally to one foot
vertically. The transitional surface zone as shown on the Zoning Map is
derived from the transitional surface.
TREE — Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and intended to
be used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds' maximum gross
weight or less.
VISUAL RUNWAY — A runway intended solely for the operation of
aircraft using visual approach procedures.
C. Airport approach surface zone. In order to carry out the provisions of
this section, there is hereby created and established a certain zone
which includes all of the land lying beneath the approach surface as it
applies to the Reading Regional Airport, and is shown on the Zoning
District Map.
D. Airport surface zone height limitations. Except as otherwise provided in
this section, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and
no tree or other natural growth shall be allowed to grow in any zone
created by this section to a height in excess of the applicable height
limit herein established for such zone. The datum for all height limits
shall be mean sea level elevation. Such applicable height limitations are
hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows:
(1) Utility runway visual approach surface zone. Slopes 20 feet
outward for each one foot upward beginning at the end of the
runway and at the same elevation as the primary surface, 343 feet
§ 475-70 KENHORST CODE § 475-70
1:580
above mean sea level, and extending to a horizontal distance of
5,000 feet along the extended runway center line.
(2) Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this section shall be
construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any
structure, or growth of any tree or other natural growth to a height
up to 35 feet above the surface of the land.
E. Airport zoning requirements.
(1) Use restrictions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
section, no use may be made of land or water within any zone
established by this section in such a manner as to create electronic
interference with navigational signals or radio communication
between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to
distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare or
smoke in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the
vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in
any other way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or
maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
(2) Nonconforming uses.
(a) Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this
section shall not be construed to require the removal,
lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree
or other natural growth not conforming to the regulations as of
the effective date of this chapter, or otherwise interfere with
the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing contained
herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration,
or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration
of which has begun prior to the effective date of this chapter,
and is diligently executed.
(b) Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding
provision of this section, the owner of any existing
nonconforming structure or tree or other natural growth is
hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and
maintenance thereon nearby of such markers and lights as
shall be deemed necessary by the Airport Administrator to
indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport
the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and
light shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the
expense of the owner, municipality, or Reading Regional
Airport.
F. Permits and variances. The following specific requirements pertaining
to permits and variances within the Airport Hazard District shall be
applicable in addition to the ordinance requirements:
(1) Future uses. Except as specifically provided hereunder, no material
change shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be
§ 475-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-70
1:581
erected or otherwise established, and no tree or other natural
growth shall be planted in any zone hereby created within this
section unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and
granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose
for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to
permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure,
or tree or other natural growth would conform to the regulations
herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the
permit shall be granted.
(a) In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and
conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground,
except when, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic
features, such tree or structure would extend above the height
limits prescribed for such zones.
(b) In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a
horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of
the runway, no permit shall be required for any structure or
tree or other natural growth less than 75 feet of vertical height
above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land
contour or topographic features, such structure or tree or
other natural growth would extend above the height limit
prescribed for such approach zones.
(c) In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones
beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zones, no permit shall
be required for any structure or tree or other natural growth
less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except
when such structure or tree or other natural growth, because
of terrain, land contour, or topographic feature, would extend
above the height limit prescribed for such transitions zones.
(d) Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any
construction, or alteration of any structure, or growth of any
tree or other natural growth in excess of any of the height
limits established by this section, except that no permit is
required to make maintenance repairs to or to replace parts of
existing structures which do not enlarge or increase the height
of an existing structure.
(2) Existing uses. Before any nonconforming structure may be
replaced, substantially altered or rebuilt or any nonconforming tree
or other natural growth is allowed to grow higher or replanted, a
permit must be secured from the Zoning Officer. No permit shall be
granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an
obstruction or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree or
other natural growth to become a greater hazard to air navigation
§ 475-70 KENHORST CODE § 475-70
1:582
than it was on the effective date of this chapter or any amendments
thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made.
(3) Variance. As regulated by Act 164280 and defined by 14 CFR
77.13(a) (as amended or replaced), any person who plans to erect a
new structure, to add to an existing structure, or to erect and
maintain any object (natural or man-made), in the vicinity of the
airport, shall first notify the Department's Bureau of Aviation (BOA)
by submitting PennDOT Form AV-57 to obtain an obstruction
review of the proposal at least 30 days prior to commencement
thereof. Any application for a variance shall be accompanied by a
determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the
effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities
and the safe, efficient use of navigable air space. Additionally, no
application for variance to the requirements of this section may be
considered by the Zoning Hearing Board unless a copy of the
application has been furnished to the Airport Manager (or person
of equal description) for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the
variance. If the Airport Manger (or person of equivalent
description) does not respond to the application within 15 days
after receipt, the Zoning Hearing Board may act without such input
to grant or deny said application. Any request for a variance shall
include documentation in compliance with 14 CFR Part 77, Subpart
B (FAA Form 7460-1, as amended or replaced). Determinations of
whether to grant a variance will depend on the determinations
made by the FAA and the Department's BOA as to the effect of the
proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe,
efficient use of navigable air space. In particular, the request for a
variance shall consider which of the following categories the FAA
has placed the proposed construction in:
(a) No objection. The subject construction is determined not to
exceed obstruction standards, and marking/lighting is not
required to mitigate potential hazard. Under this
determination, a variance shall be granted.
(b) Conditional determination. The proposed construction/
alteration is determined to create some level of encroachment
into an airport hazard area which can be effectively mitigated.
Under this determination, a variance shall be granted
contingent upon implementation of mitigating measures.
(c) Objectionable. The proposed construction/alteration is
determined to be a hazard and is thus objectionable. A
variance shall be denied, and the reasons for this
determination shall be outlined to the applicant.
(d) Such requests for variances shall be granted where it is duly
found that a literal application or enforcement of the
280. Editor's Note: See 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq.
§ 475-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-70
1:583
§ 475-71. Unconventional gas operations and facilities.
regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and that relief
granted will not be contrary to the public interest, will not
create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice and
will be in accordance with the intent of this section.
(4) Hazard marking and lighting. In granting any permit or variance
under this section, the Zoning Hearing Board shall, if it deems the
action advisable to effectuate the purpose of this section and
reasonable under the circumstances, so condition the permit or
variance to install, operate and maintain thereon such markers and
light as may be required by guidelines or regulations adopted by
the Federal Aviation Administration.
(5) Notice to department. The Zoning Hearing Board, upon the
decision to grant a permit or variance under this section, shall
notify the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of
Aviation, of its decision. This notice shall be in writing and shall be
sent to the Department of Transportation at the same time as to the
applicant. The decision shall not be effective for 10 days after it is
rendered to allow the Department of Transportation time within
which to appeal the decision.
G. Acquisition of air rights. In any case in which it is desired to remove,
lower or otherwise terminate a nonconforming structure or use, or the
approach protection necessary cannot, because of constitutional
limitations, be provided by airport zoning regulations, or it appears
advisable that the necessary approach protection be provided by
acquisition of property rights, rather than by airport zoning regulations,
the Borough, or the authority owning the airport or served by it, may
acquire by purchase, grant or condemnation, in the manner provided by
the law under which the Borough is authorized to acquire real property
for public purposes, such air right, aviation easement or other estate or
interest in the property or nonconforming structure or use in question
as may be necessary to effectuate the purpose of this section. In the
case of the purchase of any property or any easement or estate, or
interest therein, or the acquisition thereof by the power of eminent
domain, the Borough or authority shall, in addition to the damages for
the taking, injury or destruction of property, also pay the cost of the
removal and the relocation of any structure or any public utility which is
required to be moved to a new location. The Borough must be notified
by the Airport Authority in such case.
A. All unconventional gas operations and facilities shall be governed by
Title 58 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes.
B. Well and pipeline location assessment operations, including seismic
operations and related activities conducted in accordance with all
applicable federal and state laws and regulations shall be permitted in
all zoning districts.
§ 475-70 KENHORST CODE § 475-71
1:584
C. Kenhorst Borough shall have a review period of 120 days for conditional
use review of all activities related to the development of unconventional
gas operations and facilities.
D. All wells shall be located in accordance with Section 3215 of PA Title 58,
"Oil and Gas."281
281. Editor's Note: See 58 Pa.C.S.A. § 3215.
§ 475-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-71
1:585

ARTICLE VI
Nonconformities
§ 475-72. Application and intent.
§ 475-73. Nonconforming lots of record.
A. Within the zoning districts established by this chapter or subsequent
amendments thereto, there exists or will exist certain nonconformities
which, if lawful before this chapter was passed or amended, may be
continued, subject to certain limitations, although such
nonconformities would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the
terms of this chapter or future amendments thereto.
B. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any
building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter and on which
actual building construction has been diligently carried on.
A. Any lot shown on a recorded subdivision plan on the effective date of
this chapter or after the enactment of subsequent amendments thereto
which does not meet the minimum size or width requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located may be used for a use permitted by
use regulations of that district; provided, that all yard, height, coverage
and open space requirements of the zoning district shall be met;
provided, however, that when a subdivider has had an application for
approval of a preliminary or final subdivision plan approved prior to the
effective date of this chapter, no provision and/or regulation in this
chapter shall be applied to affect adversely the right of the subdivider
to commence and complete any aspect of the approved preliminary or
final plan within such time periods as are established within the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as amended).282
B. Any lot held in single and separate ownership on the effective date of
this chapter or after the enactment of subsequent amendments thereto
which does not meet the minimum size or width requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located may be used for any use permitted
in that district; provided, that all yard, height, coverage and open space
requirements of the district are met; provided, however, that if two or
more lots, combination of lots or portions of lots with continuous
frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or
amendment of this chapter, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the
requirements established for lot width and/or area, the land involved
shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this
chapter.
C. No portion of any lot or tract of land shall be used or sold in a manner
which diminishes compliance with lot width or area requirements
282. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 475-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-73
1:587
§ 475-74. Nonconforming uses of land.
Lawful uses of land, which at the effective date of this chapter or
subsequent amendment thereto become nonconforming, such
nonconforming use or uses may be continued by the present or any
subsequent owner so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
provision listed with the following subsections:
§ 475-75. Nonconforming structures or buildings.
Lawful nonconforming structures or buildings which at the effective date of
this chapter or subsequent amendment thereto become nonconforming by
reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on
the lot or other requirements concerning the building or structures, may be
continued as long as they remain otherwise lawful, subject to the provisions
listed in the following subsections:
established by this chapter; nor shall any division of any parcel be made
which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements which
are stated within this chapter.
A. Extension. A nonconforming land use shall not be enlarged, increased
and/or extended in order to occupy a greater area of land than was
occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
B. Discontinuance. Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued
for a period of 12 consecutive months, such use shall not thereafter be
reestablished, except if the owner of such property files, within 30 days
of date of discontinuance, a certificate of intention to maintain such
use. If such certificate is filed, the time period which a nonconforming
use may be discontinued and still be reestablished shall be extended by
a twelve-month period.
C. Changes or moving of use. A nonconforming use, if changed to a
conforming use, shall not thereafter be changed back to any
nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may be changed to a
conforming use or to a nonconforming use of a less offensive nature. A
nonconforming use shall not be moved in whole or in part to any portion
of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
D. Additional structures. No additional structures not conforming to the
requirements of this chapter shall be erected in connection with such
nonconforming use of land.
A. Enlargement.
(1) A nonconforming use, building or structure shall not be enlarged or
increased upon land not owned, leased or under option to purchase
at the time of the enactment of this chapter.
§ 475-73 KENHORST CODE § 475-75
1:588
§ 475-76. Nonconforming use of structures or buildings or of
buildings and land in combination.
Lawful nonconforming structures or buildings, or structures or buildings
and land in combination, which exist at the effective date of this chapter
or subsequent amendments thereto, that would not be allowed under the
terms of this chapter, may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the provisions listed under the following subsections:
(2) A nonconforming building or structure shall not be enlarged,
increased, repaired, maintained or modified in any manner which
will further violate any applicable area, yard, and height regulation
imposed by this chapter, except that a principal building which
existed at the effective date of this chapter which is nonconforming
as to a yard requirement may have repairs, improvements,
modifications and/or additions made to those portions of the
building located within the required yard; provided, that no repair,
improvement, modification and/or addition shall be made which
will cause any part of the building to project into the yard farther
than the building did at the effective date of this chapter.
(3) Total future expansion of a nonconforming use shall not exceed
50% of the area occupied by the use at the time of the effective date
of this chapter.
B. Damage or destruction. A nonconforming building or structure which
has been damaged by fire, explosion, accident and/or calamity may be
reconstructed and used for the same nonconforming use; provided, that
the reconstructed building or structure does not exceed the area,
volume and height of the destroyed buildings or structure. In addition,
building reconstruction shall be started within one year from the date
the building or structure was destroyed and shall be carried through
without interruption.
C. Moving of structure. No nonconforming structure or building shall be,
for any reason, moved for any distance unless it shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it
is moved.
A. Enlargement.
(1) An existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter
in the district where it is located may be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed or structurally altered up to, but not
more than, 25% of its floor and/or use area as it existed at the time
of the passage of this chapter or subsequent amendment; provided,
that the lot or lost upon which the nonconforming structure is
situated where in single ownership or long-term lease and
purchased or leased prior to the enactment or amending of this
chapter.
§ 475-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-76
1:589
§ 475-77. Unsafe or unlawful structures.
If a nonconforming structure or building or portions thereof containing a
nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe due to lack of repairs and
maintenance and is declared by an duly authorized official appointed by the
Board of Borough Council to be unsafe by reason of physical condition, it
shall not thereafter be restored, repaired or rebuilt, except in conformity
with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
§ 475-78. Permitted special exception uses.
Any use which is permitted as a special exception in a zoning district under
the terms of this chapter (other than a change through Zoning Hearing
Board action from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use)
shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such zoning district, but shall,
without further action, be considered a conforming use.
(2) Any enlargement, extension, construction, reconstruction or
structural alteration must conform to all other regulations of the
district in which it is located. This provision may be used only once
for each nonconforming structure.
(3) Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout the building
which was in use for the nonconforming use at the time of adoption
of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any
land outside such building unless provided for under this section.
B. Change of use. A nonconforming use of a structure, or premises and
structure, may be changed to another nonconforming use; provided,
that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the
district than the existing nonconforming use. Such determination shall
be made by a special exception granted from the Zoning Hearing Board,
which shall take into consideration, among other things, the intent of
the provisions for the district.
C. Discontinuance. Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in
or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use,
shall thereafter comply with the regulations for the district and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. When a
nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for 12 consecutive months,
the structure or structure and premises in combination, shall not
thereafter be used, except in conformity with the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
D. Destruction. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure
and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure
shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land and use.
"Destruction," for the purpose of this subsection, is defined as damage
to an extent of more than 75% of the market value at the time of
destruction.
§ 475-76 KENHORST CODE § 475-79
1:590
§ 475-79. Registration of nonconformities.
To facilitate the administration of this chapter, the property owner shall
inform the Borough Zoning Officer, or the person or firm designated by
Borough Council, as to the status of nonconforming uses, structures and
buildings. The burden of proof that the use, lot, structure or building is a
nonconformity shall be the responsibility of the property owner. All known
nonconformities shall be a matter of public record and shall constitute
sufficient notice and the limitations therein expressed and implied to any
transferee acquiring any right to use or own such property.
§ 475-80. Certification of intention.
A. A certificate of intention shall be required in all instances where a
nonconforming use of land or nonconforming use of a structure or
building is discontinued if the owner or operator of such uses desires to
maintain such a nonconforming use.
B. The Zoning Officer or the person or firm designated by Borough Council
shall maintain proper forms for the registration of any certificate of
intention. It shall be incumbent upon the owner or applicant to file such
a form with the Zoning Officer or the person or firm designated by
Borough Council. The filing of such form shall be considered a
ministerial duty of the Zoning Officer or the person or firm designated
by Borough Council, who shall not refuse to accept the completed form.
C. The Zoning Officer or the person or firm designated by Borough Council
shall maintain a record of all certificates of intention.
D. Each certificate of intention shall be valid for three years.
§ 475-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-80
1:591

ARTICLE VII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 475-81. General procedures.
§ 475-82. Permits and certificates.
A. Persons desiring to undertake any new construction, structural or site
alteration, or changes in the use of a building or lot shall apply to the
Borough Zoning Officer or the person or firm designated by Borough
Council for a zoning permit by filling out the appropriate application
form and by submitting the required fee.
B. The Zoning Officer or the person or firm designated by Borough Council
shall either issue the zoning permit or shall refuse the permit,
indicating in writing the reason for refusal. Certain construction,
alterations or uses may require approval from the Kenhorst Borough
Council, Planning Commission and/or Zoning Hearing Board.
C. If refused a permit by the Zoning Officer or the person or firm
designated by Borough Council, the applicant may appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board for further consideration.
D. After the zoning permit has been received by the applicant, he may
undertake the action permitted by the zoning permit.
E. Upon completion of such action, the applicant may apply to the Borough
Zoning Officer or the person or firm designated by Borough Council for
an occupancy permit (where such a permit is required).
F. If the Zoning Officer or the person or firm designated by Borough
Council finds that the action of the applicant is in accordance with the
zoning permit and any other required permits, he shall issue an
occupancy permit allowing the premises to be occupied.
A. Zoning permit.
(1) No person shall erect, alter, convert, move or add to any building,
structure or sign, or alter the use of any land or structure, until the
Zoning Officer or the person or firm designated by Borough Council
issues a zoning permit to the person/applicant for said change or
construction. No zoning permit is required for normal maintenance
and repairs.
(2) A zoning permit for a permitted use may be issued by the Zoning
Officer or the person or firm designated by Borough Council. A
zoning permit for a use requiring a special exception or variance
shall be issued by the Zoning Officer or the person or firm
designated by Borough Council only upon the written order and
consent of the Zoning Hearing Board after all hearing procedures.
§ 475-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-82
1:593
(3) An application for a special exception, variance, or for
interpretation of any part or provisions of this chapter shall be
made to the Zoning Hearing Board on forms which may be obtained
from the Borough. Any uses permitted by right or by special
exception are subject to any conditional uses to those applicable
provisions which may apply to the use. Borough Council and the
Planning Commission shall regulate all conditions specified under
this chapter.
(4) All applications shall be made in writing and shall be accompanied
by three sets of plans indicating or illustrating the following
information if applicable:
(a) Actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon
prepared by a licensed surveyor or engineer.
(b) The exact size and location on the lot of buildings, structures or
signs existing and/or proposed extensions thereto prepared by
a licensed surveyor or engineer.
(c) The number of dwelling units, if applicable.
(d) Parking spaces provided and/or loading facilities.
(e) Statement indicating the existing or proposed use.
(f) Height of structure, building or sign.
(g) All other information necessary for such Zoning Officer and/or
the person or firm designated by Borough Council to determine
conformance with and provide for enforcement of this chapter.
(h) A detailed scaled drawing of the signs showing intended
location and stating how it shall be affixed.
(i) A statement indicating the type of construction and the manner
of installation for signs, together with the materials to be used.
(j) A written agreement that the applicant is the owner of the
premises on which the sign will be erected or that the
applicant has obtained the consent of the owner or lessee of
such premises to erect such sign.
(k) A written agreement that the sign shall be erected according to
the accompanying plans and specifications.
(5) One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the
Zoning Officer or the person or firm designated by Borough Council
after he shall have marked such copies either as approval or
disapproval and attested to the same by his signature on such copy.
One copy of such plans shall be retained by the Zoning Officer or
the person or firm designated by Borough Council for his
§ 475-82 KENHORST CODE § 475-82
1:594
permanent records and one copy shall be retained by Borough
Council.
(6) Approval or denial of the requested zoning permit shall be made
not later than 30 days from the date of application. In denying a
zoning application, the Zoning Officer or the person or firm
designated by Borough Council shall inform the applicant of the
reasons for denial and specify the provision(s) of this chapter which
have not been satisfied. Applicants shall be informed of their rights
of appeal and provided with all necessary information to pursue
such appeals.
(7) Zoning permits shall expire within six months from date of
issuance, if the work described in any permit has not begun. If work
described in any zoning permit has begun, said permit shall expire
after one year, exclusive of any time required for administration
and permitting, from date of issuance thereof, within which time
said work shall be completed.
B. Certificate of use and occupancy.
(1) A certificate of use and occupancy shall be required upon the
completion of the work authorized. It shall be unlawful to use and/
or occupy any structure, building and/or portions thereof in any
manner until a certificate of use and occupancy has been issued by
the Zoning Officer or the person or firm designated by Borough
Council.
(2) The application for certificate of use and occupancy shall be
submitted on such form as the Zoning Officer or the person or firm
designated by Borough Council may prescribe.
(3) The Zoning Officer or the person or firm designated by Borough
Council shall inspect any structure, building, sign and/or land or
portions thereof and shall determine the conformity therewith. If
satisfied that the completed work is in conformity with this chapter
and with the work listed in the zoning permit, a certificate of use
and occupancy shall be issued.
(4) Certificate of use and occupancy shall be granted or refused, in
writing, within 10 days from the date of application.
(5) In zones in which performance standards are imposed, no
certificate of occupancy shall become permanent until 30 days
after the facility is fully operating and only after, upon reinspection
by the Zoning Officer or the person or firm designated by Borough
Council, it is determined that the facility is in compliance with all
requirements. After said reinspection, the Zoning Officer or the
person or firm designated by Borough Council shall notify the
applicant that the facility is in full compliance with all performance
standards and that the certificate of use and occupancy is
permanent or that the facility does not comply and that the
§ 475-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-82
1:595
§ 475-83. Zoning Officer.
certificate of use and occupancy is still temporary. In no case shall
a temporary certificate of use and occupancy extend 90 days past
the date of reinspection.
C. Certificate of nonconforming use or structure.
(1) The owner of the premises occupied by a lawful nonconforming use
or structure may secure a certificate of nonconforming use or
structure from the Zoning Officer or the person or firm designated
by Borough Council.
(2) Such certificate shall be authorized by the Zoning Officer or the
person or firm designated by Borough Council and shall certify to
the owner his right to continue such nonconforming use or
structure.
A. Appointment.
(1) For the purposes of this chapter, the term "Zoning Officer" shall
refer to the designated person, agent, firm or official authorized by
the Kenhorst Borough Council to administer and enforce this
chapter.
(2) The Zoning Officer, or the person or firm designated by Borough
Council to perform the duties of the Zoning Officer, shall be
appointed by Borough Council and shall not hold any elective office
that conflicts with his or her normal duties.
(3) The Zoning Officer or the person or firm designated by Borough
Council shall continue to serve the Borough until such time as
Borough Council declares otherwise.
B. Duties and powers. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer or the
person or firm designated by Borough Council to enforce literally the
provisions of this chapter, as amended, and shall have such duties and
powers as are conferred by this chapter and as are reasonably implied
for that purpose. The duties of the Zoning Officer or the person or firm
designated by Borough Council shall include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Receive applications for and issue zoning permits and sign permits
as permitted by the terms of this chapter.
(2) Keep an official record of all business and activities, including
written complaints of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter and of the action taken consequent to each such complaint.
All such records shall be open to public inspection. File copies of all
applications received, permits issued, reports and inspections
made in connection with any structure, building, sign and/or land
§ 475-82 KENHORST CODE § 475-83
1:596
§ 475-84. Zoning Hearing Board.
shall be retained as long as the structures, etc., remain in
existence.
(3) Make inspections as required to fulfill his duties. He shall have the
right to enter any building or structure or enter upon any land at
any reasonable hour in the course of his duties.
(4) Issue permits for special exception uses, conditional uses and for
variances only after such uses and/or buildings have been approved
by the Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council in accordance
with the regulations of this chapter.
(5) Be responsible for keeping this chapter and the Zoning Map up to
date so as to include all amendments thereto.
(6) Issue certificates of use and occupancy in accordance with the
terms of this chapter.
(7) Identify and register nonconforming uses, nonconforming
structures and nonconforming signs.
(8) Perform such other duties as may be required for the
administration of this chapter.
C. Notice of violations. The Zoning Officer or the person or firm
designated by Borough Council shall serve a notice of violation on any
person, firm, corporation or partnership responsible for violating any of
the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of a detailed statement or a
plan approved thereunder. Notice of violation shall be in writing,
indicating the nature of the violation and action necessary to correct
same. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the Zoning Officer
or the person or firm designated by Borough Council is hereby
authorized to file a complaint with the Magisterial District Judge
located closest to the site of the alleged violation.
A. Creation and membership.
(1) The Borough Council hereby creates a Zoning Hearing Board,
herein referred to as the "Board," consisting of three residents of
the Borough appointed by the Borough Council pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,283 who
shall be appointed and serve and shall perform all the duties and
have all the powers as prescribed by said code and this chapter.
(2) The Borough Council may appoint alternate members of the Board
pursuant to the provisions of the code, as amended. The alternate
members may serve as provided in the code.
283. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 475-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-84
1:597
§ 475-85. Functions of Zoning Hearing Board.
(3) Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance
or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of
the governing body which appointed the member, taken after the
member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take
such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if
the member shall request it in writing.
B. Organization.
(1) The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who
shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For
the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum
shall be not less than a majority of all the members of the Board.
The Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership
to conduct any hearing on its behalf and the parties may waive
further action by the Board as provided in § 475-86.
(2) The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedures, consistent with the ordinances of the Borough and
laws of the state. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman
and at such other times as the Board may determine.
(3) All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board
shall keep full public records of its business, which records shall be
the property of the municipality, and shall submit a report of its
activities to Borough Council once a year.
C. Expenditures and compensation. Within the limits of funds
appropriated by Borough Council, the Zoning Hearing Board may
employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants
and other technical services. Members of the Board may receive
compensation for the performance of their duties, as may be fixed by
Borough Council, but in no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation
authorized to be paid to the members of Borough Council.
D. Procedures for application. The Board shall act in strict accordance
with the procedures specified by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended, and as it may be amended, and by this
chapter. All appeals and applications made to the Board shall be in
writing, on forms prescribed by the Board. Every appeal or application
shall refer to the specific provision of this chapter involved and shall
exactly set forth the interpretation that is claimed, the grounds for any
challenges to validity of this chapter, the use for which a special permit
is sought or the details of the variance that is applied for and the
grounds on which it is claimed that the variance should be granted, as
the case may be. In all cases, the Zoning Hearing Board shall request
Borough Council and Planning Commission to review and comment on
the application prior to rendering a decision.
§ 475-84 KENHORST CODE § 475-85
1:598
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the functions authorized in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.284 The
jurisdiction of the Zoning Hearing Board and the Borough Council, and
the procedures to be followed by each, shall be as established in said
code.
B. Variances. The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship
upon the applicant. In granting any variance, the Board may attach
such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of this chapter and the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. The Board may, by rule,
prescribe the form of application and may require preliminary
application to the Zoning Officer or the person or firm designated by
Borough Council. In all cases, the Zoning Hearing Board shall request
Borough Council and Planning Commission to review and comment on
the application prior to rendering a decision. The Board may grant a
variance; provided that all the following findings are made where
relevant in a given case:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such condition and not circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
(2) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(5) That the variance, as granted by the Board, is the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(6) The approval of a variance, if authorized by the Board, which
anticipates construction or modification of a structure, creation of
new or revised lot lines or dimensional standards for a property or
284. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 475-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-85
1:599
structure situated thereon, shall be valid and remain in effect for a
term of one year from the date of said approval and shall thereafter
expire and be void, unless said construction, modification, new
or revised lot lines or dimensional standards or change of use or
occupancy be initiated within said one-year term or said term is
expressly extended as part of the initial approval. In the event
that the activity anticipated by the variance should not be initiated
within one year of the approval or such additional term as may
be expressed in the approval or should the activity which is the
subject of the variance be discontinued, the premises or structure
or structure situated thereon shall not thereafter be used, except in
conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
(7) Until all fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no
action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
C. Special exceptions. The Board shall hear and decide, upon application,
only such special exceptions which the Board, by the provisions of this
chapter, is specifically authorized to issue. The granting of a special
exception, when specifically authorized by the terms of this chapter,
shall be subject to the following standards and criteria. The applicant
for a special exception shall demonstrate, as a condition to approval of
his application, compliance with these criteria and those criteria
specified elsewhere in this chapter for the use in question. In all cases,
the Zoning Hearing Board shall request Borough Council and Planning
Commission to review and comment on the application prior to
rendering a decision.
(1) Such use shall be one which is specifically authorized as a special
exception use in the zoning district wherein the applicant seeks a
special exception.
(2) Such special exceptions shall only be granted, subject to any
applicable conditions and safeguards as required by this chapter.
(3) Such use shall not adversely affect the character of the general
neighborhood, the conservation of property values and/or the
health and safety of residents or workers on adjacent properties
and in the general neighborhood.
(4) Such use shall be of such size and so located and laid out in relation
to its access streets that vehicular and pedestrian traffic to and
from such use will not create undue congestion or hazards
prejudicial to the general neighborhood.
(5) Services and utilities shall be made available to adequately service
the proposed use by the applicant.
(6) The granting of the special exception shall be consistent with the
Borough Comprehensive Plan.
§ 475-85 KENHORST CODE § 475-85
1:600
§ 475-86. Hearings.
(7) The approval of a special exception, if authorized by the Board,
which anticipates construction or modification of a structure,
creation of new or revised lot lines or dimensional standards for a
property or structure situated thereon, shall be valid and remain in
effect for a term of one year from the date of said approval and shall
thereafter expire and be void, unless said construction,
modification, new or revised lot lines or dimensional standards or
change of use or occupancy be initiated within said one-year term
or said term is expressly extended as part of the initial approval.
(8) In the event that the activity anticipated by the special exception
should not be initiated within one year of the approval or such
additional term as may be expressed in the approval or should the
activity which is the subject of the special exception be
discontinued, the premises or structure or structure situated
thereon shall not thereafter be used, except in conformity with the
regulations of the district in which it is located.
(9) Until all application fees, charges and expenses have been paid in
full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
(10) In granting a special exception, the Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.285
A. Public notice, as defined by law, and written notice shall be given to the
public, the applicant, adjoining property owners of the applicant
property, the Zoning Officer or the person or firm designated by
Borough Council and to any person who has made timely request for the
same. Written notices shall be given at such time and in such manner as
shall be prescribed by ordinance or, in the absence of ordinance
provision, by rules of the Board. In addition to the written notice
provided herein, notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on
the affected tract of land at least seven days prior to the hearing.
B. Borough Council may prescribe reasonable fees consistent with the
Municipalities Planning Code.286
C. The first hearing before the Board or Hearing Officer shall be
commenced within 60 days from the date of receipt of the applicant's
application, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension
of time. Each subsequent hearing before the Board or Hearing Officer
shall be held within 45 days of the prior hearing, unless otherwise
agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the record. An applicant
285. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
286. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 475-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-86
1:601
shall complete the presentation of his case-in-chief within 100 days
of the first hearing. Upon the request of the applicant, the Board or
Hearing Officer shall assure that the applicant receives at least seven
hours of hearings within 100 days, including the first hearing. Persons
opposed to the application shall complete the presentation of their
opposition to the application within 100 days of the first hearing held
after the completion of the applicant's case-in-chief. An applicant may,
upon request, be granted additional hearings to complete his casein-
chief provided the persons opposed to the application are granted
an equal number of additional hearings. Persons opposed to the
application may, upon the written consent or consent on the record
by the applicant and municipality, be granted additional hearings to
complete their opposition to the application, provided the applicant is
granted an equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal.
D. The hearings shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may appoint
any member as a hearing officer. The decision or, where no decision is
called for, the findings shall be made by the Board; however, the
appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the
Borough, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or
findings by the Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing
officer as final.
E. In all cases, the parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of record
before the Board and any other person, including, civic or community
organizations permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have
power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for that
purpose.
F. The Chairman or acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing officer
presiding shall have the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas
to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested
by the parties.
G. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel. All such
representation shall be confirmed on the record and all statements
presented on behalf of said party shall be binding for the purposes of
administration and enforcement. All parties shall be afforded the
opportunity to respond and present evidence and argument and cross
examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
H. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
I. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the
§ 475-86 KENHORST CODE § 475-86
1:602
§ 475-87. Amendments.
transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing officer, or shall be paid
by the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal
is made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid
by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
J. The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any
issue involved, except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda or other materials, except advice from their solicitor,
unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so
noticed and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless
all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
K. The Board or the hearing officer shall render a written decision or,
when no decision is called for, make written findings on the application
in accordance with the requirements of the Municipalities Planning
Code.287
A. Initiation of amendments. Proposals for amendment, supplement,
change, rezoning, modification or repeal may be initiated by Borough
Council on its own motion, by the Borough Planning Commission or by
request of owners of property, subject to the following provisions:
(1) Proposals initiated by Borough Council. Borough Council shall
refer every proposed amendment, supplement, change,
modification, rezoning or repeal originated by it to the Borough
Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the hearing on said
proposal. The Planning Commission shall submit to the Council a
report containing the Commission's recommendations, including
any additions or modifications to the original proposal.
(2) Proposal originated by the Borough Planning Commission. The
Borough Planning Commission may at any time transmit to
Borough Council any proposal for the amendment, supplement,
change, rezoning, modification or repeal of this chapter.
(3) Proposals initiated by others. In the case of amendment,
supplement change, modification or rezoning proposed by other
than Borough Council or Borough Planning Commission, such
proposal shall be submitted to Borough Council, together with any
application forms or fees as may be required by Borough Council.
Such proposal shall be referred to the Borough Planning
Commission for review and recommendation at least 30 days prior
to the hearing on the proposal.
287. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 475-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-87
1:603
§ 475-88. Curative amendments.
B. Referral to County Panning Agency. At least 30 days prior to the hearing
on the proposed ordinance amendment, rezoning, modification, change,
or supplement, Borough Council shall submit the proposal to the
County Planning Agency for its recommendations.
C. Hearings.
(1) Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, Borough Council
shall hold a public hearing thereon pursuant to public notice. No
such amendment shall become effective until such hearing, at
which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to
be heard.
(2) If, after any public hearing held on an amendment, the proposed
amendment is revised or further revised, to include land previously
not affected by it, Borough Council shall hold another public
hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on the
amendment.
(3) Public notice, as defined in Act 247, as amended, shall be given of
the time, place and the general nature of such hearing and shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough.
Public notices of proposed zoning ordinances and amendments
shall include either the full text thereof or a brief summary setting
forth the principal provisions in reasonable detail, and a reference
to a place where copies of the proposed ordinance or amendment
may be examined.
D. Post-enactment procedures.
(1) After enactment, If the advertisement of a zoning ordinance
amendment is required by other laws respecting the advertisement
of ordinances, such advertisement may consist solely of a reference
to the place or places within the Borough where copies of the
amendment are available for examination without charge or may be
obtained for a charge not greater than the cost thereof.
(2) Amendments may be incorporated into official ordinance books by
reference with the same force and effect as if duly reported therein.
(3) Within 30 day of enactment, the Borough shall forward an endorsed
copy of the amendment to the Berks County Planning Commission.
A. Procedure for landowner curative amendments.
(1) A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the
validity of this chapter which prohibits or restricts the use or
development of land in which he has an interest, may submit a
curative amendment to Borough Council with a written request
that his challenge and proposed amendment be heard and decided
§ 475-87 KENHORST CODE § 475-88
1:604
as provided in Sections 609.1 and 916.1 of the Code (Act 247, as
amended).288
(2) Borough Council shall commence a hearing thereon within 60 days
of the request unless the landowner requests or consents to an
extension of time.
(3) The curative amendment shall be referred to the Borough Planning
Commission and County Planning Commission at least 30 days
prior to the hearing to provide both agencies with an opportunity to
submit recommendations.
(4) The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures
established in Section 609.1 of Act 247, as amended.289 Provided,
however, that the deemed approval provisions of Section 908(1.2)
and (9) shall not apply, and the provisions of Section 916.1 of the
Municipalities Planning Code shall control.290
(5) Within 30 days of enactment of a curative amendment, the Borough
shall forward an endorsed copy of the ordinance/amendment to the
Berks County Planning Commission.
B. Procedure for municipal curative amendments.
(1) Pursuant to Section 609.2 of Act 247, as amended,291 the Borough,
by formal action, may declare this chapter or portions thereof
substantively invalid and propose the preparation of a curative
amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days, Borough
Council shall:
(a) By resolution, make specific findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of this chapter. This may include references to
specific uses which are either not permitted or not permitted in
sufficient quantity, reference to a class of uses which require
revision or reference to the entire ordinance which requires
revisions.
(b) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to
correct the declared invalidity.
(2) Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the
Borough shall enact a curative amendment to this chapter or
reaffirm the validity of this chapter. The established procedures
required by Section 609 of Act 247, as amended,292 shall govern the
process of enactment of the curative amendment.
288. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1.
289. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.1.
290. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10908(1.2) and (9) and 10916.1.
291. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.2.
292. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.
§ 475-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-88
1:605
§ 475-89. Conditional uses.
(3) Following the date of enactment of a curative amendment or
reaffirmation of this chapter, the Borough may not utilize the
curative amendment procedure for 36 months.
(4) If, after the date of declaration and proposal there is a substantially
new duty or obligation imposed on the Borough by statute or
Pennsylvania appellate court decision, the Borough may utilize the
provisions of this section to prepare a curative amendment to this
chapter to fulfill said duty or obligation.
(5) Within 30 days of enactment, the Borough shall forward an
endorsed copy of the chapter/amendment to the Berks County
Planning Commission.
A. Four copies of an application for permission to conduct a use permitted
by condition shall be submitted to the Borough Secretary. Such
application shall include all information specified for a zoning permit
application and any other information necessary to allow the Borough
Council to determine that all requirements of this chapter have been
met. The applicant shall be responsible for all pertinent costs incurred
for the review of the application.
B. After receiving an application, Borough Council shall refer one copy of
the application to the Borough Planning Commission for its review and
one copy to the Borough Zoning Officer or the person or firm
designated by Borough Council for his review.
C. The application shall be reviewed at one or more advertised meetings of
the Borough Council.
D. Conditional uses shall meet the specific standard established for each
use by this chapter and all other applicable zoning district
requirements and general regulations established by this chapter. In
addition, the following standards shall be met:
(1) The use shall be one which is specifically authorized as a
conditional use in the zoning district wherein the applicant is
seeking a conditional use.
(2) The use conforms to the goals, objectives and policies of the
Comprehensive Plan.
(3) The use conforms to the spirit, purposes and intent of all other
applicable provisions of all other Borough ordinances.
(4) The use conforms to all pertinent state and federal laws,
regulations and requirements.
(5) Services and utilities shall be made available to adequately service
the proposed use.
§ 475-88 KENHORST CODE § 475-89
1:606
§ 475-90. Appeals.
All appeals for securing review of this chapter or any decision,
determination or order of Borough Council, its agencies or officers issued
pursuant to this chapter shall be in accordance with all applicable sections
(6) The use will not generate traffic such that hazardous or unduly
congested conditions will result.
(7) The use is appropriate to the site in question.
(8) The use shall not adversely affect the character of the general
neighborhood or the health and safety of residents or workers on
adjacent properties and in the general neighborhood.
E. In accordance with Section 913.2 of the Municipalities Planning Code
(53 P.S. § 10913.2), Borough Council shall either approve or disapprove
the application within 45 days after the last hearing before the Borough
Council.293
F. The Borough Council may attach such additional reasonable conditions
and safeguards as it deems necessary to implement the purpose of this
chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended.
G. The granting of permission to conduct a use permitted by condition
does not exempt an applicant from acquiring all approvals required by
Chapter 410, Subdivision and Land Development.
H. Until all application fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full,
no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
I. The approval of a conditional use, if authorized by the Board, which
anticipates construction or modification of a structure, creation of new
or revised lot lines or dimensional standards for a property or structure
situated thereon, shall be valid and remain in effect for a term of one
year from the date of said approval and shall thereafter expire and be
void, unless said construction, modification, new or revised lot lines or
dimensional standards or change of use or occupancy be initiated
within said one-year term or said term is expressly extended as part of
the initial approval.
J. In the event that the activity anticipated by the conditional use should
not be initiated within one year of the approval or such additional term
as may be expressed in the approval, or should the activity which is the
subject of the conditional use be discontinued, the premises or
structure or structure situated thereon shall not thereafter be used,
except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is
located.
293. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-90
1:607
of Act 247, as amended.294 Question of an alleged defect in the process of
enactment or adoption of this chapter shall be raised by an appeal taken
directly from the action of Borough Council to the court, filed not later than
30 days from the effective date of this chapter or map.
§ 475-91. Time limitations.
§ 475-92. Filing fees and costs.
§ 475-93. Remedies; violations and penalties.
A. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Board later
than 30 days after an application for development, preliminary or final,
has been approved by an appropriate municipal officer, agency or body
if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to limit the
approval in any manner unless such person alleges and proves that he
had no notice, knowledge, or reason to believe that such approval had
been given. If such person has succeeded to his interest after such
approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in
interest. The failure of anyone other than the landowner to appeal from
an adverse decision on a tentative plan pursuant to Section 709 of the
Municipalities Planning Code295 or from an adverse decision by a
Zoning Officer on a challenge to the validity of an ordinance or map
pursuant to Section 916.2 of the Municipalities Planning Code296 shall
preclude an appeal from a final approval except in the case where the
final submission substantially deviates from the approved tentative
approval.
B. All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowners shall be
filed by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the determination
is issued.
A. The Borough Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and
expenses and collection procedures for zoning permits, certificates of
occupancy, special exceptions, variances and appeals and other matters
pertaining to this chapter.
B. The schedule of fees shall be available for inspection in the municipal
offices for the Borough of Kenhorst and may be altered or amended by
the Kenhorst Borough Council.
C. Until all application fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full,
no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
A. Remedies. In case any buildings or structures are erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any
building, structure or land is used, in violation of this chapter, the
294. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
295. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10709.
296. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 475-90 KENHORST CODE § 475-93
1:608
Borough Council or, with its approval, the Zoning Officer or the person
or firm designated by Borough Council, in addition to other remedies,
may institute in the name of the Borough any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of
said building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises. The rights and remedies
provided in this chapter are cumulative and are in addition to all other
remedies provided by law.
B. Penalties. Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this
article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I,
Enforcement; General Penalty, of this Code.297
297. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 475-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-93
1:609
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1973 Code of Ordinances to 2016 Code.
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. II.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
N/A = Not applicable; no legislation existed in the prior publication.
Chapter/Title From 1973 Code of
Ordinances
Location in 2016 Code
Ch. 1, Administration and Government
Part 1, Elected and Appointed Officers
§§ 1–2 Ch. 101, Art. II
§ 3 Ch. 101, Art. I
§ 4 Ch. 7
§§ 5–12 Ch. 71
Part 2, Authorities Ch. 12, Art. I
Part 3, Boards and Commissions Ch. 84
Part 4, Police Department Ch. 89
Part 5, Pensions, Retirement and Social
Security
A. Police Pensions NI; see Ch. 79
B. Municipal Employees' Retirement
System
NI; see Ch. 79
C. Social Security REP
Part 6, Fire Department
A. Designation of Fire Department Ch. 44, Art. I
B. Workers Compensation Coverage Ch. 44, Art. II
Ch. 2, Air Pollution (Reserved) N/A
Ch. 3, Animals
Part 1, Animals
§§ 1–11 Ch. 142, Art. II
§§ 12 and 13 REP
Ch. 4, Bicycles
§ 475-93 KENHORST CODE § DT-1
1:610
Chapter/Title From 1973 Code of
Ordinances
Location in 2016 Code
Part 1, Bicycles REP
Ch. 5, Buildings
Part 1, International Building Code REP
Part 2, Numbering of Buildings Ch. 157
Part 3, Space Heaters REP
Part 4, Flood Damage Control Regulations Superseded by Ord. No.
542
Part 5, International Property Maintenance Superseded by Ord. No.
541
Part 6, ICC Electrical Code REP
Part 7, International Mechanical Code REP
Part 8, Uniform Construction Code Ch. 190
Part 9, International Energy Conservation
Code
REP
Part 10, International Fuel Gas Code REP
Part 11, International Residential Code REP
Part 12, International Existing Building Code REP
Ch. 6, Conduct
Part 1, Conduct
§§ 1 through 3 Repealed by Ord. No. 548
§§ 4 through 9 REP
§§ 10 and 11 Ch. 223
Ch. 7, Curfew
Part 1, Curfew Hours for Minors Ch. 196
Ch. 8, Fire Prevention and Fire Protection
Part 1, Fire Prevention and Fire Protection Repealed by Ord. No. 554
Part 2, Key Boxes Ch. 235, Art. I
Part 3, International Fire Prevention Code REP
Part 4, Fire Alarm and Fire Suppression
System
Ch. 235, Art. II
Part 5, Fire Lanes on Private Property Ch. 229
Part 6, Fire Department Service Fees Ch. 214, Art. II
Ch. 9, Franchises
Part 1, Sewage Rendered inactive by Ord.
No. 206; see Ch. 12, Art. II
Part 2, Telephone NCM
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:611
Chapter/Title From 1973 Code of
Ordinances
Location in 2016 Code
Part 3, Television Ch. 172
Ch. 10, Garbage and Refuse
Part 1, Garbage and Refuse REP
Part 2, Waste Reduction and Recycling Repealed by Ord. No. 543
Part 3, Dumpsters Ch. 205
Ch. 11, Health and Sanitation
Part 1, Cemeteries Ch. 178
Part 2, Nuisances
§§ 11 through 15 Ch. 309, Art. I
§ 16 REP
Part 3, Weeds Ch. 341, Art. I
Part 4, Skateboards Ch. 378
Part 5, Responsibilities for the Clean-Up of
Hazardous Spills
Ch. 214, Art. I
Part 6, Fire Insurance Superseded by Ord. No.
559
Part 7, Stagnant Water Pools Ch. 341, Art. II
Ch. 12, Housing
Part 1, Rental Housing Registration Repealed by Ord. No. 578;
see Ch. 362, Art. II
Part 2, Property Transfer Use and
Occupancy Certificate
Ch. 318
Ch. 13, Licenses, Permits and General
Business Regulations
Part 1, Public Exhibitions REP
Part 2, Transient Retail Business REP
Part 3, Alarm Devices Ch. 138
Part 4, Telecommunications Towers and
Antennas
Ch. 424
Part 5, Garage Sales and Lawn/Yard Sales Ch. 249
Part 6, Portable Home Storage Units Ch. 393, Art. I
Ch. 14, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 450
Ch. 15, Parks and Recreation
Part 1, Animal Regulations Ch. 142, Art. I
Part 2, Park Code Ch. 327
Ch. 16, Plumbing
§ DT-1 KENHORST CODE § DT-1
1:612
Chapter/Title From 1973 Code of
Ordinances
Location in 2016 Code
Part 1, International Plumbing Code REP
Ch. 17, Sewers and Sewage Disposal
Part 1, Sewer Connections and Uses Ch. 373, Art. II
Part 2, Sewer Rentals Ch. 373, Art. I
Part 3, City of Reading Sewer Use Ordinance Ch. 373, Art. III
Ch. 18, Signs and Billboards (Reserved) N/A
Ch. 19, Streets and Sidewalks
Part 1, Street Openings; Excavations and
Obstructions
Ch. 404, Art. I
Part 2, Sidewalks, Curbs and Driveway
Entrances
Ch. 404, Art. IV
Part 3, Regulation of Equipment on Streets
and Sidewalks
Ch. 404, Art. II
Part 4, Driveway Entrance Construction and
Repair
Superseded by Ord. No.
360
Part 5, Snow and Ice Removal from
Sidewalks
Ch. 404, Art. III
Part 6, Prohibition and Removal of
Obstructions Upon Streets and Roads
Ch. 404, Art. V
Part 7, Prohibiting Obstruction of Sidewalks
by Vendors
Ch. 368
Ch. 20, Subdivision and Land Development Superseded by Ord. No.
546
Ch. 21, Swimming Pools (Reserved) N/A
Ch. 22, Taxation; Special
Part 1, Earned Income and Net Profits Superseded by Ord. No.
537
Part 2, Per Capita Ch. 419, Art. I
Part 3, Realty Transfer Tax Ch. 419, Art. IV
Part 4, Penalty and Discount Ch. 419, Art. II
Part 5, Occupation Tax Ch. 419, Art. III
Part 6, Local Services Tax Superseded by Ord. No.
536
Ch. 23, Trailers and Trailer Parks (Reserved) N/A
Ch. 24, Trees
Part 1, Shade Tree Commission REP
Part 2, Regulations Ch. 429
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:613
Chapter/Title From 1973 Code of
Ordinances
Location in 2016 Code
Ch. 25, Water
Part 1, Stormwater Management Superseded by Ord. No.
549
Ch. 26, Zoning Superseded by Ord. No.
545
Appendix
A. Agreements and Contracts (Reserved) Excluded
B. Annexation of Territory Excluded
C. Bond Issues and Loans Excluded
D. Governmental and Intergovernmental
Affairs
Excluded
E. Plan Approval Excluded
F. Public Property (Reserved) Excluded
G. Sewers Excluded
H. Street Lighting Excluded
I. Streets Excluded
J. Water Excluded
K. Zoning; Prior Ordinances Excluded
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
KEY:
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. II.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
527 Tabled; not
adopted
528 4-1-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 450
529 4-1-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 450
§ DT-1 KENHORST CODE § DL-1
1:614
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
530 7-1-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 450
531 12-2-2010 Tax rate for 2011 NCM
532 12-2-2010 Streets and sidewalks: snow and ice
removal amendment; vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 404, Art. III;
Ch. 450
533 6-2-2011 Sewers and sewage disposal :
sewer rents and charges
amendment
Ch. 373, Art. I
534 7-7-2011 Rental property : additional
regulations
Repealed by
Ord. No. 577
535 8-8-2011 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 545
536 11-3-2011 Taxation: local services tax Ch. 419, Art. V
537 11-3-2011 Taxation: earned income and net
profits tax
Ch. 419, Art. VI
538 12-1-2011 Tax rate for 2012 NCM
539 12-1-2011 Sewers and sewage disposal: sewer
rents and charges amendment;
solid waste: garbage and rubbish
collection amendment
NI
540 2-2-2012 Streets and sidewalks: maintenance
of alleyways
Ch. 404, Art. VI
541 2-2-2012 Property maintenance: adoption of
standards
Ch. 341, Art. III
542 6-7-2012 Floodplain management Ch. 241
543 8-2-2012 Solid waste: waste management
and recycling
Ch. 384, Art. I
544 8-2-2012 Intermunicipal cooperation: Berks
County MS4 Steering Committee
NCM
545 8-2-2012 Zoning Ch. 475
546 8-2-2012 Subdivision and land development Ch. 410
547 10-4-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 450
548 10-4-2012 Noise Ch. 303
549 10-4-2012 Stormwater management Ch. 398
550 12-6-2012 Tax rate for 2013 NCM
551 12-6-2012 Street vacation NCM
552 12-6-2012 Street vacation NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:615
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
553 12-6-2012 Sewers and sewage disposal :
sewer rents and charges
amendment
Ch. 373, Art. I
554 4-4-2013 Open burning Ch. 163
555 4-4-2013 Peddling and soliciting Ch. 332
556 10-3-2013 Nuisances: neighborhood blight Ch. 309, Art. II
557 12-5-2013 Tax rate for 2014 NCM
558 12-5-2013 Sewers and sewage disposal :
sewer rents and charges
amendment
Ch. 373, Art. I
559 12-5-2013 Insurance: fire insurance claims Ch. 272, Art. I
560 12-5-2013 Property maintenance:
maintenance of structures,
premises and exterior property
areas
Ch. 341, Art. IV
561 4-3-2014 Franchise agreement: Comcast of
New Mexico / Pennsylvania, LLC
NCM
562 5-1-2014 Real estate registry Ch. 358
563 5-1-2014 Rental property: additional
regulations amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 577
564 8-7-2014 General provisions: enforcement;
general penalty
Ch. 1, Art. I
565 9-4-2014 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 450
566 11-6-2014 Land acquisition NCM
567 12-4-2014 Tax rate for 2015 NCM
568 6-4-2015 Relinquishing of property NCM
569 7-2-2015 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 450
570 11-5-2015 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 450
571 11-5-2015 Streets and sidewalks: repair and
maintenance of alleyways
Ch. 404, Art. VII
572 12-3-2015 Tax rate for 2016 NCM
573 12-3-2015 Sewers and sewage disposal: sewer
rents and charges amendment
Ch. 373, Art. I
574 1-4-2016 Salaries and compensation:
payment conditioned upon meeting
attendance
Ch. 101, Art. III
575 6-2-2016 Taxation: agency fees for
delinquent taxes
Ch. 419, Art. VII
576 8-4-2016 Parks and recreation plan NCM
§ DL-1 KENHORST CODE § DL-1
1:616
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
577 8-7-2016 Rental property: rental conduct Ch. 362, Art. I
578 9-1-2016 Rental property: inspection;
registration; rental occupancy
permits
Ch. 362, Art. II
579 11-3-2016 Possession of blighted property NCM
580 11-3-2016 Property maintenance: unkempt
properties
Ch. 341, Art. I
581 12-1-2016 Tax rate for 2017 NCM
582 12-1-2016 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
583 5-4-2017 Temporary right-turn-only
intersections
NCM
584 6-1-2017 Streets and sidewalks: sidewalks,
curbs and driveway entrances
amendment; subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 404, Art. IV;
Ch. 410
585 7-6-2017 Nontower wireless communications
facilities
Ch. 460, Art. I
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:617