Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-26-1995 as Ord. No. 12-1995]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)],
the codification of a complete body of ordinances and resolutions for the
Borough of Kutztown, County of Berks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, Articles and sections by
General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 225,
together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as a single ordinance of the Borough of Kutztown, which shall be
known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Borough of Kutztown,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown, and it is the intention of
said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Borough of Kutztown and in force on the date of the adoption
of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the
effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to January 31, 1994.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the borough or other instruments or evidence of
the borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer, electric or other special
purpose districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for
a system of sewers or water supply lines or electric distribution lines; or
providing for the construction, extension, dedication, acceptance or
abandonment of any part of a system of sewers or water supply lines or
electric distribution lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances and resolutions of a general and permanent nature adopted
subsequent to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of
this ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon
being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances
and resolutions shall be temporarily placed in the Code until printed
supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance regarding pensions.
R. Ordinance No. 7-1960 regarding water regulations.
S. Ordinance No. 10-1960, adopted 3-22-1960, regarding sewer use.
T. Resolution No. 2-1963 and Ord. No. 15-1991 regarding sewers.
U. Ordinance Nos. 1-1973, 6-1975, 9-1987 and 14-1991 regarding water.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the borough for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one (1) or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of
the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the
Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, the following changes and revisions of a
substantive nature are hereby made to various ordinances and
resolutions included in the Code. These changes are made to bring
provisions into conformity with the desired policies of the Borough
Council, and it is the intent of the Borough Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances and
resolutions so changed have been previously formally amended to read
as such. All such changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect
as of the effective date of the Code specified in § 1-15.1
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments or additions will be replaced with the
following wording: "amended (added) 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995." A complete
description of all changes is on file in the borough offices.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three (3) copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Borough Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Borough
A. Chapter and Article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-7 KUTZTOWN CODE § 1-11
1:6
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to
the effective date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances or resolutions
are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.) nor more than six hundred dollars ($600.), plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof, by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding thirty (30) days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, Article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
Article, chapter or part thereof rendered. It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the Borough Council that this ordinance and the Code would have
been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause, sentence,
subsection, section, Article, chapter or part thereof had not been included
therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after January 1, 1996.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7

ARTICLE II
Legislation Adopted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain new legislation was
authorized by the Borough Council. Such legislation is noted in the
text of the Code as "Adopted during codification; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II." Such new legislation is noted in the histories of
individual chapters as "Adopted ... during codification; see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II." During the course of routine
supplementation, specific adoption dates will be inserted where
pertinent in the text of the various chapters.
The enumeration appearing below lists each chapter adopted
during codification. The complete text of any new enactments is on
file in the office of the Borough Secretary, where it may be
inspected during office hours.]
Chapter
Adoption
Date Legislation
Ch. A231, Fees 12-26-1995 Res. No. 23-1995
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9

ARTICLE III
Code Title
[Adopted 3-12-1996 as Ord. No. 2-1996]
§ 1-16. Title; short title.
This Code shall be known as the "Code of the Borough of Kutztown" and may
be cited, for any purpose, as either the "Code of the Borough of Kutztown"
or the "Kutztown Code."
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:11
Chapter 3
BOROUGH SEAL
§ 3-1. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Section
1201(3) of the Borough Code of 1966 of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
[53 P.S. § 46201(3)], as amended from time to time.
§ 3-2. Adoption of Borough Seal.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown does hereby adopt a seal
in the form and image annexed hereto as Exhibit A2 as the corporate seal
of the Borough of Kutztown, effective as of 12:01 a.m., prevailing time, on
the effective date. Any previously adopted or utilized corporate seal of the
Borough of Kutztown shall be deemed abandoned and no longer approved
as of such date and time.
§ 3-3. Physical form of seal.
The physical form of the corporate seal adopted pursuant to this chapter
may take either or both of the following forms:
§ 3-4. Use of Borough Seal.
The corporate seal adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be utilized for
official purposes in accordance with the Borough Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and other applicable law, in such
circumstances as the Borough Council may direct, and may be utilized in
such circumstances as the Secretary of the Borough of Kutztown deems
necessary or appropriate for proper corporate and governmental purposes.
The corporate seal may be utilized in either the impressed or stamped
form, or may be utilized for the purpose of affixing both an impressed and
stamped or ink seal simultaneously, unless otherwise required by Section
1009 of the Borough Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by any
other legal requirement.
§ 3-5. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on April 19, 2005.
Chapter 5
A. A metal die which can form an impressed, embossed or raised seal on
documents; and
B. A stamp or other means of printing or applying such seal on documents
and other objects utilizing ink.
2. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 1-16 KUTZTOWN CODE § 3-5
3:12
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
§ 3-5 BOROUGH SEAL § 3-5
3:13

ARTICLE I
Kutztown Municipal Authority
[Adopted 8-7-1962 as Ord. No. 5-1962]
§ 5-1. Intent.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an
Authority under the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,
as amended.3
§ 5-2. Authorization; Articles of Incorporation.
The President and Secretary of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Kutztown, together with the Mayor, are hereby authorized and directed to
execute, on behalf of the Borough of Kutztown, Articles of Incorporation for
said Authority in substantially the following form.4
§ 5-3. Notice.
The President and Secretary of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Kutztown are further directed to cause notice of the substance of this
Article, including the substance of the above Articles of Incorporation and
of the proposed filing of the above Articles of Incorporation, to be published
once in a newspaper published and of general circulation in the County of
Berks and in the Berks County Law Journal as required by the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945.
§ 5-4. Filing.
The President and Secretary of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Kutztown are directed to file said Articles of Incorporation, together with
the necessary proofs of publication, with the Secretary of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to do all other things necessary or
appropriate to effect the incorporation of the Kutztown Municipal Authority,
including the payment of any filing fees in connection therewith.
§ 5-5. Appointments.
The following named persons be and hereby are appointed as members of
the initial Board of said Authority.5
§ 5-6. Amendment of Articles of Incorporation. [Added 8-10-1999 by
Ord. No. 10-1999]
3. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
4. Editor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation are on file in the office of the Borough
Manager and may be inspected during regular office hours.
5. Editor's Note: The list of appointed members is on file in the office of the Borough
Manager.
§ 5-1 BOROUGH SEAL § 5-6
3:15
A. The Council of the Borough of Kutztown hereby adopts and approves
the amendment to the Articles of Incorporation of the Kutztown
Municipal Authority as proposed by the resolution, duly certified by the
Chairman or Vice Chairman and Secretary or Assistant Secretary, as
appropriate, of the Kutztown Municipal Authority, which has been
submitted to the Council of this borough.
B. The amendment to the Articles of Incorporation of the Kutztown
Municipal Authority, which is hereby adopted and approved, shall be
substantially in the form presented to this Council and shall contain the
following new Paragraph 8 to be added to said Articles of
Incorporation:6
C. The proper officers of the Kutztown Municipal Authority are hereby
authorized to execute, verify and file appropriate Articles of
Amendment with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and to take all other action and to do all other things which may be
necessary in order to accomplish the amendment of the Articles of
Incorporation of the Kutztown Municipal Authority in the manner
herein adopted and approved.
6. Editor's Note: The text of the amendment is on file in the office of the Borough Manager,
as is Res. No. 8-2017, adopted 7-18-2017, which further amends the Articles of
Incorporation.
§ 5-6 KUTZTOWN CODE § 5-6
3:16
ARTICLE II
Kutztown Transportation Authority
[Adopted 8-8-2000 by Ord. No. 5-2000]
§ 5-7. Intent.
It is the intent of the Borough of Kutztown, Berks County. Pennsylvania (the
"borough"). to organize an authority under Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382,
known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," 53 P.S. § 301, et seq..
as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General
Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (the "Act").
§ 5-8. Name of the Authority.
The name of the Authority shall be the "Kutztown Transportation Authority"
(the "Authority").
§ 5-9. Purpose.
Pursuant to Section 4.A.(c) of the Act, the borough hereby specifies that the
project to be undertaken by the Authority is the acquisition, ownership. use,
management, operation, leasing, maintenance, improvement and financing
of that certain line of railroad and certain properties appurtenant thereto
known as the "Kutztown Industrial Track (USRA line No. 910)" in Berks
County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, between milepost 0.17 at Topton
and milepost 4.29 at Kutztown.
§ 5-10. Articles of Incorporation.
The proposed Articles of Incorporation of the Authority are as follows.7
§ 5-11. Directive to effect the Incorporation of the Authority.
The officers of the borough are authorized and directed to execute under
the Official Seal of the Borough the Articles of Incorporation of the proposed
Authority in substantially the same form as set forth in this article, and such
officers are authorized to do all acts necessary or appropriate to effect the
incorporation of the Authority.
§ 5-12. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this article is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this article. It is hereby declared
as the intent of the Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown that this
article would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
7. Editor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation are on file in the office of the Borough
Manager and may be inspected during regular office hours.
§ 5-7 BOROUGH SEAL § 5-12
3:17
Chapter 11
CODE ENFORCEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction Code — See Ch. 75.
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 107.
Housing standards — See Ch. 135.
Plumbing — See Ch. 163.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 192.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
195.
Wellhead protection — See Ch. 220.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 11-1. Office established; powers and duties.
A. The Borough of Kutztown hereby creates an office to be known as the
"Borough Code Office." The Borough Code Office shall have the
responsibility for administering the enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter and administering the inspection and enforcement
provisions of the following codes, regulations and ordinances of the
Borough of Kutztown (other than provisions thereof which pertain to
the keeping of public peace and order in the Borough of Kutztown):
(1) The Subdivision and Land Development Regulations of the Borough
of Kutztown, being Chapter 195 of the Kutztown Code, as amended
and supplemented.
(2) The Zoning Regulations of the Borough of Kutztown, being Chapter
225 of the Kutztown Code, as amended and supplemented, in the
manner provided in § 11-1B hereinbelow.
(3) The Sidewalk, Curb and Driveway Regulations of the Borough of
Kutztown, being Chapter 192 of the Kutztown Code, as amended
and supplemented.
(4) The Building Code of the Borough of Kutztown, being Chapter 77 of
the Kutztown Code, as amended and supplemented.
(5) The Electrical Code of the Borough of Kutztown, being Chapter 107
of the Kutztown Code, as amended and supplemented; provided,
however, that as concerns said Electrical Code, the responsibility of
the Code Office shall be limited to administering the enforcement
of provisions thereof and the making of such inspections as said
Electrical Code shall, from time to time, authorize the Code
Enforcement Officer to make.
(6) The Housing Code of the Borough of Kutztown, being Chapter 135
of the Kutztown Code, as amended and supplemented.
§ 5-12 KUTZTOWN CODE § 11-1
11:18
(7) The Plumbing Code of the Borough of Kutztown, being Chapter 163
of the Kutztown Code, as amended and supplemented.
(8) The Floodplain Regulations of the Borough of Kutztown, enacted
and ordained by Ordinance No. 10-19978 of the Borough of
Kutztown, being Chapter 123 of the Kutztown Code, as amended
and supplemented.
(9) Chapter 177 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown, entitled
"Sewers", as amended and supplemented. [Amended 4-20-2004
by Ord. No. 5-2004]
(10) The Water Ordinance of the Borough of Kutztown, enacted and
ordained by ordinance on March 15, 1960, as amended and
supplemented.
(11) The Fire Prevention Regulations of the Borough of Kutztown, being
Chapter 119 of the Kutztown Code, as amended and supplemented.
(12) Chapter 168 of the Kutztown Code, entitled "Public Health/
Nuisances," as amended and supplemented.
(13) Chapter 185 of the Kutztown Code, entitled "Solid Waste," as
amended and supplemented.
(14) Chapter 220 of the Kutztown Code, entitled "Wellhead Protection,"
as amended and supplemented.
(15) Chapter 110 of the Kutztown Code, entitled "Fiber-Optic
Communications Network," as amended and supplemented.
[Added 7-16-2002 by Ord. No. 9-20029]
(16) Chapter 75 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown, entitled
"Uniform Construction Code," being Act No. 45 of 1999, as
amended from time to time. [Added 4-20-2004 by Ord. No.
5-2004]
(17) Those provisions of any other regulations and/or ordinances of the
Borough of Kutztown now or hereafter specifically assigning or
delegating certain responsibilities to the Director of Construction
and Property Inspection or their designee. [Amended 4-20-2004
by Ord. No. 5-2004]
B. The Zoning Regulations of the Borough of Kutztown, being Chapter 225
of the Kutztown Code, the Floodplain Regulations of the Borough of
Kutztown, being Chapter 123 of the Kutztown Code, the Subdivision
and Land Development Regulations of the Borough of Kutztown, being
Chapter 195 of the Kutztown Code, the Wellhead Protection
8. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 10-1997 was superseded 3-10-1998 by Ord. No. 3-1998. See
Ch. 123, Floodplain Regulations.
9. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection A(15) as Subsection
A(16).
§ 11-1 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 11-1
11:19
§ 11-2. Appointment of Director of Construction and Property
Inspection. [Amended 4-20-2004 by Ord. No. 5-2004]
The Council of the Borough of Kutztown shall appoint a Director of
Construction and Property Inspection or their designee who shall be in
charge of code enforcement and who shall serve in that capacity at the
will of the Council of the Borough of Kutztown. Neither the Director of
Construction and Property Inspection or their designee, nor any of their
respective assistants, inspectors or other employees shall hold any elective
office in the Borough of Kutztown nor shall any of them be employed by any
other person, corporation, partnership or other entity which has any direct
or indirect relationship to the Code Enforcement Office. The Director of
Construction and Property Inspection or their designee shall have primary
responsibility for the administration and enforcement of Chapter 225,
Zoning Regulations, Chapter 195, Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations, Chapter 123, Floodplain Regulations, Chapter 220, Wellhead
Protection Regulations, all as amended from time to time, and such other
ordinances, codes and regulations as are governed by the Municipalities
Planning Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,10 as amended from
time to time.
§ 11-3. Powers and duties of Director of Construction and Property
Inspection. [Amended 4-20-2004 by Ord. No. 5-2004]
The Director of Construction and Property Inspection or their designee shall
each be responsible for the fulfillment of the duties and responsibilities
of the Borough Code Office, as assigned to each of them by the Borough
Manager appointed pursuant to Chapter 29 of this Code. The duties of
the Director of Construction and Property Inspection or their designee
shall include the receipt of applications, the issuance of permits, notices,
certificates and orders, the making of inspections (other than such
inspections under the Electrical Code of the Borough of Kutztown to be
made by a person or entity other than the Director of Construction and
Property Inspection or their designee, to determine conformance with
applicable codes, regulations and ordinances hereinabove described in
§ 11-1 of this chapter, the keeping of records, supervision of administrative
Regulations of the Borough of Kutztown, being Chapter 220, as
amended and supplemented, shall be administered and enforced by the
Code Office, acting through the Zoning Officer appointed in accordance
with said Zoning Regulations, as amended. The Plumbing Code of the
Borough of Kutztown, being Chapter 163 of the Kutztown Code, shall be
administered and enforced by the Borough Code Office, acting through
the Plumbing Inspector appointed by the Borough Council.
C. The above codes shall be enforced together with any amendments,
supplements, substitutions and revisions hereafter adopted as pertains
to any of the above-described codes, regulations and ordinances.
10.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 11-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § 11-3
11:20
matters within the Borough Code Office as assigned by the Borough
Manager, the issuance of periodic reports to the Council of the Borough
of Kutztown, the recommendation of amendments and supplements to the
various codes, regulations and ordinances described in § 11-1 of this
chapter and such other activities as may, from time to time, be designated
by the Council of the Borough of Kutztown. The Director of Construction
and Property Inspection or their designee shall supervise such other
employees, assistants and inspectors as shall be necessary for the
administration and execution of the responsibilities of the Borough Code
Office as, from time to time, appointed, approved or authorized by the
Council of the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 11-4. Official records.
An official record shall be kept of all business and activities of the Borough
Code Office and, to the extent required by law, all such records shall
be open to the public for inspection at all appropriate times; provided,
however, that the aforesaid shall not apply to any records or information
which is not required by law to be made available to the public and
provided, further, that the aforesaid shall not apply to any evidence or
information obtained in the course of any inspection or investigation, which
shall be considered privileged information and shall be kept confidential.
§ 11-5. Inspection. [Amended 4-20-2004 by Ord. No. 5-2004]
In the discharge of their respective duties, the Director of Construction
and Property Inspection or their designee, or their respective assistant
or authorized representative, upon showing proper identification when
requested, is hereby authorized to enter and inspect, at any reasonable
hour, which shall be deemed to be between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
prevailing time, any building, structure or premises in the Borough of
Kutztown for the purpose of enforcing the duties and responsibilities of
the Borough Code Office pertaining to any of the codes, regulations and
ordinances hereinabove described in § 11-1 of this chapter. The Director
of Construction and Property Inspection or their designee and the owner,
operator or occupant or other person in charge of any such building,
structure or premises, subject to the provisions of this section, may agree
to an inspection by appointment at a mutually convenient time.
§ 11-6. Construction of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit, supersede or otherwise
interfere with the duties and responsibilities of the Police Department of the
Borough of Kutztown and the members of said Police Department as such
duties and responsibilities may, from time to time, be provided by statute,
ordinance, rule or regulation or otherwise provided by law.
§ 11-3 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 11-7
11:21
§ 11-7. Enforcement. [Amended 4-20-2004 by Ord. No. 5-2004]
The Director of Construction and Property Inspection or their designee are
each hereby authorized and empowered to institute summary proceedings
by citation, civil enforcement proceedings or any other proceeding as may
be authorized by applicable code, regulation or ordinance hereinabove
described in § 11-1 of this chapter or as otherwise may be authorized by
law, and each shall also have the authority and power to request, obtain and
serve search warrants and subpoenas as may be authorized by any of the
codes, regulations and ordinances hereinabove described in § 11-1 of this
chapter or as otherwise may be authorized by law.
Chapter 12
APPEALS BOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 11. Housing standards — See Ch. 135.
§ 11-7 KUTZTOWN CODE § 11-7
12:22
ARTICLE I
Code Appeals Board
§ 12-1. Creation.
A Code Appeals Board is hereby established for the purpose of hearing
appeals from permits issued, enforcement notices issued, determinations
rendered and for the purpose of hearing requests for modifications and
waivers permitted to be granted, all pursuant to the authority contained
in certain ordinances, codes and regulations of the Borough of Kutztown,
including the Code of the Borough of Kutztown, as amended from time to
time, and all regulations issued pursuant thereto, as is more fully provided
hereinbelow in this article. The aforesaid Code Appeals Board shall be
known as the "Borough of Kutztown Code Appeals Board" (hereinafter in
this article the "Code Appeals Board").
§ 12-2. Membership; qualifications.
The Code Appeals Board shall consist of five members, all of whom shall be
residents of the Borough of Kutztown and shall be selected and appointed
by the Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown (hereinafter in this
Chapter 12 referred to as the "Council") to serve in such position. The
Council shall appoint two alternate members who shall be residents of the
borough and who may be called by the Code Appeals Board Chairperson
to hear appeals in the absence or disqualification of any member. All
references in this § 12-2 to the Code Appeals Board members shall also
be deemed to refer to Code Appeals Board alternate members, unless the
context requires otherwise. The Code Appeals Board shall annually select
one of its members to serve as Chairperson (hereinafter in this article the
"Chairperson"), select one of its members to serve as Vice Chairperson
(hereinafter in this article the "Vice Chairperson"), and select one of its
members to serve as Secretary (hereinafter in this article the "Secretary").
§ 12-3. Terms; vacancies; removal.
A. The initial term of all members of the Code Appeals Board shall begin
with their appointment and end as follows: one member for the first five
years; one member for four years; one member for three years; one
member for two years; and one member for one year. Thereafter, the
terms of office for members of the Code Appeals Board shall be five
years.
B. Vacancies on the Code Appeals Board, resulting from the conclusion of
a term of membership or the resignation, death or removal of a
member, shall be filled by the appointment and selection of a new
member by the Council. Members and alternates of the Code Appeals
Board may be reappointed. Alternate members of the Code Appeals
Board shall be appointed for terms of five years or until a successor has
been appointed.
§ 12-1 APPEALS BOARDS § 12-3
12:23
§ 12-4. Compensation.
Members of the Code Appeals Board shall serve as such without
compensation.
§ 12-5. Assistance for Secretary; recordkeeping; counsel.
§ 12-6. Quorums; voting; conflicts of interest; conduct of hearings;
meetings.
C. Any member of the Code Appeals Board may be removed from office by
majority vote of the entire Council for failure to perform the duties of
such office.
A. The Council shall employ and make available to the Code Appeals Board
qualified persons to assist the Secretary and other officers of the Code
Appeals Board, who shall appear at the meetings of the Code Appeals
Board, shall keep minutes of the Code Appeals Board proceedings,
votes, decisions and actions, as well as all dates, records and
documents pertaining to the activities of the Code Appeals Board, as
directed and authorized by the officers and solicitor of the Code
Appeals Board. The Borough Code Office of the Borough of Kutztown
established by Chapter 11 of the Kutztown Code, as amended and
supplemented from time to time (hereinafter in this Chapter 12
referred to as the "Borough Code Office"), is hereby authorized to
provide such clerical assistance to the Code Appeals Board, as and
when needed.
B. The Code Appeals Board shall obtain its own solicitor to attend its
meetings, provide legal advice and prepare decisions and orders at the
request of the Code Appeals Board, with the compensation of such
solicitor to be fixed annually by the Council and paid by the borough.
C. The Code Appeals Board may, when it deems it appropriate, provide for
a stenographic record to be made of any hearing. If the Code Appeals
Board declines to provide for the making of a stenographic record of a
hearing, any party may do so at such party's expense and, in such event,
shall deliver a copy of any transcription thereof to the Secretary of the
Code Appeals Board.
A. A quorum of the Code Appeals Board shall exist when at least three
members of the Code Appeals Board are present. Such quorum may
consist of regular and alternate members.
B. The actions of the Code Appeals Board shall be determined by the vote
or other affirmative expression of a majority of its members present at
the time of the vote. All actions of the Code Appeals Board shall be
certified by the Chairperson or, in the Chairperson's absence, the Vice
Chairperson and attested to by its Secretary.
§ 12-3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 12-6
12:24
§ 12-7. Authority and jurisdiction of Code Appeals Board.
C. No member of the Code Appeals Board shall participate in any hearing
or vote on any matter on which that member has a direct or indirect
personal or financial interest, or is engaged as a contractor,
subcontractor or professional consultant on the subject matter of the
case at hand, or is engaged in the preparation of plans and
specifications, on the subject matter of the case at hand.
D. The Code Appeals Board shall conduct all public hearings and
administrative business, and all votes, at advertised public meetings, in
accordance with the Sunshine Law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania,11 as amended from time to time, except the deliberations
for the purpose of considering an appeal, including the receipt of the
advice of the solicitor for the Code Appeals Board, may occur in
executive session.
E. The Code Appeals Board shall meet no less frequently than monthly,
except that the Chairperson may cancel such meeting if the Code
Appeals Board has no pending business at the time a meeting is
scheduled. The Code Appeals Board shall publish, no less frequently
than annually, during the month of December, a list of its regularly
scheduled public meeting dates, times and places for the ensuing 12
monthly meetings during the following year.
A. The Code Appeals Board shall have authority and jurisdiction to hear
and decide appeals from notices of violations, determinations, orders or
permits issued by the Code Enforcement Officer appointed by the
Council pursuant to Chapter 11 of the Kutztown Code, as amended and
supplemented, or such person's assistants or designees (hereinafter in
this Chapter 12, individually and collectively, the "Code Enforcement
Officer") and may hear and decide appeals from any notices of
violations, determinations, orders and permits issued and from the
effects of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to the authority of
any of the following codes, ordinances and regulations of the Borough
of Kutztown (other than provisions thereof, if any, governed by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code,12 or which are enforceable only by sworn police
officers), and may hear and decide requests for modifications and
waivers specifically permitted to be granted by the Code Appeals Board
pursuant to the authority of any of the following codes, ordinances and
regulations of the Borough of Kutztown; provided, in each case, that the
appeal and/or request pertains to premises upon which no regulated
unit (as defined in § 135-2A of Chapter 135 of the Kutztown Code and,
in this chapter, a "regulated unit") is located:
(1) The Sidewalk and Curb Regulations of the Borough of Kutztown,
being Article IV of Chapter 192, entitled "Streets and Sidewalks,"
11.Editor's Note: See 65 Pa. C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
12.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq. and 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq., respectively.
§ 12-6 APPEALS BOARDS § 12-7
12:25
§ 12-8. Appeals, hearings and procedures.
The Code Appeals Board shall utilize the following procedures and rules
in the course of considering and deciding upon the various appeals and
requests for modifications and waivers brought before the Code Appeals
Board for a decision:
of the Kutztown Code, as amended and supplemented, from time to
time;
(2) The electric standards of the Borough of Kutztown, being Chapter
107 of the Kutztown Code, as amended and supplemented;
provided, however, the authority and jurisdiction of the Code
Appeals Board shall be limited to hearing appeals relating to
§§ 107-4, 107-5, 107-6, 107-9E and 107-37.
(3) The public health; nuisances regulations, being Chapter 168 of the
Kutztown Code, as amended and supplemented from time to time;
(4) The solid waste regulations, being Chapter 185 of the Kutztown
Code, as amended and supplemented, from time to time;
(5) The fiber-optic communications network standards of the Borough
of Kutztown, being Chapter 110 of the Kutztown Code, as amended
and supplemented from time to time, except the provisions of
§ 110-12 thereof regarding the establishment of rates, fees and
charges;
(6) The Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of Kutztown, being
Chapter 136 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown, as amended
and supplemented, from time to time; and
(7) Those provisions of any other ordinance, code and/or regulation of
the Borough of Kutztown, as amended from time to time, which the
Council shall hereafter specifically include within the authority and
jurisdiction of the Code Appeals Board, provided that the same
shall at no time include any code, ordinance or regulation which is
subject to the requirements of the Municipalities Planning Code of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as amended from time to time.
B. All of the foregoing codes, ordinances and regulations shall be deemed
to include any regulations, amendments, supplements, substitutions
and revisions hereafter adopted as pertains to any of the abovedescribed
codes, ordinances and regulations (all of the foregoing codes,
ordinances, regulations, amendments, supplements, substitutions and
revisions, individually and collectively, when applied to the cases
permitted by Subsection A above, the "CAB Jurisdictional Laws").
A. Right to file appeal; time limits; form; fee; transmittal.
(1) Any person or entity being affected by the enforcement and
application of any of the CAB Jurisdictional Laws and having the
§ 12-7 KUTZTOWN CODE § 12-8
12:26
right to file an appeal under the authority of any of the CAB
Jurisdictional Laws may appeal to the Code Appeals Board any
permit, notice, determination or order issued or rule or regulation
promulgated under the authority of the CAB Jurisdictional Laws.
(2) Time limits.
(a) Any such appeal must be filed in writing in the Borough Code
Office within:
[1] Twenty days of receipt by the appellant of such notice,
permit, determination or order;
[2] If the time period for compliance with a notice, permit,
determination or order is less than 20 days, then such
appeal must be filed within the compliance period required
by the CAB Jurisdictional Laws; or
[3] Within 30 days after any such rule or regulation is issued.
(b) Requests for modifications and waivers permitted to be
granted may be filed at any time, but shall, in all other
respects, be subject to the same procedures and rules as
appeals.
(3) Any such written appeal must be filed, in complete and proper
form, with the Borough Code Office on a form of application for
hearing to be provided by the Borough Code Office in accordance
with the resolutions of the Council, as provided in § 12-12 of this
chapter. Such form shall require the appellant to state:
(a) The precise notices, permits, determinations, orders, rules or
regulations from which the appellant appeals, or the precise
modification or waiver, and legal authority therefor, which the
appellant requests;
(b) The reasons for such appeal or request, including any legal
and/or technical authority which the appellant believes
supports the appellant's appeal or request (without prejudice
the appellant's right to present further supporting authority at
the time of hearing);
(c) The provisions of the CAB Jurisdictional Laws which the
appellant contends are applicable to such appeal; and
(d) The nature of the relief which the appellant desires the Code
Appeals Board to grant to the appellant.
(4) At the time of filing of such appeal or request, the appellant shall
pay to the Borough Code Office a fee, in the amount which shall,
from time to time, be established by resolution of the Council
pursuant to the authority of this chapter to defray the costs of such
appeal.
§ 12-8 APPEALS BOARDS § 12-8
12:27
(5) Upon the filing with the Code Enforcement Officer of an appeal to
the Code Appeals Board, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
transmit a copy of such appeal to the Secretary of the Code Appeals
Board.
B. The Code Appeals Board shall commence a public hearing on each
appeal and request for modification or waiver at the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Code Appeals Board occurring at least 20
days, but no more than 45 days after the date that the appeal is filed
with the Borough Code Office.
C. The Secretary of the Code Appeals Board shall cause written notice of
the initial public hearing on any appeal or request for modification or
waiver to be given not less than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing.
Such notice shall be issued by certified first-class United States mail,
postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address of the
appellant set forth in the written appeal filed by the appellant and
addressed to any other person or entity who has requested (in writing)
notice of such appeal or request for modification or waiver.
D. Public hearing.
(1) At the public hearing, the Code Appeals Board shall review the
notices, determinations, orders, permits, regulations or rules which
are the subject of the appeal or the nature of and legal support for
the modification or waiver requested and take such testimony, hear
such witnesses (including members of the public), admit such
evidence and make such findings as it shall deem appropriate.
(2) In any appeal hearing in which the appellant has appealed from an
enforcement notice or stop-work order issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer, the Borough of Kutztown shall have the
burden of proceeding and the burden of proof by a preponderance
of the evidence with respect to such enforcement notice or stopwork
order. In all other instances, the appellant shall have the
burden of proceeding and the burden of proof by a preponderance
of the evidence.
(3) The Code Appeals Board may, if it shall deem it appropriate, order
the party having such burden to proceed and burden of proof to
present relevant expert testimony in support of such party's case
and shall dismiss the appeal or request for modification or waiver if
the party so ordered fails to present such expert testimony at the
time ordered by the Code Appeals Board. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, any party may choose to present expert testimony at a
hearing and, for this purpose, qualified representatives of any of
the Borough of Kutztown's duly appointed engineering firms shall
be permitted to testify as an expert witness on behalf of the
Borough of Kutztown.
§ 12-8 KUTZTOWN CODE § 12-8
12:28
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall be present at
all meetings of the Code Appeals Board, unless excused by the
Code Appeals Board.
(5) The Borough of Kutztown, through its Solicitor and/or other
representatives, may appear and participate as a party in any
proceedings before the Code Appeals Board. The Code
Enforcement Officer may request the Borough of Kutztown
Solicitor to represent the Borough of Kutztown at any public
hearing, with permission of the Council.
(6) The procedures of the Code Appeals Board shall not require
compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that
only relevant information be received. The Code Appeals Board
may admit into evidence in any hearing documentary evidence
consisting of public or governmental records and reports, records
and reports of codes, standards, licensing or testing organizations
and records and reports of materials manufacturers.
(7) The proceedings of the Code Appeals Board shall be governed and
regulated by the Chairperson or, in the Chairperson's absence, the
Vice Chairperson, in consultation with the members of the Code
Appeals Board and its solicitor.
E. Any public hearing may be continued or rescheduled prior to the
scheduled time of the hearing, with the written agreement of the
Chairperson (or in the Chairperson's absence, the Vice Chairperson),
the appellant and the Code Enforcement Officer, or their respective
legal counsel, or may be rescheduled or continued by the Code Appeals
Board at the time that the hearing is convened, to one or more
subsequent dates, as deemed appropriate by the Code Appeals Board.
All continued or rescheduled hearings shall be continued or
rescheduled to a regularly scheduled public meeting date of the Code
Appeals Board, unless all parties agree upon another date. No further
written notice by mail to the parties of any such continuance or
rescheduling shall be required. The appellant shall pay, in advance, a
fee in the amount which shall, from time to time, be established by
resolution of the Council pursuant to the authority of this chapter to
defray the cost of advertising the public notice of any agreed upon
hearing date which is not a regularly scheduled meeting date of the
Code Appeals Board and the additional Code Appeals Board solicitor
cost.
F. Within 45 days after the conclusion of the public hearing concerning an
appeal or request for modification or waiver, the Code Appeals Board
shall advise the appellant and all parties appearing in the appeal or
request for modification or waiver, in writing by certified first-class
United States mail, postage prepaid, of its decision, and a copy of said
decision shall be filed with the Secretary of the Borough of Kutztown
and with the Borough Code Office. Such written decision shall set forth
the evidentiary and legal findings of the Code Appeals Board and shall
§ 12-8 APPEALS BOARDS § 12-8
12:29
§ 12-9. Further appeal.
The decisions and orders of the Code Appeals Board may be further
appealed to the Court of Common Pleas of Berks County, Pennsylvania, by
any party within 30 days after the date of mailing to the appellant and all
other parties of the decision and order of the Code Appeals Board.
§ 12-10. Emergencies.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that an emergency
condition exists which requires immediate action to protect public health
and/or safety, he may, if authorized by any of the CAB Jurisdictional Laws,
issue an order declaring the existence of such emergency and requiring
action to be taken (or requiring that persons refrain from taking certain
actions) to remedy such emergency. Such emergency order shall be
effective immediately upon issuance. Any person to whom such order is
directed shall comply therewith immediately. Said person may file an appeal
or request for modification or waiver to the Code Appeals Board regarding
such order, but such appeal or request for modification or waiver shall not
serve as a supersedeas to the Code Enforcement Officer's emergency order.
contain an order entirely disposing of the appeal or request for
modification or waiver in question. The decisions and orders of the
Code Appeals Board shall be in accordance with the CAB Jurisdictional
Laws, all applicable codes, ordinances and regulations of the Borough
of Kutztown, including the Kutztown Code, as well as the statutes,
laws, judicial decisions and regulations of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the United States of America.
G. All decisions and orders of the Code Appeals Board shall be retained in
the files of the Code Appeals Board, and copies thereof shall be retained
in the files of the Borough Code Office, which files shall be available for
inspection by the public.
H. The Code Appeals Board shall have the authority to interpret the CAB
Jurisdictional Laws and grant such relief as is consistent therewith and
such modifications or waivers as are specifically authorized therein.
The mere showing of financial hardship shall be an insufficient basis for
the granting of relief by the Code Appeals Board to the appellant,
except in those specific instances where the CAB Jurisdictional Laws
expressly permit the consideration of financial hardship as a basis for
the granting of any relief. Except to the extent that the CAB
Jurisdictional Laws specifically permit and regulate limited
encroachments into the right-of-way of public ways of the Borough of
Kutztown, the Code Appeals Board shall have no authority to grant
relief which will or may have the effect of encroaching upon or
encumbering the real property, rights-of-way and rights therein owned
and held by the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 12-8 KUTZTOWN CODE § 12-11
12:30
§ 12-11. Citations and other enforcement.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to alter or affect the power and
authority of the Code Enforcement Officer or other enforcement authority
to issue or file summary citations and to prosecute such summary citations
and/or to file and pursue civil proceedings, whether at law and/or in equity,
before a District Justice, the Court of Common Pleas of Berks County and/
or other permitted authority, regarding violations of the CAB Jurisdictional
Laws and the abatement of such violations; provided, however, that
summary citations may be issued or filed and prosecuted during the
pendency of proceedings before the Code Appeals Board only if a violation
of § 12-10 of this chapter is alleged.
§ 12-12. Adoption of regulations.
The Council may from time to time, by resolution, adopt regulations to
provide for the forms and procedures to be utilized in the filing and
processing of appeals and requests for modification or waivers before the
Code Appeals Board.13
§ 12-13. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer and the appellant shall take prompt action in
accordance with the final decisions and orders of the Code Appeals Board,
from which no appeal has been or may properly be filed.
§ 12-14. (Reserved)
§ 12-15. (Reserved)
§ 12-16. (Reserved)
§ 12-17. (Reserved)
§ 12-18. (Reserved)
§ 12-19. (Reserved)
§ 12-20. (Reserved)
13.Editor's Note: Said forms, as adopted by Res. No. 20-2005, are on file in the Borough
offices.
§ 12-11 APPEALS BOARDS § 12-20
12:31

ARTICLE II
Housing License Appeals Board
§ 12-21. Creation.
A Housing License Appeals Board is hereby established for the purpose
of hearing appeals from licenses issued, enforcement notices issued,
determinations rendered, disruptive conduct reports, or DCRs (as defined
in Chapter 135 of the Kutztown Code and, in this Article II, each a "DCR")
issued, and for the purpose of hearing requests for modifications and
waivers permitted to be granted, all pursuant to the authority contained
in certain ordinances, codes and regulations of the Borough of Kutztown,
including the Code of the Borough of Kutztown, as amended from time to
time, and all regulations issued pursuant thereto, as is more fully provided
hereinbelow. The aforesaid Housing License Appeals Board shall be known
as the "Borough of Kutztown Housing License Appeals Board" (hereinafter
the "Housing License Appeals Board").
§ 12-22. Membership; qualifications.
The Housing License Appeals Board shall consist of five members, all of
whom shall be selected and appointed by the Council to serve in such
position. The members shall have the following qualifications: two of the
members shall each be nonstudent residents of the Borough of Kutztown
and shall not be an owner of one or more regulated units (as defined in
§ 135-2 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown), two of the members
shall each be an owner of one or more regulated units and each shall
be a nonstudent resident of the Borough of Kutztown, and one of the
members shall be a Kutztown University student of at least 18 years of age
residing in the Borough of Kutztown during his or her appointed term who
has received a written recommendation for appointment to the Housing
License Appeals Board from the Student Government Board of Kutztown
University. An owner and tenant of the same regulated unit cannot serve
at the same time. The Council shall appoint three alternate members.
One alternate member shall be a nonstudent resident of the Borough of
Kutztown and shall not be the owner of one or more regulated units and one
shall be an owner of one or more regulated units and shall be a non-student
resident of the Borough of Kutztown, and one of the alternate members
shall be a Kutztown University student of at least 18 years of age residing
in the Borough of Kutztown during his or her appointed term who has
received a written recommendation for appointment to the Housing License
Appeals Board from the Student Government Board of Kutztown University.
Alternate members may be called by the Housing License Appeals Board
Chairperson to hear appeals in the absence or disqualification of any
member. An alternate shall be called to serve who has the same
qualifications as the member who is absent or disqualified (i.e., a resident
alternate shall replace a resident member). All references in this § 12-22 to
the Housing License Appeals Board members shall also be deemed to refer
to Housing License Appeals Board alternate members, unless the context
requires otherwise. The Housing License Appeals Board shall annually
§ 12-21 APPEALS BOARDS § 12-22
12:33
select one of its members to serve as Chairperson (hereinafter in this article
the "Chairperson"), select one of its members to serve as Vice Chairperson
(hereinafter in this article the "Vice Chairperson"), and select one of its
members to serve as Secretary (hereinafter in this article the "Secretary").
§ 12-23. Terms; vacancies; removal.
§ 12-24. Compensation.
Members of the Housing License Appeals Board shall serve as such without
compensation.
§ 12-25. Assistance for Secretary; recordkeeping; counsel.
A. The terms of office for members and alternates of the Housing License
Appeals Board shall be one year.
B. Vacancies on the Housing License Appeals Board, resulting from the
conclusion of a term of membership or the resignation, death or
removal of a member, shall be filled by the appointment and selection of
a new member by the Council. Members and alternates of the Housing
License Appeals Board may be reappointed.
C. Any member of the Housing License Appeals Board may be removed
from office by majority vote of the entire Council for failure to perform
the duties of such office and/or failure to continuously maintain their
appointment qualifications required pursuant to § 12-22 of this article.
A. The Council shall employ and make available to the Housing License
Appeals Board qualified persons to assist the Secretary and other
officers of the Housing License Appeals Board, who shall appear at the
meetings of the Housing License Appeals Board, shall keep minutes of
the Housing License Appeals Board proceedings, votes, decisions and
actions, as well as all dates, records and documents pertaining to the
activities of the Housing License Appeals Board, as directed and
authorized by the officers and solicitor of the Housing License Appeals
Board. The Borough Code Office is hereby authorized to provide such
clerical assistance to the Housing License Appeals Board, as and when
needed.
B. The Housing License Appeals Board shall obtain its own solicitor to
attend its meetings, provide legal advice and prepare decisions and
orders at the request of the Housing License Appeals Board, with the
compensation of such solicitor to be fixed annually by the Council and
paid by the borough.
C. The Housing License Appeals Board may, when it deems it appropriate,
provide for a stenographic record to be made of any hearing. If the
Housing License Appeals Board declines to provide for the making of a
stenographic record of a hearing, any party may do so at such party's
§ 12-22 KUTZTOWN CODE § 12-25
12:34
§ 12-26. Quorums; voting; conflicts of interest; conduct of hearings;
meetings.
§ 12-27. Authority and jurisdiction of Housing License Appeals
Board.
expense and, in such event, shall deliver a copy of any transcription
thereof to the Secretary of the Housing License Appeals Board.
A. A quorum of the Housing License Appeals Board shall exist when at
least three members of the Housing License Appeals Board are present.
Such quorum may consist of regular and alternate members.
B. The actions of the Housing License Appeals Board shall be determined
by the vote or other affirmative expression of a majority of its members
present at the time of the vote. All actions of the Housing License
Appeals Board shall be certified by the Chairperson or, in the
Chairperson's absence, the Vice Chairperson and attested to by its
Secretary.
C. No member of the Housing License Appeals Board shall participate in
any hearing or vote on any matter on which that member has a direct or
indirect personal or financial interest, or is engaged as a contractor,
subcontractor or professional consultant on the subject matter of the
case at hand, or is engaged in the preparation of plans and
specifications on the subject matter of the case at hand.
D. The Housing License Appeals Board shall conduct all public hearings
and administrative business, and all votes, at advertised public
meetings, in accordance with the Sunshine Law of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania,14 as amended from time to time, except the
deliberations for the purpose of considering an appeal, including the
receipt of the advice of the solicitor for the Housing License Appeals
Board, may occur in executive session.
E. The Housing License Appeals Board shall meet no less frequently than
monthly, except that the Chairperson may cancel such meeting if the
Housing License Appeals Board has no pending business at the time a
meeting is scheduled. The Housing License Appeals Board shall
publish, no less frequently than annually, during the month of
December, a list of its regularly scheduled public meeting dates, times
and places for the ensuing 12 monthly meetings during the following
year.
A. The Housing License Appeals Board shall have authority and
jurisdiction to hear and decide appeals from notices of violations,
determinations, orders or licenses issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer and may hear and decide appeals from any notices of violations,
determinations, orders and licenses issued and from the effects of any
14.Editor's Note: See 65 Pa. C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 12-25 APPEALS BOARDS § 12-27
12:35
rule or regulation adopted pursuant to the authority of any of the
following codes, ordinances and regulations of the Borough of Kutztown
(other than provisions thereof, if any, governed by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction
Code,15 or which are enforceable only by sworn police officers), and
may hear and decide requests for modifications and waivers specifically
permitted to be granted by the Housing License Appeals Board
pursuant to the authority of any of the following codes, ordinances and
regulations of the Borough of Kutztown; provided, in each case, that the
appeal and/or request pertains to premises upon which a regulated unit
is located:
(1) The Housing Standards of the Borough of Kutztown, being Chapter
135, entitled "Housing Standards," of the Kutztown Code, as
amended and supplemented from time to time;
(2) The Sidewalk and Curb Regulations of the Borough of Kutztown,
being Article IV of Chapter 192, entitled "Streets and Sidewalks,"
of the Kutztown Code, as amended and supplemented, from time to
time;
(3) The electric standards of the Borough of Kutztown, being Chapter
107 of the Kutztown Code, as amended and supplemented;
provided, however, the authority and jurisdiction of the Housing
License Appeals Board shall be limited to hearing appeals relating
to §§ 107-4, 107-5, 107-6, 107-9E and 107-37.
(4) The public health; nuisances regulations, being Chapter 168 of the
Kutztown Code, as amended and supplemented from time to time;
(5) The solid waste regulations, being Chapter 185 of the Kutztown
Code, as amended and supplemented, from time to time;
(6) The fiber-optic communications network standards of the Borough
of Kutztown, being Chapter 110 of the Kutztown Code, as amended
and supplemented from time to time, except the provisions of
§ 110-12 thereof regarding the establishment of rates, fees and
charges;
(7) The Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of Kutztown, being
Chapter 136 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown, as amended
and supplemented, from time to time; and
(8) Those provisions of any other ordinance, code and/or regulation of
the Borough of Kutztown, as amended from time to time, which the
Council shall hereafter specifically include within the authority and
jurisdiction of the Housing License Appeals Board, provided that
the same shall at no time include any code, ordinance or regulation
which is subject to the requirements of the Municipalities Planning
15.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq. and 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq., respectively.
§ 12-27 KUTZTOWN CODE § 12-27
12:36
§ 12-28. Appeals, hearings and procedures.
The Housing License Appeals Board shall utilize the following procedures
and rules in the course of considering and deciding upon the various
appeals and requests for modifications and waivers brought before the
Housing License Appeals Board for a decision:
Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as amended from time
to time.
B. All of the foregoing codes, ordinances and regulations shall be deemed
to include any regulations, amendments, supplements, substitutions
and revisions hereafter adopted as pertains to any of the abovedescribed
codes, ordinances and regulations (all of the foregoing codes,
ordinances, regulations, amendments, supplements, substitutions and
revisions, individually and collectively, when applied to the cases
permitted by Subsection A above, the "HLAB Jurisdictional Laws").
A. Right to file appeal; time limits; form; fee; transmittal.
(1) Any person or entity being affected by the enforcement and
application of any of the HLAB Jurisdictional Laws and having the
right to file an appeal under the authority of any of the HLAB
Jurisdictional Laws may appeal to the Housing License Appeals
Board any license, notice, determination, DCR or order issued or
rule or regulation promulgated under the authority of the HLAB
Jurisdictional Laws.
(2) Time limits.
(a) Any such appeal must be filed in writing in the Borough Code
Office within:
[1] Twenty days of receipt by the appellant of such notice,
license, determination, DCR or order;
[2] If the time period for compliance with a notice, license,
determination, DCR or order is less than 20 days, then
such appeal must be filed within the compliance period
required by the HLAB Jurisdictional Laws; or
[3] Within 30 days after any such rule or regulation is issued.
(b) Requests for modifications and waivers permitted to be
granted may be filed at any time, but shall, in all other
respects, be subject to the same procedures and rules as
appeals.
(3) Any such written appeal must be filed, in complete and proper
form, with the Borough Code Office on a form of application for
hearing to be provided by the Borough Code Office in accordance
with the resolutions of the Council, as provided in § 12-32 of this
chapter. Such form shall require the appellant to state:
§ 12-27 APPEALS BOARDS § 12-28
12:37
(a) The precise notices, licenses, determinations, DCR orders,
rules or regulations from which the appellant appeals, or the
precise modification or waiver, and legal authority therefor,
which the appellant requests;
(b) The reasons for such appeal or request, including any legal
and/or technical authority which the appellant believes
supports the appellant's appeal or request (without prejudice
the appellant's right to present further supporting authority at
the time of hearing);
(c) The provisions of the HLAB Jurisdictional Laws which the
appellant contends are applicable to such appeal; and
(d) The nature of the relief which the appellant desires the
Housing License Appeals Board to grant to the appellant.
(4) At the time of filing of such appeal or request, the appellant shall
pay to the Borough Code Office a fee, in the amount which shall,
from time to time, be established by resolution of the Council
pursuant to the authority of this chapter to defray the costs of such
appeal; provided, however, that no fee shall be due in a matter
involving proceedings pursuant to § 135-10C(3) and (5) of the Code
of the Borough of Kutztown.
(5) Upon the filing with the Borough Code Officer of an appeal to the
Housing License Appeals Board, the Borough Code Officer shall
transmit a copy of such appeal to the Secretary of the Housing
License Appeals Board.
B. The Housing License Appeals Board shall commence a public hearing
on each appeal and request for modification or waiver at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Housing License Appeals Board
occurring at least 20 days, but no more than 45 days after the date that
the appeal is filed with the Borough Code Office.
C. The Secretary of the Housing License Appeals Board shall cause
written notice of the initial public hearing on any appeal or request for
modification or waiver to be given not less than 15 days prior to the
date of the hearing. Such notice shall be issued by certified first-class
United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the
address of the appellant set forth in the written appeal filed by the
appellant and addressed to any other person or entity who has
requested (in writing) notice of such appeal or request for modification
or waiver.
D. Public hearing.
(1) At the public hearing, the Housing License Appeals Board shall
review the notices, determinations, DCRs, orders, licenses,
regulations or rules which are the subject of the appeal or the
nature of and legal support for the modification or waiver
§ 12-28 KUTZTOWN CODE § 12-28
12:38
requested and take such testimony, hear such witnesses (including
members of the public), admit such evidence and make such
findings as it shall deem appropriate.
(2) In any appeal hearing in which the appellant has appealed from an
enforcement notice or stop-work order issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer, the Borough of Kutztown shall have the
burden of proceeding and the burden of proof by a preponderance
of the evidence with respect to such enforcement notice or stopwork
order. In all other instances, the appellant shall have the
burden of proceeding and the burden of proof by a preponderance
of the evidence.
(3) The Housing License Appeals Board may, if it shall deem it
appropriate, order the party having such burden to proceed and
burden of proof to present relevant expert testimony in support of
such party's case and shall dismiss the appeal or request for
modification or waiver if the party so ordered fails to present such
expert testimony at the time ordered by the Housing License
Appeals Board. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any party may
choose to present expert testimony at a hearing and, for this
purpose, qualified representatives of any of the Borough of
Kutztown's duly appointed engineering firms shall be permitted to
testify as an expert witness on behalf of the Borough of Kutztown.
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall be present at
all meetings of the Housing License Appeals Board, unless excused
by the Housing License Appeals Board.
(5) The Borough of Kutztown, through its Solicitor and/or other
representatives, may appear and participate as a party in any
proceedings before the Housing License Appeals Board. The Code
Enforcement Officer may request the Borough of Kutztown
Solicitor to represent the Borough of Kutztown at any public
hearing, with permission of the Council.
(6) The procedures of the Housing License Appeals Board shall not
require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate
that only relevant information be received. The Housing License
Appeals Board may admit into evidence in any hearing
documentary evidence consisting of public or governmental
records and reports, records and reports of codes, standards,
licensing or testing organizations and records and reports of
materials manufacturers.
(7) The proceedings of the Housing License Appeals Board shall be
governed and regulated by the Chairperson or, in the Chairperson's
absence, the Vice Chairperson, in consultation with the members of
the Housing License Appeals Board and its Solicitor.
E. Any public hearing may be continued or rescheduled prior to the
scheduled time of the hearing, with the written agreement of the
§ 12-28 APPEALS BOARDS § 12-28
12:39
Chairperson (or in the Chairperson's absence, the Vice Chairperson),
the appellant and the Code Enforcement Officer, or their respective
legal counsel, or may be rescheduled or continued by the Housing
License Appeals Board at the time that the hearing is convened, to
one or more subsequent dates, as deemed appropriate by the Housing
License Appeals Board. All continued or rescheduled hearings shall be
continued or rescheduled to a regularly scheduled public meeting date
of the Housing License Appeals Board, unless all parties agree upon
another date. No further written notice by mail to the parties of any
such continuance or rescheduling shall be required. The appellant shall
pay, in advance, a fee in the amount which shall, from time to time, be
established by resolution of the Council pursuant to the authority of this
chapter to defray the cost of advertising the public notice of any agreed
upon hearing date which is not a regularly scheduled meeting date of
the Housing License Appeals Board and the additional Housing License
Appeals Board solicitor cost.
F. Within 45 days after the conclusion of the public hearing concerning an
appeal or request for modification or waiver, the Housing License
Appeals Board shall advise the appellant and all parties appearing in
the appeal or request for modification or waiver, in writing by certified
first-class United States mail, postage prepaid, of its decision, and a
copy of said decision shall be filed with the Secretary of the Borough of
Kutztown and with the Borough Code Office. Such written decision shall
set forth the evidentiary and legal findings of the Housing License
Appeals Board and shall contain an order entirely disposing of the
appeal or request for modification or waiver in question. The decisions
and orders of the Housing License Appeals Board shall be in
accordance with the HLAB Jurisdictional Laws, all applicable codes,
ordinances and regulations of the Borough of Kutztown, including the
Kutztown Code, as well as the statutes, laws, judicial decisions and
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the United
States of America.
G. All decisions and orders of the Housing License Appeals Board shall be
retained in the files of the Housing License Appeals Board, and copies
thereof shall be retained in the files of the Borough Code Office, which
files shall be available for inspection by the public.
H. The Housing License Appeals Board shall have the authority to
interpret the HLAB Jurisdictional Laws and grant such relief as is
consistent therewith and such modifications or waivers as are
specifically authorized therein. The mere showing of financial hardship
shall be an insufficient basis for the granting of relief by the Housing
License Appeals Board to the appellant, except in those specific
instances where the HLAB Jurisdictional Laws expressly license the
consideration of financial hardship as a basis for the granting of any
relief. Except to the extent that the HLAB Jurisdictional Laws
specifically license and regulate limited encroachments into the rightof-
way of public ways of the Borough of Kutztown, the Housing License
§ 12-28 KUTZTOWN CODE § 12-28
12:40
§ 12-29. Further appeal.
The decisions and orders of the Housing License Appeals Board may be
further appealed to the Court of Common Pleas of Berks County,
Pennsylvania, by any party within 30 days after the date of mailing to the
appellant and all other parties of the decision and order of the Housing
License Appeals Board.
§ 12-30. Emergencies.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that an emergency
condition exists which requires immediate action to protect public health
and/or safety, he may, if authorized by any of the HLAB Jurisdictional Laws,
issue an order declaring the existence of such emergency and requiring
action to be taken (or requiring that persons refrain from taking certain
actions) to remedy such emergency. Such emergency order shall be
effective immediately upon issuance. Any person to whom such order is
directed shall comply therewith immediately. Said person may file an appeal
or request for modification or waiver to the Housing License Appeals Board
regarding such order, but such appeal or request for modification or waiver
shall not serve as a supersedeas to the Code Enforcement Officer's
emergency order.
§ 12-31. Citations and other enforcement.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to alter or affect the power and
authority of the Code Enforcement Officer or other enforcement authority
to issue or file summary citations and to prosecute such summary citations
and/or to file and pursue civil proceedings, whether at law and/or in equity,
before a District Justice, the Court of Common Pleas of Berks County and/
or other permitted authority, regarding violations of the HLAB Jurisdictional
Laws and the abatement of such violations; provided, however, that
summary citations may be issued or filed and prosecuted during the
pendency of proceedings before the Housing License Appeals Board only if
a violation of § 12-30 of this chapter is alleged.
§ 12-32. Adoption of regulations.
The Council may from time to time, by resolution, adopt regulations to
provide for the forms and procedures to be utilized in the filing and
processing of appeals and requests for modification or waivers before the
Housing License Appeals Board.16
Appeals Board shall have no authority to grant relief which will or may
have the effect of encroaching upon or encumbering the real property,
rights-of-way and rights therein owned and held by the Borough of
Kutztown.
16.Editor's Note: Said forms, as adopted by Res. No. 20-2005, are on file in the Borough
offices.
§ 12-28 APPEALS BOARDS § 12-33
12:41
§ 12-33. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer and the appellant shall take prompt action
in accordance with the final decisions and orders of the Housing License
Appeals Board, from which no appeal has been or may properly be filed.
§ 12-33 KUTZTOWN CODE § 12-33
12:42
Chapter 13
PAYMENT AND COLLECTION MATTERS
§ 12-33 PAYMENT AND COLLECTION MATTERS § 12-33
13:43

ARTICLE I
Attorney Fees
§ 13-1. Policies and procedures.
The policies and procedures of the Borough of Kutztown, Berks County,
Pennsylvania (the Borough), for the collection of delinquent unpaid taxes,
user charges, utility charges and other charges (herein individually an
"account" and collectively "accounts") established by the Borough, from
time to time, whether pursuant to this code or otherwise, which are covered
by the Pennsylvania Municipal Claims and Tax Lien Law, Act of May 16,
1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153), amended December 19, 1990 (P.L. 1092, No. 199)
(53 P.S. § 7101, et seq.) (the Municipal Claims Law), as further amended by
Pennsylvania Act No. 1 of 1996, (P.L. 1, No. 1) (53 P.S. § 7106) (the "Act"),
shall be as enacted from time to time by ordinance of the Borough and/or
established from time to time by resolution of the Council of the Borough,
as appropriate.
§ 13-2. Schedule of fees.
A. The Borough hereby approves the following schedule of attorney fees
for services in connection with the collection of accounts, which fees
are hereby determined to be fair and reasonable compensation for the
services set forth below, all in accordance with the principles set forth
in Section 3 (a.1) of the Pennsylvania Municipal Claims Law,17 as added
by the Act:
Legal Service Fee For Service
Initial review and sending first
demand letter
Hourly amount equal to the
Solicitor's then current regular
charges to the Borough
File lien and mailing second
demand letter
$25
Prepare Writ of Scire Facias $50
Obtain reissued writ $25
Prepare and mail letter under Pa.
R.C.P. § 237.1
$25
Prepare motion for alternate
service
$25
Prepare motion for summary
judgment and related judgment
Hourly amount equal to the
solicitor's then current regular
charges to the Borough
Prepare Writ of Execution $50
17.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7106 (a.1).
§ 13-1 PAYMENT AND COLLECTION MATTERS § 13-2
13:45
§ 13-3. Collection procedures.
The following specific collection procedures for the Borough, relating to the
imposition and collection of attorney fees, are hereby established by the
Borough in accordance with the Act:
Legal Service Fee For Service
Attendance at sale; review
schedule of distribution and
resolve distribu- tion issues
Hourly amount equal to the
Solicitor's then current regular
charges to the Borough
Services not covered above Hourly amount equal to the
solicitor's then current regular
charges to the Borough
B. There shall be added to the above amounts the reasonable out-of-pocket
expenses of legal counsel in connection with each of these services, as
itemized in the applicable legal counsel bills, which shall be deemed to
be part of the fees.
C. The amount of fees determined as set forth above shall be added to the
Borough's claim in each account.
A. At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney fees in
connection with the collection of an account, the Borough shall mail or
cause to be mailed, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice
of such intention to the taxpayer or other entity liable for the account
(the account debtor).
B. If, within 30 days after mailing the notice in accordance with
Subsection A, the certified mail to any account debtor is refused or
unclaimed or the return receipt is not received, then at least 10 days
prior to the assessing or imposing such attorney fees, the Borough shall
mail or cause to be mailed, by first class mail, a second notice to such
account debtor.
C. All notices required by this chapter shall be mailed to the account
debtor's last known post office address as recorded in the records or
other information of the Borough or such other address as it may be
able to obtain from the Berks County Tax Assessment Office.
D. Each notice as described above shall include the following:
(1) The type of tax or other charge, the date it became due and the
amount owed, including penalty and interest;
(2) A statement of the Borough's intent to impose or assess attorney
fees within 30 days after the mailing of the first notice, or within 10
days after the mailing of the second notice;
(3) The manner in which the assessment or imposition of attorney fees
may be avoided by payment of the account; and
§ 13-2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 13-3
13:46
§ 13-4. Additional actions authorized.
The proper officials of the Borough are hereby authorized and empowered
to take such additional action as they may deem necessary or appropriate
to implement this chapter.
§ 13-5. Severability; repealer.
(4) The place of payment for accounts and the name and telephone
number of the Borough official designated as responsible for
collection matters.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any of the
provisions shall be held to be unconstitutional or illegal, such decision
shall not affect the validity of any remaining provisions of this chapter.
It is hereby declared that it is the legislative intent that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional or illegal provision
not been included.
B. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter be and the same are hereby repealed.
§ 13-3 PAYMENT AND COLLECTION MATTERS § 13-5
13:47

ARTICLE II
Electronic Payment
§ 13-6. Electronic payment policy.
The use of electronic systems to transfer funds and make payments has
proliferated in recent years, with the growing use of computer systems
and the Internet. The use of electronic systems to transfer funds and make
payments provides the potential for substantial benefits to both the Borough
of Kutztown ("borough") and to the citizens and services consumers of the
borough. However, the unique characteristics of electronic systems utilized
for the making of payments, either by the transfer of funds or the granting
of credit, require modifications to the Code of the Borough of Kutztown in
order to clarify the use and application of such electronic systems in the
context of the making of payments to the borough for various purposes.
By enacting the electronic payment provisions set forth in this article, the
Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown ("Council") intends to facilitate
the use of electronic systems in the remittance of sums to the borough
and to specify the procedure for the authorization of the use of electronic
systems for such purposes, as well as for the payment of costs and the
allowance of fees, discounts and charges associated with the use of such
electronic systems by the borough.
§ 13-7. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ELECTRONIC PAYMENT — The payment or crediting of funds to the
borough by means of electronic transfer of funds, wire transfer of funds,
credit card payment or other payment involving electronic means,
including, but not limited to, the use of computers, computer networks,
electronic terminals, telephone transfers, credit card transactions, debit
card transactions, point-of-sale transfers, automated teller machine
transfers and electronic deposit of funds. The term "electronic payment"
shall not include a transaction originated by or involving currency, check,
draft or similar paper instrument, whether or not the transaction involves
the use of an electronic device or telephone.
OBLIGATION — Any sums owed by any person or entity to the borough for
any reason, including, without limitation, any fee, charge, interest charge,
penalty, fine, permit fee, license fee, application fee, appeal fee, user
charges, utility charges and/or account, except the following:
Any of the foregoing as to which payment by means of electronic
payment is prohibited by virtue of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and/or the United States of America;
A.
Any tax, including any interest, penalty and late charges assessed
or charged thereon, and other sums owed in connection therewith,
whether levied by the borough under Chapter 200 of the Code of the
Borough of Kutztown, as in effect from time to time, or levied by the
B.
§ 13-6 PAYMENT AND COLLECTION MATTERS § 13-7
13:49
§ 13-8. Agreements for electronic payment.
Any means of electronic payment and any agreement involving a means
of electronic payment, whereby the borough will or may become obligated
to pay a fee or service charge for the transactions or will or may suffer
the deduction of a discount from the amount of the obligation for each
transaction, shall be subject to approval by the Council, from time to time,
by means of a resolution.
§ 13-9. Electronic payment authorized.
Subject to the approval of the means of electronic payment and any
agreement therefor by the Council by a resolution, as and when required
by § 13-8 of this Code, the borough and its officials, officers, employees and
agents are hereby permitted to accept payment of any obligation by means
of electronic payment, including in those instances whereby the borough
shall become obligated to pay a fee in connection with such transaction and
in those instances where the amount of the obligation paid to the borough
will be reduced by a fee, charge or discount on account of such transaction.
§ 13-10. Repealer; effectiveness.
Except to the extent specifically set forth herein, the Code of the Borough
of Kutztown, as previously amended, shall remain unchanged and in full
force and effect. All provisions of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown,
ordinances, resolutions and parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions
of this article are hereby repealed. This article shall become effective upon
enactment.
borough from time to time by virtue of any other ordinance, resolution
or enactment, notwithstanding whether such tax is collected directly by
the borough or by a tax collector, agent or other party;
Any judgment, fine, penalty or other sum imposed and payable as
a result of proceedings before the courts of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, including, without limitation, proceedings before any
District Justice and/or before the Court of Common Pleas of Berks
County, Pennsylvania, unless such sum is payable directly to the
borough; and
C.
Any tapping fee, connection fee and/or customer facilities fee relating
to sewer and/or water utility services, as defined in Section 4(B)(t) of
the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, No.
164, as amended from time to time, and as described in Section 507-A
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968 (P.L. 805,
No. 247), as reenacted and amended from time to time.
D.
§ 13-7 KUTZTOWN CODE § 13-10
13:50
ARTICLE III
Interest Rate on Municipal Liens
[Added 9-17-2002 by Ord. No. 11-2002]
§ 13-11. Interest rate on municipal liens of record.
In accordance with the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act of 1923, May
16, 1923, P.L. 207, § 9,18 as amended from time to time, a rate of interest in
the amount of 6% per annum shall be collectible on all municipal claims of
the Borough of Kutztown, on improvements from the date of the completion
of the work after it is filed as a lien, and on claims for taxes, water rates,
sewer rates, electric rates and any other types of claims from the date of
the filing of the lien therefor.
18.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 13-11 PAYMENT AND COLLECTION MATTERS § 13-11
13:51
Chapter 15
ENVIRONMENTAL CODE
§ 13-11 KUTZTOWN CODE § 13-11
13:52
ARTICLE I
Environmental Advisory Commission
[Adopted 12-18-2007 by Ord. No. 17-2007]
§ 15-1. Title.
The short title of this article shall be the "Environmental Advisory
Commission," and the same may be cited in that manner.
§ 15-2. Establishment.
It is hereby established that the Environmental Advisory Commission
(hereinafter referred to as "EAC") shall be an advisory commission and shall
remain in existence until an ordinance terminating its existence is passed
by the Borough Council.
§ 15-3. Composition and organization.
A. The Environmental Advisory Commission shall be made up of seven
members who shall be appointed by the Borough Council. The seven
members or Commissioners shall consist of the following: five Borough
residents, one nonresident who is a Borough property owner, and one
student member, said student being either a Kutztown University
student residing in the Borough or on the campus of Kutztown
University, or a student at Kutztown Area High School, who resides
within the Borough of Kutztown. Each member shall be appointed for a
term of three years except for original appointments which are
specified in Subsection C below or until his/her successor takes office.
[Amended 8-18-2009 by Ord. No. 5-2009]
B. The EAC shall annually elect one of its members to serve as
Chairperson and elect such other officers and adopt procedural rules
and regulations as it deems appropriate.
C. The initial terms of all members of the EAC shall be deemed at their
appointment and end as follows: two residents shall be appointed for
terms of one year; two residents shall be appointed for terms of two
years; two residents shall be appointed for terms of three years; and the
lone student representative shall be appointed for a term of two years.
D. The student representative on the EAC shall be allowed to serve his/her
term on the EAC for as long as he/she is enrolled as a student at either
Kutztown Area School District or Kutztown University and resides
within the Borough of Kutztown or on the campus of Kutztown
University. In the event that the student member on the EAC no longer
meets the requirements, his/her membership on the EAC shall be
terminated, and the Borough Council shall appoint a new student
representative meeting the qualifications of the student member.
§ 15-1 PAYMENT AND COLLECTION MATTERS § 15-4
13:53
§ 15-4. Borough Council liaison.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown shall accommodate one
of its members to serve as the Borough Council's liaison to the Borough
of Kutztown Environmental Advisory Commission. The Council liaison shall
have the ability to engage in the discussion of the EAC and to provide useful
input to the EAC. However, the Council liaison shall not have a vote in the
affairs of the EAC nor shall be/she be eligible for election as an officer of the
EAC.
§ 15-5. Purpose, powers and duties.
A. The purpose of the EAC shall be to advise the Borough Council on all
environmental issues confronting the Borough and to make
recommendations regarding the Borough's environmental policies.
B. The EAC's duties shall include the following:
(1) To serve as a clearinghouse for information and forum for inquiries
and issues of an environmental nature from citizens and any other
board or commission and to assist in answering the inquiry and/or
resolving the issue presented.
(2) When requested or necessary, to recommend plans and programs
to the appropriate agencies for identification and resolution of
environmental problems, promotion and conservation of natural
resources and for the protection and improvement of the quality of
the environment within the Borough of Kutztown.
(3) To encourage voluntary environmental programs and community
participation therein.
(4) To undertake such other environmental tasks as requested by the
Borough Council.
(5) To apply for and receive grants and expend funds appropriated for
its use for the purposes set forth in this subsection, provided that
no expense may be incurred by the EAC without the prior approval
of the Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown.
C. The EAC shall file an annual report with the Borough Council which
shall contain recommendations concerning the Borough's
environmental policies and methods to improve thereon. The report
shall also set forth an outline of the EAC's goals and objectives for the
upcoming year.
§ 15-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 15-5
13:54
Chapter 17
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Chapter 20
JOINT UCC BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 11.
Appeals Boards — See Ch. 12.
Intergovernmental projects and
agreements — See Ch. 37.
Construction Code — See Ch. 75.
§ 20-1. Approval to enter agreement.
The Borough Council hereby approves entering into the agreement, a copy
of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference, with the
intent and effect that the Borough shall be bound by the agreement.19
§ 20-2. Authorization to execute agreement.
The President of the Borough Council is hereby authorized and directed on
behalf of the Borough:
§ 20-3. Prior actions.
All actions of any officer, agent or other representative of the Borough
heretofore taken in pursuit of the establishment of the UCC Board of
Appeals and/or the Borough's participation therein are hereby ratified and
approved in all respects.
§ 20-4. Future actions.
The Borough Council is hereby authorized to take such other action as may
be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this chapter and of
the agreement.
A. To execute and deliver the Agreement; and
B. To execute and deliver such additional instruments, and to take such
further actions, as may be necessary or appropriate to carry forth the
agreement and the transactions to be effected under the agreement,
including payment of the participation fee to Berks County on behalf of
the UCC Board of Appeals, as may be due from the Borough under the
agreement.
19.Editor's Note: A copy of the agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 15-5 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 20-5
17:55
§ 20-5. Compliance with statute.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,20 the
following matters are specifically found and determined:
§ 20-6. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any section, sentence,
clause, or part or provision hereof shall be held to be illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the
court shall not affect the remaining sections, clauses, parts or provisions of
this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough that such
chapter would have been enacted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional
section, sentence, clause, part or provision had not been included herein.
§ 20-7. Repealer.
All ordinances and resolutions or parts of ordinances and resolutions
conflicting herewith are hereby repealed.
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the agreement.
B. The Borough shall utilize the UCC Board of Appeals for all appeals filed
from application of Chapter 75 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown,
as set forth in the Pennsylvania Construction Code, Act 45 of 1999, for
the term as set forth in the agreement.
C. The purpose and objectives of the agreement are as set forth in the
background of this chapter and in the agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing the agreement are that:
(1) No borrowing will be required by the Borough;
(2) Funds to implement the Borough's obligations under the
agreement shall come from normal and usual budgeted amounts
for such matters; and
(3) Other provisions governing the manner and extent of the financing
of the UCC Board of Appeals shall be as set forth in the agreement.
E. The UCC Board of Appeals shall be administered by the Board of
Commissioners of Berks County, or its designee.
F. All property, real or personal, of the UCC Board of Appeals shall be
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by the UCC Board of
Appeals in accordance with the terms of the agreement and the rules
and procedures as may be adopted by the UCC Board of Appeals.
G. The UCC Board of Appeals will not be entering into any contracts.
20.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa. C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 20-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 20-8
20:56
§ 20-8. Construal of provisions.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any
cause of action existing prior to the enactment of this chapter.
§ 20-9. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective on the earliest date permitted by law after
enactment.
Chapter 25
LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST
§ 25-1. Borough to join Trust.
The Borough of Kutztown (hereinafter referred to as the "borough") shall
join with local governmental units in accordance with the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act and other similar acts by becoming a
settlor of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust (hereinafter
referred to as the "Trust") and entering into the Declaration of Trust, which
is adopted by reference with the same effect as if it had been set out
verbatim in this section and a copy of which shall be filed with the minutes
of the meeting at which this chapter is adopted.21
§ 25-2. Authorization to purchase shares.
The borough is authorized to purchase shares in the Trust from time to time
with available funds and to redeem some or all of such shares from time
to time as funds are needed for other purposes, subject to the terms and
restrictions of the Declaration of Trust referred to in § 25-1. Such actions
are to be taken by the officers of the borough designated for such purpose
by resolution of the Council of the borough.
§ 25-3. Custody of funds.
The Trustees of the Trust are designated as having official custody of the
borough's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in the Trust.
§ 25-4. Findings.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 25-1.
21.Editor's Note: A copy of the Declaration of Trust in on file in the office of the Borough
Manager.
§ 20-8 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST § 25-4
25:57
Chapter 29
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 11.
Fire Department — See Ch. 17.
Pensions — See Ch. 33.
Police Department — See Ch. 38.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 43.
B. The borough's participation in the Trust shall be terminable at any time
by ordinance, subject to the terms and restrictions of the Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 25-1.
C. The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing the borough's funds in obligations which are
otherwise legal investments, as part of a pooled arrangement with
other local governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other
advantages of pooled investments, and the powers and scope of
authority delegated are set forth in the Declaration of Trust referred to
in § 25-1.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
funds of the borough except through the purchase of shares in the
Trust.
E. The Trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust22 and the bylaws provided for therein.
F. Shares may be repurchased and redeemed from time to time as the
borough may determine to be necessary or appropriate to meet its cash
investment requirements in accordance with the terms and restrictions
of the Declaration of Trust referred to in § 25-1.
G. The Trust shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of
group insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for its
employees.
22.Editor's Note: A copy of the Declaration of Trust in on file in the office of the Borough
Manager.
§ 25-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 25-4
25:58
ARTICLE I
Auditor
[Adopted 1-5-1965 by Ord. No. 3-1965]
§ 29-1. Appointment.
The Council of the Borough of Kutztown shall annually appoint an auditor
who shall be a certified public accountant or a firm of certified public
accountants or a competent independent public accountant or a firm of
independent public accountants.
§ 29-2. Duties; reports.
Such auditor shall be appointed by resolution of the Council before the
commencement of each fiscal year. The auditor shall audit the accounts and
other evidences of financial transactions of the Borough of Kutztown and
the officers of the Borough of Kutztown for the fiscal year then closing and
shall submit the audit report to the Council.
§ 29-3. Compensation.
The compensation of such auditor shall be fixed by Council at the instance
of employment and paid out of Boroughfunds.
§ 29-1 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST § 29-3
25:59

ARTICLE II
Secretary/Treasurer
[Adopted 10-2-1973 by Ord. No. 9-1973]
§ 29-4. Consolidation of offices.
Henceforth it shall be permissible for the office of the Secretary of the
Borough of Kutztown and the office of the Treasurer of the Borough of
Kutztown to be held by the same person, who shall be designated by the
Council of the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 29-5. Construal.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to make mandatory the appointment by the
Council of the Borough of Kutztown of the same person to the offices of
Secretary and Treasurer of said borough.
§ 29-4 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST § 29-5
25:61

ARTICLE III
Manager
[Adopted 1-22-1991 by Ord. No. 2-1991]
§ 29-6. Creation of office.
The office of Borough Manager is hereby created by the Borough of
Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
§ 29-7. Appointment and removal.
The Borough Manager (hereinafter referred to as the "Manager") shall be
appointed for an indefinite term by a majority of all members of the Council.
The Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the Council, and he may be
removed at any time by a majority vote of all of the members of Council. At
least 30 days before such removal is to become effective, the Council shall
furnish the Manager with a written statement setting forth its intention to
remove him.
§ 29-8. Qualifications. [Amended 7-15-2008 by Ord. No. 8-2008]
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to the duties of his office as
herein outlined.
§ 29-9. Bond.
Before entering upon his duties, the Manager shall give a bond to the
Borough with a bonding company as surety, to be approved by the Council,
in the sum of $10,000.) or in such other amount as Council may from time
to time provide by resolution, conditioned upon the faithful performance of
his duties. The premium for said bond shall be paid by the borough.
§ 29-10. Manager's compensation.
The salary of the Manager shall be fixed from time to time by the Council.
§ 29-11. Powers and duties.
A. The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Borough
and shall be responsible to the Council as a whole for the proper and
efficient administration of the affairs of the Borough placed in his
charge. The powers and duties for the administration of all Borough
business shall be vested in the Manager, unless expressly imposed or
conferred by statute or ordinance upon other Borough officers.
B. Subject to recall by ordinance of Council, the powers and duties of the
Manager shall include the following. He shall:
(1) Supervise and be responsible for the activities of all municipal
departments. Nothing in this provision is intended, however, to
§ 29-6 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST § 29-11
25:63
apply to the office of the Borough Solicitor or Borough Engineer
or to supervision of the Police Department in the absence of a
delegation of authority from the Mayor.
(2) If and when approved by resolution of Council, assume the office of
Secretary of the Borough and keep all accounts and records in
connection with said office and perform all the duties of Secretary
of the borough. If the Manager also serves as Borough Secretary,
he shall not receive any additional compensation therefor.
(3) Recommend to Council the hiring of any employee and, when
necessary for the good of the borough, suspend any employee
under his supervision, subject, however, to review by Council at its
next meeting; provided, however, that persons covered by the civil
service provisions of the Borough Code23 shall be hired, suspended
or discharged in accordance with such provisions; and provided,
further, that the Manager shall report, at the next meeting
thereafter of Council, any action taken by authority of this
subsection.
(4) Recommend to Council wages and salaries of all personnel under
his supervision.
(5) Prepare and submit to Council by November 1 of each year a
proposed budget for the next fiscal year and an explanatory budget
message. In preparing the proposed budget, the Manager, or
officer designated by him, shall obtain from the head of each
department, agency or board, or any qualified officer thereof,
estimates of revenues and expenditures and such other supporting
data as is required. The Manager shall review such estimates and
may revise them before submitting the proposed budget to the
Council.
(6) Be responsible for the administration of the budget after its
adoption by the Council.
(7) Develop, in conjunction with the preparation of the annual budget,
long-range fiscal plans for the borough, such plans to be presented
annually to the Council for its review and adoption.
(8) Hold such other Borough offices and head such Borough
departments as the Council may from time to time direct as
permitted by law.
(9) Attend all meetings of the Council and have the right to attend
meetings of its committees, with the right to take part in the
discussions. The Manager shall receive notice of special meetings
of Council and its committees.
23.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.
§ 29-11 KUTZTOWN CODE § 29-11
25:64
(10) Prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Council and supply
facts pertinent thereto.
(11)Keep the Council informed on a monthly basis as to the conduct of
Borough affairs; submit periodic reports to the Council on the
condition of the Borough finances and such other reports as the
Council may from time to time request; and make such
recommendations to the Council as he may from time to time deem
advisable.
(12) Submit to the Council, as soon as possible at the close of the fiscal
year, a complete report on the finances and administrative
activities of the Borough for the preceding year.
(13) See that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and
privileges granted by the Borough are observed.
(14) Employ, by and with the approval of the Council, experts and
consultants to perform work and to advise in connection with any of
the functions of the borough.
(15) Attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law and supervise
the performance and faithful execution of the same except insofar
as such duties are expressly imposed by statute upon some other
Borough officer.
(16) Be responsible for all accounts payable and receivable; in this
respect he shall see that all money owed by the Borough is
promptly paid and that proper proceedings are taken for the
security and collection of all of the borough's claims.
(17) Serve as purchasing officer of the Borough and purchase, in
accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code24 and any
other applicable law, all supplies and equipment for the agencies,
boards, departments and other offices of the borough. He shall
keep an account of all purchases and shall, from time to time or
whenever directed by the Council, make a full written report
thereof. The Manager shall also issue rules and regulations, subject
to the approval of the Council, governing the procurement of all
municipal supplies and equipment.
(18) Investigate and dispose of, or designate an officer to investigate
and dispose of, all complaints regarding Borough services and
personnel and report to the Council thereon. All complaints
regarding Borough services shall be referred to the Office of the
Manager.
(19) Enforce the ordinances and regulations of the Borough upon a
delegation of authority from the Mayor.
24.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.
§ 29-11 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST § 29-11
25:65
§ 29-12. Reservation by Council.
The Council reserves the right at any time, by ordinance, to amend or
otherwise modify or repeal § 29-11 of this Article in any particular.
§ 29-13. Delegation by Mayor.
The Mayor of the Borough is hereby authorized to delegate, in writing, to
the Manager, subject to revocation by written notification at any time, any
of his nonlegislative and nonjudicial powers and duties.
§ 29-14. Procedural limitations on Council.
Other than for the purpose of inquiry, the Council, any of its members
or any of its committees or members of committees shall deal with the
administrative service solely through the Manager, and neither the Council
nor any of its members nor any of the Council's committees or committee
members shall give orders, publicly or privately, to any subordinate of the
Manager.
§ 29-15. Disability or absence of the Manager.
If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the borough, he
shall designate one qualified member of his staff to temporarily perform
the duties of Manager during such absence or disability. The person so
designated shall not perform such duties for a period longer than two (2)
weeks without the approval of the Council.
§ 29-16. Word usage.
Whenever a masculine pronoun is used, it shall include the feminine.
(20) Perform such other duties as may be from time to time by
ordinance conferred upon the Manager.
§ 29-11 KUTZTOWN CODE § 29-16
25:66
Chapter 33
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 29.
Police Department — See Ch. 38.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 43.
§ 29-16 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST § 29-16
25:67

ARTICLE I
Social Security
[Adopted 9-9-1952]
§ 33-1. Authorization.
The Borough of Kutztown is hereby authorized to execute and deliver to
the Secretary of Labor and Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
(hereinafter referred to as the "State Agency") a plan and agreement,
required under Section 6 of the Act No. 491 of the 1951 session of the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Social
Security Act, to extend coverage to all full-time and part-time employees
of the Borough of Kutztown, excepting, however, policemen and police
officers, and to do all other necessary things to effectuate coverage of such
full-time and part-time employees, excepting policemen and police officers,
under the old-age and survivors insurance system.
§ 33-2. Payroll deductions.
The Secretary of the Borough is hereby authorized and directed to establish
a system of payroll deductions to be matched by payments by the Borough
of Kutztown to be made into the Contribution Fund of the Social Security
Act through the office of the State Agency and to make charges of this tax
to the fund from which wage or salary payments are issued to said fulltime
and part-time employees of the Borough of Kutztown, such payments
to be made in accordance with the provisions of the law and regulations
promulgated by the State Agency and the Federal Security Administrator.
§ 33-3. Appropriations.
Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund or funds of the Borough
of Kutztown of the necessary amount to pay into the Contribution Fund as
provided in Section 4 of the Enabling Act25 and in accordance with the plan
and agreement.
§ 33-4. Agreement.
The President and Secretary of Council are hereby authorized and directed
to enter into and execute the plan and agreement with the State Agency,
which agreement shall be in accordance with Act No. 491 and in accordance
with Section 218 of the Social Security Act, such plan and agreement to
provide that the participation of the Borough of Kutztown shall commence
as of July 1, 1952.
25.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6904.
§ 33-1 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST § 33-4
25:69

ARTICLE II
Police Pensions
[Adopted 5-24-1977 as Ord. No. 9-1977]
§ 33-5. Establishment of plan; amendments. [Amended 4-26-1994
by Ord. No. 1-1994]
A. A Police Pension Plan is hereby established pursuant to the Act of May
29, 1956, P.L. 1804, as amended and supplemented, to provide for the
administration of a police pension plan and the investment and
management of the funds and assets of a police pension fund (such
police pension plan and police pension fund hereinafter collectively the
"Police Pension Plan"). Such Police Pension Plan shall be under the
direction of the Borough of Kutztown and shall be applied under such
regulations as the Council of the Borough of Kutztown may prescribe, in
accordance with law. The Council of the Borough of Kutztown may, in
the exercise of its sole discretion, from time to time, select and retain by
resolution such investment advisors, investment managers, actuaries,
accountants, trustees and other professionals and consultants as the
Council deems advisable for the purpose of rendering services in
connection with the administration and management of the Police
Pension Plan and may fix their terms of retention and compensation.
The Council of the Borough of Kutztown may, in the exercise of its sole
discretion, from time to time, adopt by resolution an investment policy
("Investment Policy") to be made applicable to the Police Pension Plan.
The Investment Policy, when adopted by the Council of the Borough of
Kutztown, shall:
(1) Govern the actions of the investment advisors, investment
managers, actuaries, accountants, trustees and other professionals
and consultants which from time to time may be retained by the
Council of the Borough of Kutztown in connection with the Police
Pension Plan.
(2) Set forth the various investment and management objectives of the
Police Pension Plan, including but not limited to appropriate levels
of risk, relative asset allocations, limitations imposed by applicable
statutes and regulations, liquidity needs and growth goals.
B. The Police Pension Plan, originally effective January 1, 1947, is hereby
amended and restated in its entirety, effective January 1, 2001, and the
form thereof dated January 1, 2001, is hereby adopted as the Police
Pension Plan, and the Trust Agreement bearing even date therewith is
also adopted, the terms of both of which are incorporated herein by
reference. Appointment and substitution of the Chief Administrative
Officer of the Police Pension Plan and/or the Trustee of the Trust
thereunder may be made from time to time hereafter by resolution of
the Council of the Borough of Kutztown. [Added 3-16-2004 by Ord.
No. 3-200426]
§ 33-5 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST § 33-5
25:71
C. Section 1.3(a) is amended to change the definition of "compensation" to
comply with the provisions of an Act 111 arbitration award for the
period January 1, 2005, through December 31, 2007. As amended,
Section 1.3(a) shall read as follows: [Added 1-16-2007 by Ord. No.
2-200727]
Section 1.3(a)(1) "Compensation" means any earnings reportable as
W-2 wages for federal income tax withholding purposes, plus elective
contributions, for the applicable period. Elective contributions are
amounts excludable from the employee's gross income and contributed
by the employer, at the employee's election to:
A Cafeteria plan [excludable under IRC Section 125 and as provided in
Section 7.1(e)(3)];
A tax sheltered annuity [excludable under IRC Section 403(b)]; or
A deferred compensation plan excludable under IRC Section 457).
Any reference in this plan to compensation shall be a reference to
the definition in this Section 1.3, unless the plan reference specifies
a modification to this definition. The Plan Administrator shall take
into account only compensation actually paid by the employer for the
relevant period. A compensation payment includes compensation by
the employer through another person under the common paymaster
provisions in IRC Sections 3121 and 3306.
Compensation from a related employer that is not a participating
employer under this plan shall be excluded.
(2) Exclusions from compensation. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Section 1.3(a)(1), the following types of remuneration shall be
excluded from the participant’s compensation:
Unused vacation, holidays, and compensatory time paid on account of
termination of employment.
Any lump sum payment made upon termination of employment.
D. The Police Pension Plan, originally effective January 1, 1947, and
amended and restated in its entirety, effective January 1, 2001 by
Ordinance No. 3-2004, to comply with Internal Revenue Code
requirements, and further amended by Ordinance No. 2-2007 to comply
with the provisions of an Act 111 arbitration award which amended the
Police Pension Plan Section 1.3(a) to redefine and clarify the definition
of "compensation," is hereby amended and restated in its entirety,
effective January 1, 2008 and the Trust Agreement bearing even date
therewith is also adopted, the terms of both of which are incorporated
herein by reference. [Added 11-18-2008 by Ord. No. 14-2008]
26.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 33-6, Eligibility for participation in
plan, § 33-7, Requirements for benefits, as amended, § 33-8, Contribution rate, as
amended, § 33-9, Retirement or pension benefits, as amended, § 33-10, Cost of living
increase, § 33-11, Vesting, as amended, and § 33-12, Prior pension assets and benefits, all
of which immediately followed this section.
27.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective as of 1-1-2005.
§ 33-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 33-5
25:72
§ 33-6. through § 33-12. (Reserved)
E. The attached 2009 Compliance Amendment to the Borough of Kutztown
Police Pension Plan is hereby approved and the Council President, as
the agent of the Borough of Kutztown, is authorized to execute the
attached amendment of the Plan.28 [Added 1-19-2010 by Ord. No.
2-2010]
F. The attached amendment to the Borough of Kutztown Police Pension
Plan is hereby approved29 and the Council President, as the agent of the
Borough of Kutztown, is authorized to execute the attached amendment
of the Plan. [Added 7-19-2011 by Ord. No. 6-2011]
G. The attached amendment of the Borough of Kutztown Police Pension
Plan is hereby enacted.30 The Borough Manager, as the agent of the
employer, is authorized and directed to execute the attached
amendment of the Plan. [Added 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 14-2011]
H. The attached amendment of the Borough of Kutztown Police Pension
Plan is hereby enacted.31 Borough Manager Gabriel Khalife, as the
agent of the employer, is authorized and directed to execute the
attached amendment of the Plan. [Added 11-18-2014 by Ord. No.
1-2014]
28.Editor's Note: Said plan and amendment are on file in the Borough offices.
29.Editor's Note: This amendment (Amendment No. 2) is on file in the Borough offices.
30.Editor's Note: This amendment (2011 HEART Compliance Amendment) is on files in the
Borough offices.
31.Editor's Note: This amendment (recognizing the revised definition of "spouse" under the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania) is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 33-5 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST § 33-6
25:73

ARTICLE III
Nonuniformed Employees
[Adopted 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1-201232]
§ 33-13. Upgrading of benefits.
The Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania (the Borough), being
a member municipality of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System
(the System), hereby elects to amend its Municipal Pension Plan
administered by the System in accordance with Article IV of the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law, 53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq. as
amended (the Retirement Law) and does hereby agree to be bound by all of
the requirements and provisions of the Retirement Law and the Municipal
Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act, 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.,
and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise, placed upon member
municipalities.
§ 33-14. Membership.
Membership in the System shall be mandatory for all nonuniformed
employees, i.e., "municipal employee" as such term is defined in the
amended Municipal Pension Plan entered into between the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement Board and the Borough, effective January 1, 2012
(the contract). Membership for elected officials, part-time employees not
currently members, and employees hired on a temporary or seasonal basis,
whether full- or part-time, is prohibited, as is membership for individuals
paid only on a fee basis.
§ 33-15. Credit for prior service.
Credit for prior service for original members is granted for each year or
partial year thereof that the member was employed by the Borough from
the original date of hire.
§ 33-16. Manner of payment.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this article and
the contract shall be made by the Borough in accordance with the
Retirement Law and the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act.33
§ 33-17. Acceptance of contract and obligations.
As part of this article, the Borough agrees that the System shall administer
and provide the benefits set forth in the contract. The passage and adoption
of this article by the Borough is an official acceptance of the contract and
the financial obligations resulting from the administration of said benefit
32.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Nonuniformed Employees,
adopted 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 12-2001.
33.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.020 et seq.
§ 33-13 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST § 33-17
25:75
package. The Borough hereby assumes all liability for any unfundedness
created due to the benefit structure set forth in the contract.
§ 33-18. Filing of copies; when effective.
A duly certified copy of the ordinance enacting this article and an executed
contract shall be filed with the System.
§ 33-19. Effect on other ordinances.
The Borough intends this article to be the complete authorization of the
contract, and it shall become effective and specifically repeal Ordinance No.
12-2001, enacted on November 13, 2001, either immediately or on January
1, 2012, which is the effective date of the contract, whichever is later.
§ 33-17 KUTZTOWN CODE § 33-19
25:76
ARTICLE IV
Police Pension Advisory Committee
[Adopted 9-28-1993 by Ord. No. 6-1993]
§ 33-20. Creation of committee.
A Police Pension Advisory Committee is hereby established for the purpose
of developing recommendations and advising the Council of the Borough of
Kutztown (hereinafter referred to as the "Borough") on matters involving
or related to the investment and management of the funds and assets of
the Borough Police Pension Fund and the administration of the Borough
Police Pension Plan (hereinafter collectively the "Police Pension Plan"). The
aforesaid Borough Police Pension Advisory Committee shall be known as
the "Kutztown Police Pension Plan Advisory Committee" (hereinafter the
"Committee").
§ 33-21. Membership.
§ 33-22. Term, vacancies, removal.
The initial term of all members of the Committee shall begin with their
appointment and end on January 3, 1994. Thereafter the terms of office for
members of the Committee shall be two years, provided that any member
of the Committee who was selected and is serving as a member of the
Committee pursuant to § 33-21A(2) of this article shall cease to be a
member of the Committee on the last day of such member's employment
with the Borough, and provided further that any member of the Committee
who was selected and is serving as a member of the Committee pursuant
to § 33-21A(3) of this article shall cease to be a member of the Committee
on the day such member ceases to serve as a member of the Borough
Civil Service Commission, and provided further that any member of the
Committee who shall also be a member of the Council shall cease to be
A. The Committee shall consist of five members, as follows:
(1) Two of whom shall be duly elected or appointed Council members
serving in such position, to be selected by the Council;
(2) One of whom shall be a member of the Borough police bargaining
unit, to be recommended by the Borough police bargaining unit and
confirmed and approved by the Council;
(3) One of whom shall be a duly appointed member of the Borough
Civil Service Commission serving in such position, to be selected by
the Council; and
(4) One of whom shall be the duly appointed Borough Manager of the
Borough (hereinafter the "Borough Manager").
B. The Council shall determine, from time to time, when necessary, which
member shall serve as Chairman of the Committee.
§ 33-20 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST § 33-22
25:77
a member of the Board on the day such member ceases to hold office as
a Council member. Members may be reappointed or reelected. Vacancies
on the Committee shall be filled in the same fashion in which the previous
occupant of the vacant member office was selected. Members of the
Committee shall serve at the will and pleasure of the Council during their
respective terms, and may be removed by the Council with or without cause.
§ 33-23. Compensation.
Members of the Committee shall serve as such without compensation.
§ 33-24. Secretary; recordkeeping.
The Borough Manager shall serve as the Secretary of the Committee and
shall keep minutes of the Committee's proceedings, votes,
recommendations to the Council and all dates, records and documents
pertaining to the Committee's activities regarding the Police Pension Plan.
Annually, or more frequently as and when requested by the Council, the
Committee shall report to the Council summarizing the activities of the
Committee during the past year and the then-current recommendations of
the Committee regarding the Police Pension Plan.
§ 33-25. Voting; conflicts of interest.
The action of the Committee shall be determined by the vote or other
affirmative expression of a majority of its members. All actions of the
Committee shall be certified by its Chairman and attested to by its
Secretary. No member of the Committee shall vote on any matter in which
he has a personal interest; provided, however, that Committee members
who are also Police Pension Plan beneficiaries shall not be deemed to have
a conflict of interest. In this respect, the Committee and its members shall
comply with the requirements of the Public Official and Employee Ethics
Law, Act No. 170 of 1978, as amended from time to time.34
§ 33-26. Meetings.
The Committee shall meet at least once every three months and at other
times at the call of the Chairman or Secretary, at the request of the majority
of Committee members, or at the request of the Council. The Committee
and its members shall comply with the requirements of the Sunshine Act,
Act No. 84 of 1986, as amended from time to time.35
§ 33-27. Responsibilities.
The role of the Committee shall be that of advisor to the Council. Therefore,
the Committee shall have the following responsibilities:
34.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 401 et seq.
35.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 271 et seq.
§ 33-22 KUTZTOWN CODE § 33-27
25:78
§ 33-28. Indemnification.
No member of the Committee shall be liable for any act or omission of any
other member of the Committee, nor for any act or omission on his own
part, except only his own willful misconduct. The Borough shall indemnify
and save harmless each and every member of the Committee against any
and all expenses, claims or liabilities arising from his or her membership
on the Committee, except only expenses and liabilities arising out of the
Committee member's own willful misconduct. Members of the Committee
shall serve without bond.
A. To provide advice and guidance to the Council, regarding the
investment and management of the funds and assets held in the Police
Pension Plan.
B. To provide advice and guidance to the Council regarding the
employment and compensation of investment advisors, actuaries,
accountants, trustees and other professionals rendering services in
connection with the Police Pension Plan.
C. To provide advice and guidance to the Council regarding the
administration of the Police Pension Plan, including without limitation
the establishment and modification of benefits, the award or denial of
benefits to Police Pension Plan beneficiaries, actuarial matters and such
other Police Pension Plan issues and questions as the Council may
direct.
D. When necessary, to examine and review documentation regarding and
relating to the Police Pension Plan in furtherance of the Committee's
responsibilities described in this Article, including all Police Pension
Plan documents, relevant employment records and information
regarding Police Pension Plan beneficiaries (except such employment
records and information as would not otherwise be made available by
the Borough as a public record), actuarial and investment information
regarding the Police Pension Plan and all reports and returns filed with
governmental authorities regarding the Police Pension Plan.
E. To investigate and make inquiries to the extent necessary to properly
advise the Council as provided in § 33-27A, B, C and D of this Article.
§ 33-27 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST § 33-28
25:79

ARTICLE V
Selection Criteria for Professional Services Contracts
[Added 7-18-2017 by Res. No. 7-2017]
§ 33-29. Procedures for selection of individuals.
The following constitutes the Borough's procedures for selecting the most
qualified person to enter into a professional services contract pursuant to
Section 702-A of Act 4436 (capitalized words shall have the meaning set
forth in Act 44):
A. Request for proposal application(s), including disclosures. Applications
will be drafted at the time professional services are needed by the
Borough. The application provisions will address the applicants'
qualifications, experience, expertise and compensation to be charged. A
disclosure form in accordance with the provisions of Act 44 will be
included as part of the application. The selection process is not subject
to a requirement that the lowest bid be accepted.
B. Advertisement. The Borough shall advertise the availability of a
proposal for a professional services contract to potential participants or
candidates in a timely and efficient manner. An advertisement of such
will include the following:
(1) The services that are the subject of the proposed professional
services contract.
(2) Specifications relating to the professional services.
(3) Procedures to compete for the professional services contract.
(4) Required disclosures and additional information desired.
C. Review.
(1) The evaluation process will involve several steps. The initial
responses to the advertisement for proposals will be evaluated by
the Borough. The Borough will determine a list of finalists,
interview finalists, if applicable, and make a final decision.
(2) The criteria to be used in the evaluation process can differ
depending on the professional services requested, but all shall
include at least the following:
(a) The applicant's qualifications, experience, and expertise
related to Pennsylvania municipal pensions;
(b) The applicant's approach to managing risk and research
capabilities;
(c) The applicant's knowledge of Act 205 and Act 600;
36.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 33-29 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST § 33-29
25:81
(d) The quoted fee(s) associated with the desired service(s)
sought;
(e) The applicant's availability to meet with the Borough's pension
committees or governing body for periodic review; and
(f) The response to the references provided by the applicant.
D. Personnel. Prior to entering into a professional services contract, the
contractor shall disclose the names and titles of each individual who
will be providing professional services to the Borough pension system,
including advisors or subcontractors of the contractor. Furthermore,
disclosures will include all of the following:
(1) Whether the individual is a current or former official or employee of
the Borough;
(2) Whether the individual is a current or former registered federal or
state lobbyist;
(3) A description of the responsibilities of each individual with regard
to the services provisions of the professional services contract; and
(4) The resume of an individual listed in the aforementioned disclosure
shall be provided to the Borough upon request.
E. Conflict of interest.
(1) All proposals for professional services contracts shall include a
minimum restriction for any applicant of one year on:
(a) Participation by a former employee of a proposed contractor or
potential contractor in the review of a proposal or negotiation
of a professional services contract with that proposed
contractor.
(b) Participation by a former employee of the Borough in the
submission of a proposal or the performance of a contract by a
proposed contractor.
(2) Additionally, all proposals for performance service contracts shall
include a permanent disqualification of any applicant for:
(a) Any person or affiliated entity that currently holds a
professional services contract with the Borough and has
conveyed a gift having more than a nominal value to any
official or employee of the Borough; or
(b) Any person or affiliated entity that currently holds a
professional services contract responds to, applies for, or
otherwise solicits a professional services contract with the
Borough and has, within the past two years of responding to
any proposal, made a political contribution to any parties,
candidates or current office holders of or for the Borough; or
§ 33-29 KUTZTOWN CODE § 33-29
25:82
(c) Any person or affiliated entity that holds a professional
services contract with the Borough and has a direct financial,
commercial or business relationship with any Borough official
unless the Borough consents, in writing, to the relationship
after full and complete disclosure.
F. Public information. Following the award of a professional services
contract, all applications and disclosure forms shall be made public
except as may be exempted under the Right to Know Act.
G. Notification and posting of proceedings. Following the decision by the
Borough of the selection of any applicant for a contract, the relevant
factors that resulted in the selection for award of the professional
services contract must be summarized in a written statement and
included or attached to the documents awarding the contract. Within
10 days of the selection for award of the professional services contract,
the original application, the proposal and selection statement, and all
disclosure forms must be transmitted to all unsuccessful applicants and
posted on the Borough's website, at least seven days prior to the
execution of the professional services contract.
H. Increase. A professional services contract shall not be amended to
increase the cost of the contract by more than 10% or $10,000,
whichever is greater, unless the increase and a written justification for
the increase are public and posted on the Borough's website, at least
seven days prior to the effective date of the amendment.
§ 33-29 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST § 33-29
25:83
Chapter 36
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 29.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
195.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 36-1. Establishment.
A Planning Commission of the Borough of Kutztown is hereby created, to be
known as the "Borough Planning Commission."
§ 36-2. Membership; terms; vacancies.
§ 36-3. Residency requirement; compensation.
All members of said Borough Planning Commission shall reside within the
Borough of Kutztown and shall serve without compensation.
§ 36-4. Powers and duties.
Said Borough Planning Commission shall perform all the duties and may
exercise all the powers conferred upon Borough Planning Commissions by
law.
§ 36-5. Effect of adoption on current members.
Prior to the adoption of this chapter the Borough of Kutztown had
constituted a Planning Commission consisting of five members, pursuant to
the previous Chapter 36, all of whose appointments and terms shall remain
in place and unaffected by the adoption of this chapter.
A. Said Borough Planning Commission shall consist of seven persons to be
appointed by the Borough Council. The term for each member of the
Borough Planning Commission shall be four years, except that any
initial term of appointment for a seat on the Planning Commission may
be for a period of less than four years, so as not to conflict with § 36-2B
of this chapter.
B. In no event shall the term of more than two members of the Borough
Planning Commission expire in the same year.
C. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall only be for the unexpired portion
of the then term of the former member of the Borough Planning
Commission whose position is being filled.
§ 33-29 KUTZTOWN CODE § 36-5
36:84
Chapter 37
INTERGOVERNMENTAL PROJECTS AND AGREEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Joint UCC Board of Appeals — See Ch. 20. Local Government Investment Trust — See
Ch. 25.
§ 36-5 PLANNING COMMISSION § 36-5
36:85

ARTICLE I
Joint Comprehensive Plan
[Adopted 5-22-2007 by Ord. No. 8-2007]
§ 37-1. Adoption of agreement.
The Borough of Kutztown hereby adopts the intergovernmental cooperation
agreement for the creation of a Joint Comprehensive Plan Committee
between the Borough of Kutztown, the Borough of Lyons and Maxatawny
Township in accordance with the authorization of the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act37 and the Municipalities Planning
Code.38 The purpose of said Committee shall be the preparation of a Multi-
Municipal Comprehensive Plan to be voted upon by the participating
municipalities. Said intergovernmental cooperation agreement is attached
hereto and incorporated herein by reference39 with the intent and effect
that the Borough shall be bound by the agreement.
§ 37-2. Duration of agreement. [Amended 5-29-2008 by Ord. No.
5-2008]
The acceptance by the Borough of Kutztown of the provisions of the
intergovernmental cooperation agreement with the Borough of Lyons and
Maxatawny Township continues in effect until terminated by subsequent
ordinance of the Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown or by the
subsequent withdrawal from the Regional Planning Committee pursuant to
the terms and conditions of the agreement by the Borough of Lyons and the
Township of Maxatawny. Furthermore, the intergovernmental cooperation
agreement, attached hereto as Exhibit A,40 can be amended from time to
time by a duly authorized resolution of the Borough of Kutztown Borough
Council amending same.
§ 37-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this intergovernmental cooperation agreement shall be to
allow the parties to create a regional planning committee pursuant to the
terms and conditions of the agreement and cooperate in the joint creation
of a Multi-Municipal Comprehensive Plan.
§ 37-4. Participation on Committee.
Pursuant to and in accord with the above-referenced authority, the Borough
of Kutztown is hereby authorized to become a member of and to participate
in the Regional Planning Committee established hereby, and hereby
authorizes the participation of its representatives in the activities of the
37.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa. C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
38.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
39.Editor's Note: The agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
40.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 37-1 PLANNING COMMISSION § 37-4
36:87
Regional Planning Committee in accordance with the authority granted in
the above-referenced laws in this article.
§ 37-5. Authorization and direction to enter agreement.
Pursuant to and in accord with the above-referenced authority, the Borough
of Kutztown is hereby authorized and directed to enter into the
intergovernmental cooperation agreement, known as the "Kutztown
Borough-Maxatawny Township-Lyons Borough Joint Comprehensive Plan,"
which governs the Regional Planning Committee and its affairs, a copy of
which is attached to this article and incorporated herein by reference (the
"agreement").
§ 37-6. Composition of Committee; rules for participation.
The Regional Planning Committee, created and existing under and by virtue
of the authority and the aforementioned statutes in this article, shall be
comprised of representatives of the municipalities creating and
participating in the Regional Planning Committee. The participation of the
Borough of Kutztown in the Regional Planning Committee shall be governed
and controlled by the terms and conditions of the agreement, the provisions
of the applicable Pennsylvania laws and regulations, and such other policies
as may be duly adopted by the Regional Planning Committee in accordance
with the agreement.
§ 37-7. Finances.
The agency and its activities shall be operated with funds provided by
the participating municipalities in accordance with the provisions of the
agreement referred to above, and such other grants or funding as may be
available.
§ 37-8. Powers and duties of Regional Planning Committee.
The Regional Planning Committee, subject to review and approval of each
participating municipality, shall exercise the powers and duties of the
participating municipalities as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
§ 37-9. Acquisition of property.
No acquisition of real property or real estate is authorized.
§ 37-10. Regional Planning Committee employees.
There does not exist any current authority for the Regional Planning
Committee to hire employees. However, in the event the Regional Planning
Committee is subsequently granted authority under the agreement to hire
employees, then the Regional Planning Committee shall be empowered to
enter into contracts for policies or group insurance and employee benefits,
including Social Security for its employees.
§ 37-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 37-10
36:88
Chapter 38
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police pensions — See Ch. 33, Art. II. Police jurisdiction — See Ch. 39.
§ 38-1. Existing Department ratified and confirmed.
The establishment of a Police Department in and for the Borough of
Kutztown on January 7, 1924, is hereby ratified and confirmed.
§ 38-2. Designation of chief executive; powers and duties.
A. The Chief of Police shall be the chief executive of the Police
Department. The Chief of Police shall, under the direction of the Mayor
and Council, be in charge of the police force and have supervision of its
members in the exercise of their powers, duties and authority.
B. The following are the duties and responsibilities of the Police Chief:
(1) Plan, coordinate, supervise and evaluate Police Department
operations.
(2) The development and preparation of policies and procedures for
the Police Department, in order to implement directives from the
Borough Council or Mayor.
(3) Plan and implement a law enforcement program for the Borough in
order to better carry out the policies and goals of Borough
management and the Council. In furtherance of implementing a law
enforcement program for the Borough, the Chief shall also be
responsible for evaluating the effectiveness of the plan and
amending the plan to alleviate deficiencies.
(4) Coordinate the information gathered and work accomplished by
various officers and assign officers to special investigations
utilizing their specific skills, as the need arises.
(5) Assure that personnel are assigned to shifts or working units which
provide optimum effectiveness in terms of current situations and
circumstances governing deployment.
(6) Evaluate evidence, witnesses, and suspects in criminal cases to
correlate all aspects and to assess for trends, similarities, or for
association with other cases.
(7) Supervise and coordinate the preparation and presentation of an
annual budget for the Department; direct the implementation of
§ 37-10 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 38-2
38:89
the Department's budget; plan for and review specifications for
new or replacement equipment.
(8) Prepare purchasing proposals and bid specifications; aid in the
development of ads for items to be purchased; review bids and
recommend the appropriate party to be awarded contracts.
(9) Arrange for the preparation of Department-related ordinances and
resolution and review same for accuracy.
(10) Be responsible for all Departmental correspondence, public
relations, and public safety as concerns the operation of the
Department.
(11) Review and approve Departmental payroll records to insure proper
payment in accordance with the agreement between the Borough
of Kutztown and the Kutztown Police Association.
(12) Assure compliance with the agreement between the Borough of
Kutztown and the Kutztown Police Association.
(13) Direct the development and maintenance of systems, inventory and
equipment and records and legal documents that provide for the
proper evaluation, control and documentation of Police Department
operations.
(14) Be responsible for the training and development of Department
personnel.
(15) Be responsible for Departmental personnel issues, including job
descriptions, evaluations, recommendation of discipline,
grievances, and the efficiency and the general good conduct of
assigned personnel.
(16) Be responsible for personnel issues for the Police Department
nonuniformed employees as delegated by the Borough Manager.
(17) Prepare and submit periodic reports to the Borough Mayor and/or
Borough Council regarding the Department's activities and other
matters as appropriate.
(18) Meet with elected or appointed officials, other law enforcement
officials, community and business representatives and/or the public
on all aspects of the Department's activities.
(19) Attend conferences and meetings to keep abreast of current trends
in the law enforcement field and to represent the Borough Police
Department at a variety of local, county, and state meetings.
(20) Cooperate with county, state and federal law enforcement officers
as appropriate where activities of the Police Department are
involved.
§ 38-2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 38-2
38:90
§ 38-3. Classifications. [Amended 7-20-2004 by Ord. No. 16-2004]
§ 38-4. Duties of Department.
The duties of the Department shall be to:
(21) Direct the investigation of major crimes while at the scene and
during the course of the investigation.
(22) Be responsible for the supervision of Departmental activities
involving special detail, such as parades, stadium events, civil
disturbances or major disorders.
(23) Fully cooperate with and provide mutual assistance between the
Police Department and all other branches of the Borough.
(24) Perform all duties and responsibilities of the Chief of Police under
the provisions of the Departmental Manual for the Kutztown Police
Department, agreement between the Borough of Kutztown and the
Kutztown Police Association, Rules and Regulations of the Civil
Service Commission of the Borough of Kutztown, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, the Borough Code, the approved Borough of
Kutztown Chief of Police position description, as well as all safety
policies and procedures, work rules and regulations or security
standards as established by the Borough of Kutztown.
(25) Perform other work-related duties as assigned by the Mayor or
other persons or committees as may be designated by ordinance or
resolution of the Borough Council.
A. Subordinate to the Chief of Police in the Police Department, the
following classifications are hereby established:
(1) Sergeant.
(2) Corporal.
(3) Patrol officer.
(4) Community service officer.
B. The priority of authority among such subordinate classifications shall
be in order above listed, and in the event that there shall be more than
one member of the Police Department holding any such classification,
then as to such classification the priority of authority shall be based on
seniority in that classification. The number of persons to serve in each
of such classifications on a full-time and /or part-time basis, and the
compensation of each shall be determined by the Borough Council from
time to time. From time to time the Mayor may designate a member of
the Police Department to fulfill the functions and duties of a criminal
investigator.
A. Prevent crimes against persons and properties.
§ 38-2 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 38-4
38:91
§ 38-5. Sergeant; function.
§ 38-6. Police Corporal; function.
§ 38-7. Criminal investigator; function.
B. Enforce all laws and ordinances of the Borough of Kutztown.
C. Promote public safety through the enforcement of highway safety and
motor vehicle codes.
D. Maintain records and files of crimes and criminals.
E. Operate the facilities for the safe keeping of prisoners.
F. Develop and conduct community relations and educational programs.
G. Operate and maintain the police radio and emergency communications
systems as may be assigned to the Department.
H. Maintain records and logs relating to radio and emergency
communications as required by law.
A. The Sergeant shall be responsible for assisting in the direction and
supervision of the Police Department and other activities of the Police
Department. The Sergeant shall be responsible for providing special
assistance and tactical operations, personnel, administration, and
investigation. The Sergeant shall be subordinate in authority to the
Police Chief and act on behalf of the Chief of Police on Borough Police
business during short-term absences of the Police Chief. The Sergeant
shall also supervise the Police Corporal and subordinate officers during
the course of investigations, traffic regulation and related law
enforcement activities.
B. The Sergeant shall perform all duties and responsibilities as specified in
the approved Borough of Kutztown Sergeant position description.
A. The Corporal shall be responsible for assisting in the direction and
supervision of the Police Department. The Corporal shall also be
responsible for providing special assistance in personnel,
administration, tactical operations, supervision and training of other
officers, and other related functions. The Corporal shall be subordinate
in rank to the Police Chief and the Sergeant. In the absence of both the
Police Chief and the Sergeant, the Corporal shall act on behalf of the
Chief of Police on Borough Police business during short-term absences
of both superiors.
B. The Corporal shall perform all duties and responsibilities as specified in
the approved Borough of Kutztown Corporal position description.
A. The criminal investigator shall be a patrol officer with the title of
"criminal investigator" bestowed upon him/her by the Mayor, and said
title shall be held at the discretion of the Mayor. The criminal
§ 38-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 38-7
38:92
§ 38-8. Authority and duties of Mayor.
Chapter 39
POLICE JURISDICTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 38.
§ 39-1. Statutory authority; background.
investigator shall be particularly charged with the prevention of crimes,
the investigation of criminal cases within the Borough, the detection
and arrest of criminal offenders, the locating of missing persons, the
recovery of lost and stolen property, the proper conduct of fugitive
requisition proceedings, and be cognizant to all conditions relating to or
tending toward the fostering of crime including vice and gambling. The
criminal investigator shall acquaint him/herself with various methods
of operation adopted by criminals in the commission of crime and in
evading detection. He/she shall be prepared to combat criminals and
take the progressive steps necessary to prevent crime in the Borough.
He/she shall develop, retain and improve sources of information in
every medium of the Borough's society.
B. In the absence of supervisory personnel, the criminal investigator, when
at the scene of a crime in which he was called to or is actively engaged
in a criminal investigation of, shall perform all of the supervisory and
command functions of said supervisory and command personnel as it
directly relates to his investigation.
C. The criminal investigator shall be charged with acting on behalf of the
Chief of Police on Borough Police business during short-term absences
of the Borough's command staff consisting of the Police Chief, Sergeant,
and Corporal.
D. The criminal investigator shall perform all duties and responsibilities as
specified in the approved Borough of Kutztown criminal investigator
position description.
A. It shall be the duty of the Mayor to preserve order in the Borough, to
enforce the ordinances and regulations, to remove nuisances, to exact a
faithful performance of the duties of the officers appointed, and to
perform such other duties which shall be vested in his office by law or
ordinance.
B. Nothing herein contained shall affect the authority of the Mayor as
defined by the Borough Code.
§ 38-7 POLICE JURISDICTION § 39-1
39:93
§ 39-2. Agreement to provide services.
The Borough of Kutztown, through its Police Department, shall provide to
the Township of Maxatawny, throughout the geographic boundaries of those
borough owned properties located within the township, police protection
for its residents and properties, upon the terms and conditions and for the
period or periods of time set forth in an agreement between the governing
bodies of said municipalities.
§ 39-3. Authority to enter agreement.
The governing body of the Borough of Kutztown be and hereby is authorized
to enter into and execute such agreement, filed in the office of the Manager
of the Borough of Kutztown, setting forth the terms and conditions for the
providing of police protection by the Borough of Kutztown as hereinbefore
set forth.
§ 39-4. Elimination of boundaries.
The municipal boundaries for the borough owned properties within the
township are eliminated for the sole purpose of providing police service,
thereby permitting a single police department, namely the Borough of
Kutztown Police Department; its police officers and said Police Department
A. Pursuant to the Borough Code, Act of February 1, 1966, P.L. 1656, 53
Pa. C.S.A. §§ 46202(35) and 56554, as amended, the Borough of
Kutztown may agree with the authorities of an adjacent township for
the furnishing to such township of police protection.
B. The Borough of Kutztown owns certain borough properties located
within the corporate boundaries of the Township of Maxatawny.
C. Said Borough Code authorizes a borough to conduct certain law
enforcement activities on property owned by such borough but located
outside of its corporate boundaries.
D. The Borough of Kutztown is willing to provide twenty-four-hour police
protection to those borough properties located within the corporate
boundaries of the Township of Maxatawny.
E. Pursuant to the Borough Code, Act of February 1, 1966, P.L. 1656, 53
Pa. C.S.A. §§ 46202(35) and 56554, as amended, and the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of December 19, 1996, P.L. 1158,
53 Pa. C.S.A. § 2301 et seq., the governing body of the Borough of
Kutztown is willing to provide police protection to those borough
properties located within the Township of Maxatawny, and the
Township of Maxatawny is willing to delegate its police function, power
and responsibility for those borough properties located within the
Township of Maxatawny to the Borough of Kutztown for the duration of
the agreement between said municipalities.
§ 39-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § 39-4
39:94
shall have and exercise full police powers within said borough properties
located within the township.
§ 39-5. Termination of agreement.
Either the Borough of Kutztown or the Township of Maxatawny may
withdraw from and terminate the agreement aforementioned, upon written
notice to the other, under the terms and conditions set forth in said
agreement relating to the termination.
§ 39-6. Related actions authorized.
The proper officials of the Borough of Kutztown are hereby authorized and
empowered to take such additional action as they may deem necessary or
appropriate to implement this chapter.
§ 39-7. Severability; repealer.
Chapter 43
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 29.
§ 43-1. Mayor.
The salary or compensation for the Mayor of the Borough of Kutztown is
hereby fixed at the sum of $3,325 per annum, payable monthly.
§ 43-2. Council members.
The salary or compensation for each member of Borough Council, excepting
only the member of Borough Council serving as President of said Borough
Council, is hereby fixed at the sum of $2,500 per annum, payable monthly.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional or illegal, such decision shall not
affect the validity of any remaining provisions of this chapter. It is
hereby declared that it is the legislative intent that this chapter would
have been adopted had such unconstitutional or illegal provision not
been included.
B. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter be and the same are hereby repealed.
§ 39-4 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-3
43:95
§ 43-3. Council President.
The salary or compensation for the member of Borough Council serving as
President of said Borough Council is hereby fixed at the sum of $3,325 per
annum, payable monthly.
Chapter 47
STANDING COMMITTEES
§ 47-1. Appointments. [Amended 12-30-2003 by Ord. No. 10-2003;
3-21-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006; 12-18-2007 by Ord. No. 19-2007;
1-4-2010 by Ord. No. 1-2010]
Commencing with the year 2010 and biannually thereafter, the President of
Council of the Borough of Kutztown shall, subsequent to the organization
of Council as provided by law, appoint no more than three members of
Council to serve on each of the following Committees, to wit: Finance and
Electric; Telecommunications and Information Technologies; Public Works;
Community Development and Public Safety; Water and Wastewater; and
Personnel, which aforementioned Committees shall be the Standing
Committees of the Borough Council.
§ 47-2. Powers and duties of Finance and Electric Committee.
[Amended 12-30-2003 by Ord. No. 10-2003; 12-18-2007 by Ord. No.
19-2007; 1-4-2010 by Ord. No. 1-2010]
The Finance and Electric Committee shall, on behalf of the Council, report
on and oversee the following Borough facilities, activities and functions
pertaining to finances and the electric supply and distribution system:
A. The distribution and sale of electrical power in the Borough.
B. The construction, repairing, replacement and maintenance of the
electrical distribution system.
C. The preparation of plans and specifications when required for any work
to be done relating to the electrical distribution system.
D. The recommendation of contracts relating to the electric systems shall
be made to the Borough Council for its consideration and award.
E. The promotion and marketing of the Borough electric services.
F. The recommendation of rates and collection of fees required to be
charged for the electric services.
G. Annually prepare, in conjunction with the Borough Manager and
Treasurer, an estimate of the income and expenditures of the general
fund and preparation of the annual budget.
§ 43-3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 47-2
43:96
§ 47-3. Powers and duties of the Public Works Committee.
[Amended 12-30-2003 by Ord. No. 10-2003; 12-18-2007 by Ord. No.
19-2007]
The Public Works Committee shall, on behalf of Council, report on and
oversee the following Borough activities, functions, and facilities:
H. Prepare the rate of tax and fees required to be levied to meet the
required expenditures.
I. Examine and audit all claims presented for payment and endorse
payment on all such proposed approved claims and withhold and deny
payment on all such proposed disapproved claims of the Committee and
report all such claims to the Council.
J. Receive from the Borough Treasurer a correct statement of the finances
of the Borough and present such statement to Council at least once
every three months and from time to time as the Committee deems
advisable.
A. The opening, widening, vacating, construction, grading, paving and
repairing of all streets, highways, alleys, pavements, curbs, gutters,
bridges, watercourses and culverts.
B. The preparation of plans, specifications and cost estimates associated
with all street work.
C. The collection and disposal of all refuse and recyclable items
accumulated in the Borough.
D. The maintenance of sanitary conditions on public and private premises
within the Borough.
E. The recommendation to the Finance and Electric Committee of rates
required to be charged for the collection and disposal of refuse and
recyclable items. [Amended 1-4-2010 by Ord. No. 1-2010]
F. The imposition and collection of fees for the collection and disposal of
refuse and recyclable items accumulated in the Borough.
G. The care and maintenance of all buildings and grounds of the Borough,
including, without limitation, the Borough Park, but excluding the
grounds and buildings occupied and used by the sewage/wastewater
treatment plant of the Borough, the grounds and buildings occupied
and used by the water system and the water supply facilities of the
Borough and the grounds and buildings occupied and used by the
electric distribution system of the Borough.
H. The repairs, replacement, maintenance, construction or reconstruction
to be performed relating to grounds and buildings.
I. The summer recreation programs.
§ 47-2 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 47-3
43:97
§ 47-4. Powers and duties of Community Development and Public
Safety Committee. [Amended 12-30-2003 by Ord. No. 10-2003;
3-21-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006; 12-18-2007 by Ord. No. 19-2007;
1-4-2010 by Ord. No. 1-2010]
The Community Development and Public Safety Committee shall, on behalf
of Council, report on and oversee the following Borough facilities, activities
and functions:
J. The preparation of plans and specifications when required for any work
to be done and any equipment that needs to be purchased relating to
streets, refuse, grounds, buildings and recreation. All contracts relating
to the Public Works Committee shall be awarded by Borough Council.
A. Monitor and develop positive relationships between the Borough and its
residents, inhabitants, industries and businesses located within the
Borough limits.
B. The Borough Community Development Office in the administration of
the provisions of the Borough codes and regulations, other than the
provisions pertaining to the keeping of public peace and order, as more
fully described in Ordinance No. 6-1989,41 as from time to time
amended, supplemented or replaced.
C. The relationships of the Borough with its neighboring municipalities
and Kutztown University.
D. The Community Development Office in the administration of all matters
involving planning and land development.
E. Zoning matters which involve land use planning.
F. The recommendation to the Finance and Electric Committee of fees
required to be charged for the administration of community relations
services.
G. Be a liaison to the Borough Planning Commission.
H. The operations of the Police Department, as a liaison between Borough
Council and the Mayor.
I. The administration of the provisions of the Kutztown Code and other
applicable rules and regulations that address public safety.
J. Zoning matters which involve violations or enforcement notices.
K. The recommendation to the Finance and Electric Committee of fees
required to be charged for the administration of public safety services.
41.Editor's Note: See Ch. 11, Code Enforcement.
§ 47-3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 47-5
43:98
§ 47-5. Powers and duties of Water and Wastewater Committee.
[Amended 12-30-2003 by Ord. No. 10-2003; 12-18-2007 by Ord. No.
19-2007]
The Water and Wastewater Committee shall, on behalf of the Council, report
on and oversee the following Borough facilities, activities and functions
pertaining to the water and sewage/wastewater systems:
§ 47-6. Powers and duties of Telecommunications and Information
Technologies Committee. [Amended 12-30-2003 by Ord. No.
10-2003; 3-21-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006; 12-18-2007 by Ord. No.
19-2007; 1-4-2010 by Ord. No. 1-2010]
A. The distribution and sale of water in the Borough and wherever served
outside of the Borough.
B. The water treatment plant and appurtenances, the grounds upon which
the plant is erected and the water distribution infrastructure.
C. The sewage/wastewater treatment plant and its appurtenances, the
grounds upon which the plant is erected and the collection system and
mains of the sewage/wastewater system of the Borough.
D. The recommendation to the Finance and Electric Committee of rates
required to be charged for water and the collection of sewage/
wastewater. [Amended 1-4-2010 by Ord. No. 1-2010]
E. The construction, repairing and replacement of the water treatment
plant, water distribution system, wells and the pumps and all of the
apparatus and appurtenances pertaining to the same as well as of the
sewage/wastewater treatment plant, including the mains and collection
system.
F. The preparation of plans and specifications when required for any work
to be done relating to the water and sewage/wastewater systems. All
contracts relating to the water supply and distribution system and the
sewage/wastewater treatment plant and collection system shall be
awarded by the Borough Council.
A. The provisioning of telecommunications services, including cable TV,
Internet, web-related services, and telephone; the provisioning of other
services, as appropriate, over the Borough telecommunications
network.
B. The preparation of plans and specifications when required for any work
to be done or equipment purchased relating to the telecommunications
system.
C. The construction, repairing, replacement and maintenance of the
telecommunications system.
D. The recommendation of contracts relating to telecommunications shall
be made to the Borough Council for its consideration and award.
§ 47-5 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 47-6
43:99
§ 47-7. Powers and duties of Personnel Committee. [Amended
12-30-2003 by Ord. No. 10-2003; 12-18-2007 by Ord. No. 19-2007]
The Personnel Committee shall, on behalf of Council, report on and oversee
all of the following Borough activities and functions:
§ 47-8. Itemized estimates required.
It shall be the duty of each of the Standing Committees to annually prepare,
in conjunction with the Borough Manager and Treasurer, an itemized
estimate of the income and expenditures of the activities, functions and
facilities overseen by the various Committees so that the required budget
of the Borough of Kutztown can be prepared and adopted in the time
prescribed by the Borough Code.42
§ 47-9. Council approval of expenditures required.
No expenditures shall be made and no obligations incurred by any of the
Standing Committees without the approval of the Borough Council duly and
properly given at a regular or special meeting of such Borough Council.
E. The promotion and marketing of the Borough telecommunications
services.
F. The recommendation of rates and collection of fees required to be
charged for the telecommunications services.
G. Address internal technology policy decisions.
H. Prepare plans and specifications for any work to be done and any
equipment that needs to be purchased relating to the internal
technology needs of the Borough.
A. The recommendation for employment and termination of Borough
employees. All employment and termination of Borough employees
shall be done by Borough Council.
B. The recommendation of wages and salaries of Borough personnel.
C. The administration and modification of benefits.
D. In appropriate instances, the Personnel Committee shall hear
grievances or other complaints of Borough employees and shall make
recommendations to Borough Council pertaining thereto.
E. The Personnel Committee, or its designees, shall negotiate labor
contracts when required.
42.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.
§ 47-6 KUTZTOWN CODE § 47-9
43:100
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 60
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 60-1. Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined as follows:
ALARM — A communication indicating or warning that a crime, fire or
other emergency situation warranting immediate action by the Borough
Police, local fire company or local emergency medical services personnel
has occurred or is occurring.
ALARM DEVICE — A privately owned and operated or a leased electronic,
electrical, mechanical or similar device desired to transmit an alarm by
wire, telephone, radio, audible signal (bell, siren or buzzer) or other means
to the Borough Police, local fire company, local emergency medical services
personnel, any person or firm who or which is instructed to notify the
Borough Police, local fire company or emergency medical services
personnel, or any person who is within the sound transmitting distance
limits of such an audible signal. Notwithstanding the aforesaid, a device
designed solely to detect smoke and/or heat and not connected to a central
alarm system shall not be deemed to be an "alarm device."
ALARM DEVICE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Borough Police for the
installation and/or operation of an alarm device.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH POLICE — The Police Department of the Borough of Kutztown,
Berks County, Pennsylvania or, in the the event of an alarm, the Police
Department requested to respond to an alarm device activation.
FALSE ALARM — An alarm to which the Borough Police, local fire company
or local emergency services personnel respond, resulting from the
activation of an alarm device, when it appears that a crime, fire or other
emergency warranting immediate action by the Borough Police, local fire
company or local emergency medical services personnel has not occurred
at the premises where the alarm was transmitted. Notwithstanding the
aforesaid, the activation of an alarm device caused by an interruption or
failure of electrical power supplied by the borough or any other utility
company shall not be deemed a "false alarm."
FALSE ALARM CHARGE — The charge provided for in § 60-5 of this chapter.
INTENTIONAL FALSE ALARM — An alarm resulting from the intentional
activation of an alarm device by an individual under circumstances where
the individual had no reasonable basis to believe that a crime, fire or other
emergency warranting immediate action by the Borough Police, local fire
company or local emergency medical services personnel has occurred or
was occurring.
§ 47-9 ALARM SYSTEMS § 60-1
60:101
NEW INSTALLATION — A business or residence at which an alarm device
has been installed where an alarm device previously did not exist, or a
business or residence which has made a major change to the existing
alarm device in respect to sensory devices, control panels, audible signals,
transmission devices or any combination of the aforementioned system
components, or where the ownership or control of any business operating a
preexisting alarm device has changed.
PERMIT HOLDER — A person to whom the Borough Police has issued an
alarm device permit.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, incorporated
association, trust or other legal entity.
§ 60-2. Permits required; provisions applicable to permit.
A. It shall be unlawful for any property owner, lessee of property or any
person otherwise occupying premises in the borough to put an alarm
device into operation on such person's premises or to allow an alarm
device to be put into operation on such person's premises or to permit
the operation of an alarm device on such person's premises without first
obtaining an alarm device permit from the Borough Police.
B. In order to apply for an alarm device permit, a person shall submit an
application to the Chief of the Borough Police stating the following:
(1) The person's name.
(2) The person's home address and principal business address and the
telephone number for each.
(3) The location at which the alarm device will be installed and
operated.
(4) If the alarm device is at a business, the names, addresses and
telephone numbers of at least two (2) other individuals who have
keys to the premises at which the alarm device is located and who
are authorized to enter the premises at any time; or in lieu thereof,
the name, address and telephone number of a security service
company which provides alarm services at the premises and which
has on file with it the names of such authorized key holders, so long
as such security service company can be contacted twenty-four (24)
hours each and every day of the year.
(5) If the alarm device is at a residence, the name, address and
telephone number of at lease one (1) other individual who has keys
to the premises and is authorized to enter the premises at any time,
along with that individual's place of employment and its telephone
number.
(6) A complete description of the alarm device, including information
indicating if the alarm device is coordinated with any other type of
antipersonnel, smoke, fire or personal safety device.
§ 60-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § 60-2
60:102
(7) If the alarm device is to be leased or rented from or is to be
serviced pursuant to a service agreement by a person other than
the person making application for an alarm device permit, the
name, address and telephone number of that person.
(8) Such other information as may be requested by the Borough Police
pertaining to the alarm device and/or the premises in which the
alarm device is to be located.
C. The Borough Police shall furnish forms upon which any person wishing
to apply for an alarm device permit shall submit his application.
D. Each alarm device permit issued shall be valid for a period of one (1)
year from the date of issuance. Permits may be renewed annually upon
reapplication in the manner prescribed by this chapter for an initial
application.
E. The fee for the initial issuance of an alarm device permit shall be set
from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council,43 and there
shall be no fee for each annual renewal by the same person or the
spouse of such person. The fee for the initial issuance of an alarm
device permit shall be waived for any alarm device in service on the
effective date of this chapter, provided that application for the alarm
device permit is made within thirty (30) days after the effective date of
this chapter.44
F. The Chief of the Borough Police shall, upon receipt of an application for
an alarm device permit, either grant an alarm device permit to the
applicant or notify the applicant in writing that his, her or its
application has been denied stating the reason or reasons why it has
been denied.
G. The Chief of the Borough Police is authorized to revoke the alarm
device permit of any permit holder found to be in violation of this
chapter and, upon written notification thereof, said permit holder shall
surrender such alarm device permit to the Borough Police. Failure,
when so requested, to surrender such alarm device permit so revoked
shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
H. Upon application for an alarm device permit, the applicant shall furnish
proof that the alarm device meets the operational standards as set forth
in § 60-3 of this chapter by submitting a form, furnished with the
application, completed by the security service company or the
applicant, which verifies that the operational standards of this chapter
have been met. Such form shall be signed by the person completing said
form.
I. An application for an alarm device permit may only be denied or
revoked for the following reasons:
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 60-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 60-2
60:103
§ 60-3. Operational standards.
§ 60-4. Intentional false alarms.
It shall be unlawful to cause or knowingly permit an intentional false alarm.
§ 60-5. False alarm charges.
(1) The application submitted does not conform with the requirements
of this section.
(2) The application contains false or incorrect information.
(3) The alarm device does not conform with the operational standards
set forth in this chapter.
(4) Delinquency of payment of any false alarm charge by more than
ninety (90) days.
J. In the event of a new installation, an application for an alarm device
permit shall be made within thirty (30) days from the date that an alarm
device has been placed into service or, in the event of a preexisting
alarm device in service on the effective date of this chapter, within
thirty (30) days from the effective date of this chapter.
A. If the alarm device is designed to transmit a recorded message, the
contents of said message shall be intelligible.
B. If the alarm device is designed to cause an exterior bell, siren or other
sound which is designed to be audible on or near the premises on which
the alarm device is installed at the time it gives an alarm, said alarm
device shall be designed to deactivate the bell, siren or other soundmaking
device after a maximum of twenty (20) minutes following the
activation of the alarm.
C. The sensory mechanisms used in connection with an alarm device must
be installed and adjusted to suppress false indications of fire, smoke,
intrusion or other emergency.
D. The permit holder shall ensure that the alarm device is maintained in
good repair to assure reliability of operation.
A. In the case of new installations, a thirty-day testing period shall apply to
allow the security service company and/or the applicant the opportunity
to adjust the system as necessary to prevent false alarm indications.
During this thirty-day period, false alarm charges shall not be assessed.
B. A permit holder shall pay to the borough a charge for each false alarm
emanating from his alarm device during any calendar month. The fee
shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.45
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 60-2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 60-5
60:104
§ 60-6. Violations and penalties.46
Any person who shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction before any District Justice, be fined an amount not
less than fifty dollars ($50.) nor more than six hundred dollars ($600.), and
in default of payment of such fine, be imprisoned for not more than thirty
(30) days.
Chapter 62
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
C. When a false alarm occurs, the borough shall notify the permit holder of
the permit for the alarm device from which the false alarm emanated
that a false alarm charge is due and the amount thereof payable at the
office of the Borough Secretary. Such notice shall be in writing and
mailed to the permit holder at his last known address by certified mail,
postage prepaid.
D. A false alarm charge shall be due and payable at the office of the
borough no later than thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of the
false alarm charge.
E. Failure of a permit holder to pay a false alarm charge on or before the
due date shall subject such permit holder to the penalties provided for
in § 60-6 of this chapter.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 60-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 60-6
60:105

ARTICLE I
Open Containers
[Adopted 11-22-1988 by Ord. No. 13-1988]
§ 62-1. Purpose; findings.
§ 62-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to protect and promote the
safety, health and well-being of the residents and inhabitants of the
Borough of Kutztown and their property and to regulate the conduct of
persons in the Borough of Kutztown by prohibiting the consumption of
alcoholic beverages in public places or ways.
B. Findings.
(1) The Council of the Borough of Kutztown finds that the possession of
an open or unsealed container containing an alcoholic beverage or
the consumption of alcoholic beverages in public ways and public
places, except under certain conditions, is detrimental to the
health, safety and welfare of the residents and inhabitants of the
Borough of Kutztown, causes unsightly and unsanitary conditions,
creates a nuisance and interferes with the peace and good order of
the Borough of Kutztown.
(2) The Council of the Borough of Kutztown further finds that the
possession of an open or unsealed container containing an
alcoholic beverage or the consumption of alcoholic beverages on
public ways and public places is a serious, substantial and
significant cause of persons (especially, but not limited to, persons
who are under the legal age for alcoholic consumption) becoming
unruly, disruptive, disorderly, uncontrollable, obnoxious, offensive
and of a general character detrimental to the health, welfare and
peaceful orderliness of the community. In addition, the allowance of
possession of an open or unsealed container containing an
alcoholic beverage or consumption of alcoholic beverages on public
ways and public places has been proven to be a significant and
substantial cause in the congregation of persons who in turn
significantly and substantially cause and promote unruly,
disruptive, disorderly, uncontrollable, obnoxious, offensive and
generally detrimental behavior.
(3) The Council of the Borough of Kutztown finds that this Article is
necessary and proper to promote the health, welfare and safety of
the general public and that the restrictions on conduct created by
this Article are not unduly harsh or restrictive and are necessary
and proper pursuant to the police power of the Borough of
Kutztown.
§ 62-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 62-2
60:107
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any liquor or brewed or malt beverage as
defined by the Liquor Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Act of
April 12, 1951, P.L. 90, Art. I, Section 101 et seq., as amended, 47 P.S.
§ 1-101, as amended.
PERSON — Includes any individual, whether a resident or nonresident of
the Borough of Kutztown and whether male or female.
PUBLIC WAY or PUBLIC PLACE — A "public way" shall mean every way,
including but not limited to every street, road, alley, sidewalk, steps and
ramps that are open to the use of the public as a matter of right; and "public
place" shall mean any place, of whatever nature, that is open to the use
of the public as a matter of right, including but not limited to public parks
and public buildings, so long as the "public way" or "public place" is located
within the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 62-3. Consumption or possession restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage and/
or possess an open or unsealed container containing an alcoholic beverage
in or upon public ways or public places within the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 62-4. Consumption or possession in motor vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages and/
or possess an open or unsealed container containing an alcoholic beverage
while such person is the operator of or occupant or passenger in or on
a motor vehicle which is parked, standing or being operated in a public
place or public way within the Borough of Kutztown. To the extent that this
section is inconsistent with or specifically addressed by the Pennsylvania
Motor Vehicle Code,47 and in particular 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3715, as amended,
the Motor Vehicle Code shall control.
§ 62-5. Exemptions.
Any facility or establishment licensed to serve or to dispense alcoholic
beverages by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board or other body pursuant
to the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and persons who are
patrons of any such facilities or establishments are exempt from this Article,
provided that the patrons remain within the confines of said facilities or
establishments with the alcoholic beverages. The confines of said facilities
or establishments shall include the sidewalk area between the public way
and the front of said facilities or establishments, so long as the facility
or establishment provides adequate amounts of tables and seating for its
patrons and provides waiter and/or waitress service to its patrons at said
tables and seating facilities.
47.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 62-2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 62-6
60:108
§ 62-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No.
12-1995]
Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of
this Article before any District Justice shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $50 nor more than $600 for each offense, together with costs of
prosecution, or to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed
30 days, or both.
§ 62-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 62-6
60:109

ARTICLE II
Intermunicipal Liquor License Transfers and Economic
Development Liquor Licenses
[Adopted 4-17-2001 by Res. No. 7-2001]
§ 62-7. Administration of applications.
The following procedures will be followed in the administration of
applications pursuant to the requirements of Act 141 of 200048 relating
to applications for intermunicipal liquor license transfers and economic
development liquor licenses:
§ 62-8. Application form requirements.
Any applicant seeking an intermunicipal liquor license transfer or economic
development liquor license shall complete the Borough's application form,
which shall be available at the Borough Code Office and shall require the
following information:
A. The applicant's full name, home address and telephone number;
B. The applicant's Pennsylvania LCB license number (if applicable);
C. The current business name, address, municipality, and telephone
number where the liquor license proposed for transfer is located;
D. The business name, address, and telephone number where the liquor
license is proposed to be located within the Borough of Kutztown;
E. The type of license proposed to be transferred;
F. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all parties who have or
propose to have a financial interest or ownership in the business where
the proposed liquor license will be located;
G. The owner of the property where the liquor license is proposed to be
located;
H. The date at which the applicant proposed to relocate the liquor license
to the Borough of Kutztown;
I. The names of other businesses with liquor licenses in Pennsylvania in
which applicant has some interest or ownership, including the license
number of these establishments;
J. Whether the applicant has ever been cited with liquor law violations;
K. A brief description of the nature of the business proposed to be
operated in connection with such license, including, but not limited to,
a description of any proposed food or other product sales and/or
entertainment;
48.Editor's Note: See 47 P.S. § 4-401 et seq.
§ 62-7 ALARM SYSTEMS § 62-8
60:111
§ 62-9. Form to be filed with Borough Code Office.
The form of the application for a public hearing shall be filed with the
Borough Code Office by any person or entity requesting an intermunicipal
license transfer or economic transfer license before the Council of the
Borough of Kutztown.
§ 62-10. Application fee; additional charges.
The Borough of Kutztown wishes to provide for the reimbursement of
expenses incurred in the administration of the applications and hearings for
the transfer of liquor licenses into the Borough of Kutztown. In order for
an application to be accepted by the Borough Code Office, the applicant
must submit an application fee in the amount of $500, payable to the
Borough, to defray the cost of the public notices, stenographic appearance
fee, secretarial fees, and administrative fees. The applicant will be
responsible for any charges over and above $500 for costs that the Borough
incurs relative to conducting the public hearing in conformity with Act 141
of 2000. Upon the payment of the Borough of all allowable costs associated
with the public hearing, any unused portion of the fee/deposit shall be
returned to the applicant.
§ 62-11. Public and written notices.
Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the Borough Code Office, the Borough Planning Commission, the
Borough Chief of Police, adjacent property owners (including those owners
of property directly across a street or alley from the subject property), the
governing body and the Solicitor of the borough. Such written notice shall
be given not less than 10 days prior to the scheduled public hearing by
first class United States mail with postage paid. The Borough shall have
the right to post the property upon which the liquor license is sought to be
transferred, but shall not be required to do so.
§ 62-12. Factors affecting application approval.
The Borough, in deciding on an application for an intermunicipal transfer or
an economic development license, may consider any or all of the following
items and/or factors:
L. A copy of the proposed application required by the Pennsylvania Liquor
Control Board, including the applicant's criminal history; and
M. Certification by the applicant that the information contained in the
application is true and correct, that the presentation of false
information shall subject the applicant to possible arrest, fines and
imprisonment, and acknowledgment that submission of false
information may constitute grounds for revocation of the liquor license.
A. A written report and/or recommendation from the Borough Code Office,
the Borough Planning Commission and the Borough Chief of Police;
§ 62-8 KUTZTOWN CODE § 62-12
60:112
§ 62-13. Public hearing.
The public hearing will be held in conformity with Act 141 of 2000 and a
stenographer shall be present to make a transcript of the hearing.
B. The population of the Borough of Kutztown, the number of students
attending Kutztown University, and the number of such students
residing in the Borough of Kutztown;
C. The type of establishment proposed, such as a restaurant, tavern,
nightclub, or take-out shop;
D. The number of the liquor licenses approved and proposed for use within
the Borough of Kutztown at the time of the application;
E. Whether the total number of existing liquor licenses will exceed the
ratio of one license per 3,000 population in the Borough of Kutztown (as
established by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board);
F. The location of the closest existing liquor license, school, park, church,
and private recreation or amusement facility;
G. The concerns, if any, expressed by the area residents, businesses,
churches, Kutztown University, and the Kutztown Area School District;
and
H. Any other factors the Council of the Borough of Kutztown believes are
necessary to preserve the welfare, health, peace and morals of the
Borough.
§ 62-12 ALARM SYSTEMS § 62-13
60:113

ARTICLE III
Bring Your Own Bottle Clubs
[Adopted 10-16-2012 by Ord. No. 5-2012]
§ 62-14. Purpose.
The Council of the Borough of Kutztown hereby declares that the purpose
of this article is to preserve the health, safety and welfare of its residents
by preserving the character of neighborhoods and protecting the right of its
citizens to quiet enjoyment of those neighborhoods.
§ 62-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any and all beverages, including malt
beverages, which contain alcohol, liquor or such other intoxicating
substances as are further defined in the Pennsylvania Liquor Code, 47 P.S.
§ 1-101 et seq.
BYOB CLUB — Any facility operated for profit or pecuniary gain which is
not licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board wherein patrons
may consume alcoholic liquors, alcohol or malt or brewed beverages which
said patrons have carried or brought into the premises. The term shall not
include a licensee under the Liquor Code. The permissibility of a use of land
involving to any extent a BYOB club shall be determined according to the
principal intended use.
§ 62-16. Club requirements.
A. Any BYOB club, as the term is herein defined, shall comply with the
following requirements:
(1) Obtain and carry general liability coverage in the minimum amount
of $1,000,000 per occurrence, proof of which shall be filed with the
Borough's Code Enforcement Officer, and upon policy renewal;
(2) Obtain a valid BYOB club license pursuant to this article and
prominently display said license as required;
(3) Conspicuously post the hours of operation at the business premises
such that patrons are sufficiently apprised of same;
B. No BYOB license shall be issued for any premises until the Borough's
Code Enforcement Officer receives:
(1) A certification from the Tax Collector that all real property taxes
and assessments pertaining to the premises and the property on
which the premises is located and for which a BYOB license is to be
issued are current and that no such taxes or assessments are then
due and owing;
§ 62-14 ALARM SYSTEMS § 62-16
60:115
§ 62-17. License required; application; transferability.
(2) A certification from the Borough of Kutztown that all Borough
utilities and assessments pertaining to the premises for which a
BYOB license is to be issued are current and that no such utilities
or assessments are then due and owing.
A. Any person or persons desiring a BYOB license to operate a BYOB club
as required by this section shall make application upon forms provided
by the Borough's Code Enforcement Officer.
B. The initial license issued for a BYOB club shall be valid through
December 31 of the calendar year in which it is issued. Subsequent
renewals of a license shall be issued for a period of one year
commencing January 1 of the year for which it is issued and expiring on
December 31 of that same year.
C. All applications for renewal of a BYOB license shall be submitted to the
Borough's Code Enforcement Officer on or before December 1 of the
preceding year and shall contain the following minimum information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, if an
individual; the name, residence and business address and
telephone number of each partner, if a partnership; the name and
principal place of business, if a corporation, as well as the name,
address and telephone number of any person who owns at least
10% of the stock of the corporation; and if a foreign corporation,
whether the same is authorized to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) The street address and the lot and block numbers of the premises
on which the BYOB club is to be conducted.
(3) The names, resident addresses and telephone numbers of all
managers of the premises.
(4) A certification signed by the applicant, if an individual, or all
persons owning at least ten-percent interest in the applicant, if the
applicant is a partnership, corporation or limited liability company,
that the applicant has read and agreed to comply with all of the
provisions of this section and that the applicant understands that a
BYOB license is subject to revocation for violation of any of the
provisions of this section.
(5) A certification signed by the property owner that he or she is the
legally deeded property owner on which the applicant's premises is
located and acknowledge awareness of the applicant's pursuit of
obtaining a BYOB license at said premises.
D. The Borough's Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) shall determine
whether the BYOB club fully and completely complies with the
provisions and requirements of this article within 30 days following the
§ 62-16 KUTZTOWN CODE § 62-17
60:116
§ 62-18. Rules and regulations for operation.
The following rules and regulations are applicable to all businesses holding
a BYOB club license:
date on which the application is received. If the Borough's CEO
determines that the applicant fully and completely complies with the
provisions hereof, the Borough's CEO shall issue a BYOB club license;
if the Borough's CEO determines that the applicant does not fully and
completely comply with the provisions hereof, the Borough's CEO shall
deny the issuance of a BYOB license and shall furnish written evidence
of the same to the applicant, together with the reason(s) for denial.
E. All applications for a BYOB license or renewal thereof shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $50.
F. BYOB licenses shall not be transferable in the event of a change in
ownership of the premises.
A. Premises with BYOB club privileges must comply with all applicable
state, federal and municipal rules, regulations, statutes and ordinances
pertaining to the consumption of alcoholic beverages on a premises that
is not licensed or permitted to sell or serve alcoholic beverages.
B. There shall be no consumption of alcoholic beverages by employees of
the premises, but only by patrons. No person waiting to be seated for
service may consume or possess an open container of an alcoholic
beverage while waiting to be seated for service.
C. No outdoor consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted
unless a specific area for outdoor dining is designated. All outdoor
consumption of alcoholic beverages must be done within the designated
dining area. The outdoor consumption of alcoholic beverages by
patrons within any Borough street right-of-way is prohibited.
D. The consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted only during
the hours between 11:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
E. No BYOB club licensee or employee shall be permitted to serve, handle,
pour or distribute alcoholic beverages on the premises.
F. There shall be no storage of alcoholic beverages on the premises.
Patrons shall not be permitted to deliver alcoholic beverages to the
premises in advance or to leave alcoholic beverages on the premises to
be consumed or to be picked up at a later time.
G. Patrons who desire to consume alcoholic beverages on the premises
shall bring such beverages with them to the establishment. No delivery
of alcoholic beverages by any person, including a licensed alcoholic
beverage establishment, shall be permitted.
§ 62-17 ALARM SYSTEMS § 62-18
60:117
§ 62-19. Unlawful activity.
No business establishment, fitting the definition of a BYOB club, shall allow
alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises without a valid BYOB
license.
§ 62-20. Violations and penalties.
H. Alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted to be stored, displayed or
maintained on a service bar or service table and must be kept by the
patron at the table at which the patron is seated.
I. No BYOB club licensee shall permit a patron or any person to bring or
deliver to the premises a large quantity of alcoholic beverages intended
for consumption at a party or other special event to be attended by
more than one table of patrons. Public or private parties to be attended
by more than four persons and for which the host of the party provides
alcoholic beverages to persons attending the function are not
permitted.
J. No BYOB club licensee or employee of a licensee shall allow, permit or
suffer any alcoholic beverages to be consumed by any intoxicated
person or by any person under the age of 21 years.
K. A BYOB club licensee shall immediately report to the Borough of
Kutztown Police Department any incident of underage drinking or the
presentation of false identification by an underage person and any
incident involving the excessive consumption of alcohol by a patron.
The failure to immediately report any such incident will result in the
suspension or revocation of the BYOB license.
A. Any person, persons or entity violating the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine in an amount of no
less than $300 and no more than $600 for each day of such violation,
and any and all other remedies available in accordance with the
codified ordinances of the Borough of Kutztown and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The unlawful activities specified herein shall constitute separate and
distinct offenses for each and every day in which said activities are
conducted.
C. In addition to any monetary penalties involved, the Borough of
Kutztown shall revoke the club license required, upon conviction of any
unlawful activities, for a period of one year from the date of conviction.
D. In the event that any of the unlawful activities specified herein are
conducted by or in the name of a corporation, partnership, joint
venture, trust, firm or association, in addition to entity liability, the
officers, agents or principals of said corporation, partnership, joint
venture, trust, firm or association shall be deemed in violation, as well
as the person or persons engaged in the unlawful activity.
§ 62-18 KUTZTOWN CODE § 62-21
60:118
§ 62-21. Appeals.
Any aggrieved person may appeal the decision of the Code Enforcement
Officer to the Borough of Kutztown Code Appeals Board in accordance with
the requirements contained in Chapter 12 of the Code of the Borough of
Kutztown.
§ 62-21 ALARM SYSTEMS § 62-21
60:119
Chapter 64
AMBULANCE SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 17. Police Department — See Ch. 38.
§ 64-1. Purpose.
The Borough, after considering the relative principals under the
Pennsylvania Emergency Medical Services Act, 35 P.S. § 6921, et seq. and
the authority of a municipality to make the designation of a primary
provider, has decided that it is in the best interests of the residents and
visitors of the Borough of Kutztown, in order to prevent premature death
and to reduce suffering and disability that may arise from a critical illness
or injury, to designate a primary ambulance provider within the Borough
of Kutztown. It is the intent of the Borough of Kutztown, through the
designation of a primary provider for the Borough, to provide the Borough
with an effective, efficient and reliable emergency medical services system,
including basic and advanced life support emergency medical care and 911
services, that are equally accessible in a timely fashion to residents and
visitors of the Borough.
§ 64-2. Designation of provider; term.
The Borough of Kutztown may appoint, by a duly authorized resolution
of the Borough of Kutztown Borough Council, an advanced life support
ambulance service, licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Health, to
be the primary provider of emergency medical ambulance services for the
Borough of Kutztown. Furthermore, the designated primary provider shall
remain the primary provider of emergency medical ambulance services for
the Borough of Kutztown until such time as either it notifies the Borough
of Kutztown that it no longer desires the designation or the designated
primary provider is unable to provide the services of a primary provider
of emergency medical ambulance services to the Borough of Kutztown or
the Borough of Kutztown designates another emergency medical ambulance
service as the primary provider for the Borough of Kutztown by the adoption
of a resolution designating another emergency medical ambulance service
as the primary provider for the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 64-3. Responsibility of primary provider.
It shall be the responsibility of the primary provider of emergency medical
ambulance services for the Borough of Kutztown to be the first-due EMS
responder for all emergencies requiring basic and/or advanced life support
care, treatment or transportation in the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 62-21 KUTZTOWN CODE § 64-4
64:120
§ 64-4. Direction to dispatch services.
The Borough of Kutztown hereby directs the Berks County Communication
Center to dispatch the designated primary provider as the first-due provider
for all emergencies within the Borough limits of the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 64-5. Unavailability of primary provider.
In the event that the primary provider is unavailable for any reason for
calls within the Borough of Kutztown, the next closest available BLS and/or
ALS ambulance service should be in place of the primary provider for the
Borough of Kutztown.
Chapter 66
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 156.
§ 64-4 ANIMALS § 64-5
66:121

ARTICLE I
Running at Large
[Adopted 12-28-1976 as Ord. No. 16-1976]
§ 66-1. Running at large prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian and keeper of any dog, cat
and/or other pet to allow such dog, cat and/or other pet to run at large at
any time, either upon any of the streets, alleys or public grounds in the
Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania, or upon the property of
another than the owner, custodian and keeper of such dog, cat and/or other
pet, unless accompanied by and under the immediate control of such owner,
custodian or keeper.
§ 66-2. Seizure; notice; redemption.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Borough of Kutztown who
witnesses any dog, cat and/or other pet running at large in conflict with the
provisions of § 66-1 of this Article or who receives information of any dog,
cat and/or other pet so running at large to seize such dog, cat and/or other
pet and to convey it to the place designated by the Borough Council as a
pound. Notice of such seizure shall be sent to the owner of such dog, cat
and/or other pet in the manner prescribed by law, and such dog, cat and/or
other pet may be redeemed by the owner thereof within the time specified
by law, upon payment of the charges incurred by reason of such detention.
Rates for such charges shall be determined from time to time by resolution
of the Borough Council.49
§ 66-3. Nuisances prohibited.
No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog, cat and/or
other pet shall cause, suffer or allow such dog, cat and/or other pet to soil,
defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance on any common thoroughfare,
sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park or any place where people
congregate or walk or upon any public property whatsoever or upon private
property without the permission of the owner of said private property. The
restriction of this section shall not apply to that property lying between the
curbline and the improved sidewalk area, which area shall be used to curb
such dog, cat and/or other pet, subject to the following conditions:
A. The person who so curbs such dog, cat and/or other pet shall
immediately remove all feces deposited by such dog, cat and/or other
pet in a sanitary method from the designated areas as heretofore
defined.
B. The feces removed from said designated area shall be deposited by the
person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog, cat and/or
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 66-1 ANIMALS § 66-3
66:123
§ 66-4. Violations and penalties.50
Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this Article shall, upon
conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.) and not exceeding six hundred dollars ($600.) and
costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days; provided, however, that
such fine and costs shall be in addition to any payments required to be made
under § 66-2 of this Article.
other pet curbed in accordance with the provisions of this section in a
sanitary manner.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 66-3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 66-4
66:124
Chapter 75
CONSTRUCTION CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 11.
Code Appeals Board — See Ch. 12.
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 107.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 119.
Plumbing — See Ch. 163.
Streets and sidewalks — Ch. 192.
§ 75-1. Election to administer and enforce.
The Borough hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Construction Code, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101
through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and the regulations
of the Act as promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry.
§ 75-2. Adoption of standards.
§ 75-3. Administration and enforcement; building permits required.
[Amended 12-1-2004 by Ord. No. 24-2004; 5-24-2005 by Ord. No.
17-2005]
A. The Uniform Construction Code contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401
through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein, as amended, by Chapter 77, Chapter 107, Chapter
119, Chapter 163 and Chapter 192 of the Code of the Borough of
Kutztown, by reference as the Building (Construction) Code of the
Borough.
B. In addition to the codes, sections and appendix set forth in § 403.21,
Uniform Construction Code, as being adopted and incorporated by
reference, this chapter adopts and incorporates the ICC Property
Maintenance Code, 2003, and the remainder of the appendix of the
codes set forth in § 403.21(a) of the Act.
A. The administration and enforcement of the code within the Borough of
Kutztown shall be undertaken by the Borough by appointing the
Director of Construction and Property Inspection as the Building Code
Official as defined in the code.
B. Building permits.
(1) Pursuant to and in accordance with State Act 92 of 2004, Section
104(B), the Borough Of Kutztown shall require permits for
residential alterations and repairs pursuant to the International
§ 66-4 CONSTRUCTION CODE § 75-3
75:125
§ 75-4. Board of Appeals.
The Borough Council shall by resolution or ordinance appoint, either alone
or jointly with other municipalities, a Board of Appeal as set forth in the
Code.
§ 75-5. Amendment of existing provisions.
The following chapters of the Kutztown Code are amended so as to provide
requirements that exceed the minimum requirements of the Code and which
were adopted prior to July 1, 1999, and are more fully set forth in said
chapters:
§ 75-6. Repealer.
All chapters of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown or parts thereof,
excepting Chapter 192, Streets and Sidewalks, or parts thereof, that are
inconsistent with this Chapter 75 are hereby repealed.
§ 75-7. Fees.
Fees for the administration, inspections, and enforcement of the Code
shall be established by resolution from time to time by the Council of the
Borough.
§ 75-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, corporation, trust or other entity who or which
shall fail to comply with any of the requirements hereof or repair a building
or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Code Official
or other authorized person or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000. In default of payment of
the fine by any convicted person, partnership, corporation, trust or other
entity, such person, the members of such partnership, the officers of such
corporation or the trustees of such trust or the persons responsible for
the operation of any other entity shall be liable to imprisonment for not
Residential Code 2003, Chapter 1, Section 105, or any subsequent
edition thereof.
(2) Pursuant to and in accordance with State Act 92 of 2004, Section
104(B), the Borough Of Kutztown shall require building permits for
all residential utility and miscellaneous use structures of 200
square feet or more.
A. Chapter 77, Building Construction.
B. Chapter 119, Fire Prevention.
C. Chapter 163, Plumbing.
§ 75-3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 75-8
75:126
more than 60 days. Each day that a violation is continued shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 75-9. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective five days after the enactment of same.
§ 75-10. Severability.
Should any part of this chapter be held unconstitutional, illegal, or
unenforceable by any count of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall
not effect, impair, nullify, or otherwise prevent the enforcement of the
remainder of this chapter.
Chapter 77
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction Code — See Ch. 75.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 107.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 119.
Housing standards — See Ch. 135.
Plumbing — See Ch. 163.
§ 77-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Borough of Kutztown Building
Code."
§ 77-2. Reenactment of provisions.
The provisions contained in § 77-3 of this chapter were reenacted on April
20, 2004, pursuant to Act 45 of 1999, also known as the "Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code," which allowed for the reenactment of all
building code ordinances which equal or exceed the specific requirements
of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code and were in effect prior to
July 1, 1999.
§ 77-3. Additional regulations.
A. Erosion control notification. The Code Official shall notify the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (PennDER) or its
designee immediately upon receipt of an application for a building
permit involving an earthmoving activity which affects five acres or
more of land. The Code Official shall not issue a building permit to those
engaged in earthmoving activities requiring a PennDER permit until
PennDER has issued such permit.
§ 75-8 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 77-3
77:127
B. Flood hazard area requirements. The Code Official shall not issue
permits for the erection or alteration of buildings and structures
located or to be located within areas of the Borough of Kutztown
regulated under Section 1910.3 of the National Flood Insurance
Program Regulations issued by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development unless and until all of the
requirements of all ordinances of the Borough of Kutztown relating to
the criteria and requirements of Section 1910.3 of the National Flood
Insurance Program Regulations issued by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development and all requirements
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania are met.
C. The placement or replacement of roofing or siding or change of
construction materials shall require an application to the Code Official.
D. The plan shall also include the approximate location and types of all
underground lines and the names and addresses of the users as
required by Act 38 of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as from time
to time amended.
E. A list of required inspections shall appear on the building permit. The
applicant to whom a building permit is issued shall be responsible for
requesting of the Code Official each inspection appearing on the permit
as aforesaid, at least 24 hours before the applicant desires each
inspection to be performed.
F. Violations and penalties. Any person, partnership, corporation, trust or
other entity who or which shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements hereof or repair a building or structure in violation of an
approved plan or directive of the Code Official or other authorized
person or of a permit or certificate issued under the provision of this
Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $1,000. In default of payment of the fine
by any convicted person, partnership, corporation, trust or other entity,
such person, the members of such partnership, the officers of such
corporation or the trustees of such trust or the persons responsible for
the operation of any other entity shall be liable to imprisonment for not
more than 60 days. Each day that a violation is continued shall
constitute a separate offense.
G. Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of
emergency work shall be paid by and shall be the liability of the owner
of the premises where the unsafe building or structure is or was
located. Upon failure of payment, the Solicitor for the Borough of
Kutztown shall institute appropriate action against such owner for
recovery of such costs.
H. Dwellings. All boardinghouses, hotels, motels and all single-family, twofamily
and multifamily dwellings as those terms are defined in Chapter
225, Zoning.
§ 77-3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 77-3
77:128
Chapter 96
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 156.
§ 96-1. Curfew established.
It shall be unlawful for boys and girls under sixteen (16) years of age, such
persons being defined for purposes of this chapter as a child or children,
to be, or remain, in or upon the streets (which includes the area located
between the building lines as set forth on the topographical survey of the
Borough of Kutztown), alleys, parks or public places in the Borough of
Kutztown at night between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and the immediately
following 6:00 a.m., prevailing time.
I. Dwelling unit. A dwelling unit as that term is defined in Chapter 225,
Zoning.
J. Private garages in Use Group R shall be separated from the interior
spaces and attic area by five-eighths-inch fire shield, gypsum board or
equivalent applied to the garage side.
K. Door sills between private garages and adjacent interior spaces shall be
raised not less than four inches (102 millimeters).
L. The minimum compressive strength of concrete shall not be less than
3,000 pounds per square inch (20,685 kPa).
M. Housekeeping. Rubbish and trash shall not be allowed to accumulate on
the construction site and shall be removed as soon as conditions
warrant. Combustible rubbish shall be removed daily and shall not be
disposed of by burning on the premises or in the immediate vicinity. The
entire premises and area adjoining and around the operation shall be
kept in a safe and sanitary condition and be kept free of accumulation of
trash, rubbish, nuts, bolts, small tools and other equipment. Rubbish
and trash shall not be buried or backfilled on the premises but shall be
removed and disposed of in accordance with regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
N. Fee schedule. A fee schedule shall be determined and established from
time to time by the Borough Council. Upon enactment of this section
and until such time as the Borough Council enacts a new fee schedule,
the fee schedule in place at the time of this section's adoption shall be
enforced.
§ 77-3 CURFEW § 96-2
96:129
§ 96-2. Responsibility of parents; exceptions.
It is hereby made unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having
the legal care or custody of any of the children above designated to allow
or permit any such child, ward or other person under such age, while in
such legal care or custody, to go or be in or upon any streets, alleys, parks
or public places in said borough after the time prohibited in § 96-1 of this
chapter, except in the following circumstances:
§ 96-3. Violations and penalties.
Any child as above designated found upon the borough streets, alleys, parks
or public places within the borough in violation of § 96-1 of this chapter
shall be taken into custody by the borough police and released to his or her
parents, guardian or person having the legal care or custody of said child,
and report thereof shall be made promptly to the Mayor. If said parent,
guardian or person having the legal care or custody of said child shall again
allow him or her to be on said streets, alleys, parks or public places in
violation of § 96-1 of this chapter, said parent, guardian or person having
the legal care or custody of said child so offending shall, upon conviction
by a court having jurisdiction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.) and the costs of suit or, on failure of the convicted
party to pay said fine, to imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to
exceed five (5) days, and a like fine or imprisonment shall be imposed on
A. When such child is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other
person having the legal care or custody of such child.
B. When returning home by a direct route from [and within thirty (30)
minutes of the termination of] a school activity or an activity of a
religious or other voluntary association.
C. When going to or returning home from a child's place of employment,
so long as the child carries on his person a card certified by the
employer identifying the child, the place of employment and the hours
of the child's employment.
D. In case of reasonable necessity, but only after such child's parent has
communicated to the borough's police station personnel the facts
establishing such reasonable necessity.
E. Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech
and the right of assembly, provided that there shall first be delivered to
the office of the Borough Manager a written communication signed by
the child and signed by a parent or guardian of the child specifying
when, where and in what manner said child will be on the streets at
night during hours during which the curfew provisions of this chapter
are applicable in the exercise of a First Amendment right as specified in
such written communication.
§ 96-2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 96-3
96:130
any person aiding or abetting in the violation of the intent and purpose of
this chapter.
§ 96-4. Repeated violations.
Any child who shall violate this chapter more than three (3) times shall
be reported to the Juvenile Probation Officers of Berks County, and such
proceedings shall be initiated in the Court of Common Pleas of Berks County
exercising jurisdiction as the Juvenile Court as may be deemed necessary by
said Juvenile Probation Officers or by any citizen who is a resident of Berks
County, and the parent, guardian or person having the legal care or custody
of said child shall likewise be reported to said Juvenile Probation Officers
and a like procedure followed as in the case of said child.
§ 96-5. Determination of age.
The Police Officers of the borough, in taking children into custody, shall
use their discretion in determining age, and in doubtful cases may require
positive proof, and until such proof is furnished, the officer's judgment shall
prevail.
Chapter 99
DANCES, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 96.
§ 99-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated unless a different meaning clearly appears in the context:
DANCE HALL — Any room, place or space in which a public dance, as
herein defined, is held.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm,
corporation, trust or other entity.51
PUBLIC DANCE — Any dance or ball to which admission may be had
by payment of a fee or by the purchase, possession and presentation
of a token or ticket or in connection with which a charge is made for
the care of clothing or other property; provided, however, that the term
"public dance" shall not include any dance which is held in any room,
place or space subject to regulation by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control
Board (or any successor entity or organization) pursuant to authority
granted to the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board by the Liquor Code
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 96-3 DANCES, PUBLIC § 99-1
99:131
§ 99-2. Hour of closing.
Every public dance shall be discontinued at, and the facility in which such
public dance is held shall be closed at, 2:00 a.m. prevailing time.
§ 99-3. Violations and penalties.53
Any person who or which shall violate any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.) and/or to
undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed thirty (30) days. Each day
the violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 107
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 77. Housing standards — See Ch. 135.
of Pennsylvania, as may be amended from time to time,52 or any dance,
the proceeds of which, after the payment of reasonable expenses, inure
exclusively to the benefit of any charitable, religious, civic, educational,
fraternal or beneficial nonprofit organization.
B. In this chapter the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall
include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
52.Editor's Note: See 47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 99-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § 99-3
99:132
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 12-3-1991 by Ord. No. 13-1991]
§ 107-1. Definitions and word usage.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms or words used herein,
unless otherwise expressly stated, shall have the meanings hereinafter set
forth. Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the
masculine gender include the feminine and the neuter; and the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular.
APPLICANT — The person, firm, corporation, association, trust,
partnership, consumer or consumer's agent or other entity who or which
applies for a permit to install any electrical wiring, equipment and
apparatus regulated by this article.[Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No.
12-1995]
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The person so designated
by Borough Council or his representative so designated either by Borough
Council or by the Borough Manager.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Kutztown.
BOROUGH ELECTRIC DEPARTMENT — The Electric Department of the
Borough.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The corporate official appointed by the Borough
Council as the Borough Manager or such official's properly designated
representative.54[Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
CONNECTED LOAD — The combined rated capacity of all the consumer's
lights, motors or other energy-consuming devices.
CONSUMER — The corporation, association, partnership, trust, individual
or other entity being served by or using electric service supplied by the
Borough.[Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
CONSUMER'S INSTALLATION — All wire, cutouts, switches, appliances
and apparatus of every kind and nature used in connection with or forming
a part of an installation for utilizing electric energy for any purpose
ordinarily located on the consumer's side at the point of delivery and
including the service leads, whether such installation is owned outright by
the consumer or used by the consumer under lease or otherwise.
ELECTRICAL WIRING, EQUIPMENT AND APPARATUS — All supplies of
every kind and nature, including electrical wiring, electrical apparatus,
electrical fixtures and all other electrical supplies used as part of any
installation for the conduction, use or consumption of electrical energy in
any form or for any purpose; provided, however, that said terms shall not
54.Editor's Note: Original Subsection (g), Borough Superintendent, which immediately
followed this definition, was deleted 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995.
§ 107-1 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-1
99:133
apply to domestic appliances, built-in standardized sizes and types, which
are installed or connected as a unit by inserting a plug into a wall or other
similar electrical outlet.
ELECTRICIAN — Any person, partnership, corporation, trust or other entity
who or which, within the Borough, engages in or carries on the business of
installing, erecting, altering, extending, maintaining or repairing electrical
wiring, apparatus, fixtures, devices, appliances or equipment for the
utilization of electricity for light, heat or power.[Amended 12-26-1995 by
Ord. No. 12-1995]
INSTALLER — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, trust or other
entity engaged in the business of installing or repairing dishwashers, water
softeners, garbage disposals, ice machines, refrigeration machinery, water
heaters and other similar types of appliances.[Amended 12-26-1995 by
Ord. No. 12-1995]
MASTER ELECTRICIAN — An electrician who is permitted to engage in
electrical work in any type of building use group.[Added 6-24-2003 by
Ord. No. 5-2003]
POINT OF DELIVERY — The point where the wires or apparatus of the
Borough are connected to the service leads of the consumer.
RESIDENTIAL ELECTRICIAN — An electrician who may only engage in
electrical work in one- or two-family dwellings and accessory buildings or
uses thereto.[Added 6-24-2003 by Ord. No. 5-2003]
SERVICE — The furnishing of service or delivery of energy referred to in
this article, and in contracts with consumers shall be construed to mean
readiness and ability on the part of the Borough to maintain at the point of
delivery the approximate frequency, phase and voltage sufficient to supply
the maximum demand that at any single time the Borough is obligated to
supply, whether or not the consumer makes any use thereof.
UNIT(S) — Any individual residential dwellings, residential dwelling units,
commercial occupancies or industrial occupancies.
§ 107-2. Adoption of Electrical Code. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord.
No. 12-1995; 3-11-1997 by Ord. No. 5-1997; 8-24-1999 by Ord. No.
11-1999; 3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2-2002]
In order to safeguard the public and the property of the public and to
ensure the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Borough, the
National Electrical Code 2002, published by the National Fire Protection
Association, is incorporated herein by reference thereto, as hilly as if set out
at length herein, and, as modified by the provisions of this article, is adopted
as the Electrical Code of the Borough. In addition, whenever the National
Electrical Code 2002 makes reference to the National Electrical Safety
Code published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
Inc., the applicable provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code 2002
Edition are hereby incorporated herein by reference thereto, as fully as if
set out at length herein, as a part of the Electrical Code of the Borough.
§ 107-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-2
99:134
Copies of the National Electrical Code 2002 and the National Electrical
Safety Code 2002 Edition shall be kept on file in the Code Office of the
Borough. In the event that any provision of this article is in conflict with the
National Electrical Code 2002, the most restrictive requirement shall apply
so as to meet the objectives of this article.
§ 107-3. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any public utility under the
jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission; nor to any utility
owned by a municipality; nor to the employees of such utility under the
jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or utility owned
by any municipality in the course of their employment with said utility;
nor to the servicing of appliances by distributor servicing agencies at the
direction of any aforesaid utility. The provisions of this article shall apply to
all other private enterprises.
§ 107-4. Licensing of electricians. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord.
No. 12-1995; 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 1-1998; 7-13-1999 by Ord. No.
9-1999; 6-24-2003 by Ord. No. 5-2003]
A. Electrical wiring, equipment and apparatus may be installed, altered or
extended only under the supervision of a master or residential
electrician who is registered with the Borough; provided, however, that
the owner and occupier of a single-family residence may perform such
electrical work in his own residence as long as he shall first obtain a
permit for such electrical work prior to the performance thereof, and,
upon its completion, said electrical work shall be inspected as
hereinafter required by § 107-34 of this article.
B. Application for a master or residential electrician's license to perform
electrical work within the Borough can be accomplished by either of the
following methods:
(1) If the applicant holds a valid master or residential electrician's
license issued by any city of the third class or larger in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, such applicant may present said
license, together with a fee as set from time to time by resolution of
the Borough Council,55 and a certificate of insurance as required by
§ 107-5 of this article to the Code Enforcement Office of the
Borough, which shall issue a master or residential electrician's
license to such applicant permitting such applicant to perform
electrical work within the Borough; provided, however, that said
license must be annually renewed during the month of January of
each year.
(2) Any applicant who does not hold a valid master or residential
electrician's license issued as set forth in § 107-4B(1) shall apply to
the International Code Council, Contractor Examination Services
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 107-2 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-4
99:135
for an examination and, upon successful completion of said
examination and proof of a minimum of three years' experience in
the class of license applied for or at least two years of technical
training and one year of experience in the class of license applied
for and upon payment of the required license fee and the posting of
a certificate of insurance as required by § 107-5, shall be issued a
license.
(3) If an applicant was previously licensed as a master or residential
electrician in the Borough but has let said license expire, he shall
be reinstated by applying for a license if the applicant does not
meet the qualifications of Subsection B(1) of this section but the
applicant is actively employed as an electrician by a licensed
master or residential electrician who shall, by letter, certify
employment and experience.
C. Any person not a master or residential electrician who assists a master
or residential electrician in the performance of any electrical work
(other than a person performing any electrical work in his own
residence if he is the owner thereof, as hereinabove permitted) shall be
the holder of a journeyman electrician's license. Any applicant who
does not hold a valid journeyman electrician's license issued by a city of
the third class or larger in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall
apply to the International Code Council, Contractor Examination
Services for an examination and, upon successful completion of said
examination and upon proof of three years of experience or two years of
technical training, shall be issued a license upon payment of the
required fee.56
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A above, a person, firm,
company, partnership, corporation or other entity engaged in the
selling of electrical appliances who or which has as a part of its
operation a department engaged in the repair of those appliances may
install such appliances within the Borough, provided that a permit for
any necessary electrical work is first obtained prior the performance
thereof, and, upon its completion, said work shall be inspected as
hereinafter required by § 107-34 of this article.
E. The Code Enforcement Officer may revoke any license if it is
subsequently determined that said license was obtained through
nondisclosure, misstatement or misrepresentation of a fact or in the
event that the holder thereof is deemed to be in violation of any
provision of this Code and a penalty as provided for in this Code has
been imposed upon the holder thereof; provided, however, that before
any license may be revoked, the licensee shall receive a notice, in
writing, enumerating the charges against him, and said licensee shall
be entitled to a hearing before the Code Appeals Board in the matter
provided for appeals in Chapter 12 of the Code of the Borough of
Kutztown.
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 107-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-5
99:136
§ 107-5. Insurance. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
An applicant for any electrician's or installer's license shall be required
to file concurrently with the application and fee one or more certificates
of insurance evidencing one or more policies of insurance covering
commercial general liability by the licensing applicant in the performance
of services as an electrician in the minimum amount of $300.000 per
occurrence with an aggregate limit of $300.000. Such policy or policies
shall provide that the Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania,
be given at least 30 days prior written notice before the cancellation of
such insurance coverage. Successive certificates shall be filed in order
to evidence continuing coverage. Upon cancellation of any such policy or
policies of insurance, the license issued by the Borough hereunder to the
licensing applicant whose insurance has been canceled shall be deemed null
and void. In no such event shall the Borough, its elected and/or appointed
officers, officials, employees and/or agents be responsible for investigating
cancellations, affirmatively revoking any license upon such cancellation or
notifying a third person of such cancellation and/or revocation.
§ 107-6. Permits.
§ 107-7. Application and contract for service.
A. Prior to the commencement of any electrical work within the limits of
the Borough or upon any property served by the Borough Electric
Department permitted under this article, a registered master
electrician shall apply to the Borough, by submitting the required
application and, if required, a plan, for a permit to install any electrical
wiring, equipment and apparatus in any structure or building, whether
existing or new construction; provided, however, that in the case of an
owner-occupied one-family dwelling, the owner may obtain said permit
to do said electrical work.
B. A permit is not required for the replacement in kind or repair of
individual breakers, switches, receptacles and like components of the
consumer's installation; provided, however, that components of the
consumer's entrance service are not exempt from permit requirements.
C. A permit fee as from time to time determined by resolution of Borough
Council shall accompany each application.57
A. Contract for service. The Borough reserves the right to require the
consumer to sign a written contract setting forth the conditions under
which service is to be supplied. Receipt of electric service shall
constitute the receiver a consumer of the Borough subject to its rules
and regulations, whether service is based upon contract, agreement,
accepted signed application or otherwise.
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 107-5 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-7
99:137
B. Right to reject application. The Borough reserves the right to reject, for
any valid reason, any application. The Borough may require contracts
for a suitable period of time and reasonable guaranties when unusual
construction or equipment expense is necessary to furnish the service.
C. Right-of-way and access to property. Borough representatives, who are
properly identified, shall have full and free access to consumers'
premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of reading meters, for
inspection and repairs, for removal of Borough property or for any
other purpose incident to the service. The consumer should
immediately contact the Borough in case of any question as to the
authority or credentials of Borough representatives. The consumer
shall provide without charge a right-of-way acceptable to the Borough
for such lines across property owned or controlled by the consumer as
in the judgment of the Borough are necessary to furnish the service.
When the premises of the consumer is so located that right-of-way
across the property of another is required for the supply of service, the
consumer shall reimburse the Borough for any and all costs incurred by
the Borough for such a right-of-way. The Borough shall have the right to
request the consumer to deposit with the Borough the estimated costs
to be incurred before undertaking to acquire the right-of-way.
D. Establishments of rates; point of delivery. Borough Council shall from
time to time, by separate resolution, establish the rate or rates for the
service of electric energy. Such rate or rates shall be based upon the
supply of service to one entire premises through a single delivery point.
The use of service at two or more separate properties will not be
combined for billing purposes.
E. Short-term contracts. Service may be supplied under the rate
applicable for the character of service required for periods less than the
standard contract period, subject to guaranteed revenue. In the case of
seasonal consumers, the Borough may require such consumers to pay
12 months' guaranty in advance, said advance to apply on bills
rendered during such seasonal or short-term contracts.
F. Service for construction or emergency. The Borough will supply service
for construction or emergency purposes only when the Borough has
available unsold capacity and supplying equipment, subject to a charge
collected in advance to cover the cost of the supply and discontinuance
of such service.
G. Prior debts. Service will not be furnished to a former consumer until
any indebtedness of said former consumer to the Borough for previous
service has been satisfied.
H. Unauthorized use of service. Unauthorized connection to the Borough's
supply facilities may be terminated by the Borough without notice. Use
of service without notifying the Borough or enabling it to read its meter
will render the user liable for any amount due for service supplied to
§ 107-7 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-7
99:138
§ 107-8. Guaranty of payment.
the premises from the time of the last reading of the meter as shown on
the records of the Borough.
A. Deposits. A cash deposit may be required from any consumer to insure
payment of any bill in compliance with this article and all other
applicable rules and regulations.58 A consumer whose credit standing
has become impaired through failure to pay his or her electric bills may
be required to furnish an additional deposit.
B. Amount of deposits. Deposits required from consumers taking service
for a period of less than 30 days shall equal the estimated gross bill for
such temporary period. Deposits required from all other consumers
shall be in accordance with the schedule of charges which shall be
determined from time to time by resolution of Borough Council.59 In the
event that any consumer is delinquent in the payment of his or her
electric bill, as hereinafter provided in Subsection E of this section,
more than one time within any six-month period, then, upon notice from
the Borough Secretary to the consumer, the consumer shall be required
to post an additional deposit in the amount as established by the
Borough Manager or his designee within 10 days from the receipt of
such notice, and in the event that the consumer shall fail to post such
additional deposit, the Borough shall discontinue the service of
electricity to the consumer, unless other arrangements are made
between the consumer and the Borough Manager or his designee.
[Amended 7-18-2006 by Ord. No. 13-2006]
C. Interest on deposits. No interest shall be payable by the Borough on any
deposits. [Amended 8-25-1992 by Ord. No. 9-199260]
D. Refund of deposits. Upon discontinuance of service, the Borough may
apply any deposit then in its possession toward the final settlement of
the consumer’s account, and any remaining balance thereof greater
than $1 will be refunded to the consumer. If a consumer’s balance is
less than or equal to $1, the balance will not be returned to the
consumer and will be deposited to the Electric Fund of the Borough of
Kutztown. [Amended 7-20-2004 by Ord. No. 18-2004; 7-18-2006
by Ord. No. 13-2006]
E. Payment of bills. Payment of an electric bill shall be due on or before the
20th day of the month succeeding the last date for service on the bill.
58.Editor’s Note: Resolution No. 19-2004, adopted 7-20-2004, provided that the Borough
Council of the Borough of Kutztown, pursuant to the authority contained in Ch. 107 of the
Code of the Borough of Kutztown, adopts a policy requiring the collection of cash security
deposits from tenants in accordance with §A231-1 of the Code of the Borough of
Kutztown.
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
60.Editor's Note: Section 2 of this ordinance also provided as follows: "Interest now accruing
and paid on deposits shall cease to accrue and effective September 1, 1992, and
thereafter, no interest shall be paid on deposits except such interest that shall have
accrued prior to September 1, 1992."
§ 107-7 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-9
99:139
§ 107-9. Consumer's installation.
A. Character of service. The phase, voltage, size and type of all motors
installed by consumers shall be subject to the approval of the Borough.
Consumers shall, as provided for and regulated by this article, install
motor-starting devices, automatic circuit breakers, switches, fuses or
overload devices of a type approved by the Borough and shall adjust,
renew or replace the same from time to time or on request of the
Borough. The Borough Manager may issue regulations concerning the
method of starting motors, in order to keep excess current required for
such starting as low as practicable, without in any way rendering the
Borough responsible for control or operation of any such equipment.
The voltages and phases of motors which may be part of the consumer's
installation to which the Borough supplies service shall conform, as
applicable, to the following requirements:
(1) Motor rated 1/2 horsepower or less. A motor rated 1/2 horsepower
or less shall be a single-phase motor and shall be rated for
connection to one-hundred-twenty-volt or two-hundred-forty-volt
single-phase circuits.
(2) Motor rated larger than 1/2 horsepower but not exceeding five
horsepower. A motor rated larger than 1/2 horsepower but not
exceeding five horsepower shall be single-phase and shall be a
motor rated for connection to two-hundred-forty-volt single-phase
circuits. A motor rated larger than 1/2 horsepower but not
exceeding five horsepower shall not be rated for connection to onehundred-
twenty-volt single-phase circuits.
(3) Motor rated in excess of five horsepower or a group of motors
having a combined horsepower rating in excess of five horsepower
shall be connected only for three-phase operation and only where
the Borough supplies polyphase service to the consumer's
installation.
(4) Motors frequently started or motors arranged for automatic control
shall be of the type to give maximum starting torque with minimum
current and shall be equipped with controlling devices approved by
the Borough. At the consumer's expense, the consumer shall, as
provided for and regulated by this article, install a reverse-phase
relay of approved type on every alternating-current motor used for
passenger or freight elevators, hoists, pumps or cranes.
(5) Notwithstanding the aforesaid requirements set forth above in
Subsection A(1), (2) and (3), the Borough Manager may authorize a
connection of a motor or a group of motors to a voltage or a phase
other than in accordance with the aforesaid requirements where, in
the opinion of the Borough Manager, the required type of
connection would impose a hardship upon the consumer and the
proposed connection not in conformance with the aforesaid
requirements would not interfere with the Borough's electric
§ 107-9 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-9
99:140
distribution system or with the rendering of electric service to any
other consumer of the Borough.
B. Fluorescent and neon lights. Consumers shall, as provided for and
regulated by this article, install in connection with any fluorescent or
neon lighting, or other lighting or display facilities having similar load
characteristics, auxiliary equipment designed to correct the power
factor of such installations to not less than eight-five percent (85%).
C. Capacity limitation. The Borough will not supply single-phase service to
any consumer's installation where the connected load exceeds 100
kilovolt-amperes. In instances where the connected load exceeds 100
kilovolt-amperes, the consumer shall, as provided for and regulated by
this article, arrange or rearrange the consumer's installation to accept
polyphase service which will be supplied by the Borough.
D. Single-phase source derived from polyphase service. Only transformers
with separate primary and secondary windings shall be utilized where
the consumer's installation is arranged to derive single-phase power
from the polyphase service supplied by the Borough. Auto transformers,
balance coils or means other than a transformer with separate primary
and secondary windings shall not be utilized for such purpose.
E. Insulation requirements. The following insulation requirements shall
apply to every new building, every addition to an existing building,
every building hereafter converted to electric space heating and any
mobile home hereafter placed within the Borough, as follows:
(1) The following minimum insulation levels shall apply to every
residential building (as that term is defined in the Borough's
Building Code61 as from time to time in effect) constructed within
the Borough:
(a) The minimum thermal resistance (R) values through building
sanctions shall be:
[1] Ceilings adjacent to unheated areas: R=30.
[2] Exterior walls and partition walls between heated and
unheated areas: R=17.
[3] Foundation walls (applicable to all heated basements and
unheated areas): R=13.
[4] Partition walls between apartments and other heated
areas: R=11.
[5] Floors over areas open to the outside and crawl spaces if
foundation walls are not insulated in accordance with
Subsection E(1)(a)[3] above: R=30.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 77, Building Construction.
§ 107-9 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-9
99:141
[6] Floors over unheated basements: R=13.
[7] Floors of residences over other occupancies: R=19.
[8] Windows: double-glazed or single-glazed plus storm
windows.
[9] Entrance doors: R=4.
[10] Supply ducts in unheated areas: R=6.
[11] Return ducts in unheated areas: R=3.
(b) The thermal resistance values through the insulation material
for edge insulation for cement slabs shall be R=8.
(c) Vapor barriers, weather stripping and sill sealer shall be used
where applicable.
(d) Adequate ventilation shall be provided for all air spaces
between insulated ceilings and roofs.
(2) The insulation installed in other buildings hereafter constructed
within the Borough shall conform to the Borough's Building Code62
as from time to time in effect.
(3) The insulation in all existing residential buildings within the
Borough hereafter converted to electric space heating shall
conform to at least the minimum requirements for new residential
buildings hereinabove set forth in Subsection E(1)(a)[1], [5], [6],
[7], [8], [9], [10] and [11].
(4) The insulation installed in all additions to existing buildings within
the Borough shall conform to those minimum insulation
requirements set forth above applicable to the type of building to
which the addition is attached or made a part.
(5) Every mobile home hereafter brought into the Borough and every
mobile home presently existing in the Borough hereafter converted
to electric heating shall conform to the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development safety standards and
construction and insulation regulations in effect at the time the
mobile home is brought into the Borough or converted to electric
heat.
(6) For the purposes of this section, thermal resistance (R) shall be
deemed to be a measure of the ability of a material to retard the
flow of heat. It is the reciprocal of thermal conductance. Thermal
conductance shall be deemed to be the time rate of heat flow
expressed as British thermal units (Btu) per hour -- square foot --
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 77, Building Construction.
§ 107-9 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-9
99:142
§ 107-10. Service connection.
Fahrenheit degree average temperature difference between two
surfaces.
(7) The requirements and provisions of the within section shall apply to
every new building and every addition to an existing building
hereafter constructed within the Borough, to every existing
building within the Borough hereafter converted to electric heat
and to every mobile home hereafter brought into the Borough or
converted to electric heat which has a positive heat supply
designed to maintain air temperature of at least 50°F. (10° C.) or
higher.
F. A safety disconnect switch shall be provided at the entry to all spaces
housing a solid or liquid fuel furnace or boiler. In the case of furnace or
boiler rooms, the switch shall be located on the exterior wall of said
room; in dwelling units, the switch shall be located inside the entry to
the area containing the furnace or boiler.
G. In all panelboards, each and every means of disconnect and overload
protection shall be clearly marked, indicating the circuit controlled and
protected by such device. The required marking shall indicate room(s)
and whether receptacles and/or lighting circuits are controlled and
protected, plus any designated circuits.
H. Overcurrent protection shall consist of either S-type fuses, circuit
breakers or noninterchangeable cartridge fuses.
I. Each unit shall be metered separately. In addition, a separate meter
shall be supplied for consumption which is independent but common to
the units. The additional meter shall be required whether or not the
owner of the building occupies any of the units.
J. Protection of equipment against loss of voltage, undervoltage, transient
or sustained overvoltage, voltage unbalance, overcurrent, phase
failure, phase reversal, loss of synchronism and short circuit shall be
the responsibility of the consumer.
K. All floor receptacles in dwellings shall be protected with ground fault
circuit interrupters.
A. Facilities supplied by Borough. The Borough will install at its expense
on the private property of a consumer, and for the exclusive use of such
consumer, the meter and the first 100 feet of overhead service wires
extending from the Borough's supply wires. All other wiring and
equipment on private property of the consumer shall be furnished and
installed by the consumer, as provided for and regulated by this article.
The Borough shall not be responsible for any such wiring and/or
equipment furnished and/or installed by or on behalf of the consumer.
§ 107-9 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-10
99:143
B. Connection of service wires. The Borough Electric Department will
make all service connections to the Borough's facilities.
C. Location. In general, single-phase meters will be located on the outside
of the building. If an outdoor location is not practical, single-phase
meters may be located at another location approved by the Borough
Electric Department as near to the point of service entrance as
possible. The inside and/or outside location selected shall be accessible
at all times to both the consumer and the Borough and shall be clean,
dry and free from vibration and shall comply with the requirements of
Articles 500 through 517 of the National Electrical Code 1993. The
location shall be clear of all heating systems, plumbing and other
obstructions, and there shall be not less than three feet of clear area in
front of the meter cabinet. The height of the meter from the floor or
ground line shall be in accordance with the Borough policy as
determined by the Borough Electric Department. If the meter is to be
installed indoors, a meter board shall be constructed of three-fourthsinch
clear soft pine or similar wood and painted. The board shall be
securely fastened to a wall with an air space between the wall and
board. Socket meter cabinets may be mounted on metal framework or
directly on the wall if an air space is provided between cabinet and wall.
If there is more than one meter at a location, each shall be plainly and
permanently identified to indicate the circuit served and, further, shall
only serve one occupancy. When either the Borough or the consumer, as
provided for and regulated by this article, desires to place meters on
the consumer's switchboards, the Borough will furnish plans for such
installation. In the case of multimeters, whether installed indoors or
outdoors, each meter shall be permanently identified as to the unit(s)
served by such meter(s). [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No.
12-1995]
D. Means of disconnect. Service switches, circuit breakers and fuses shall
be furnished by the consumer, as provided for and regulated by this
article, which shall be capable to disconnect all electric to a separate
occupancy for which it is indicated. Each occupancy shall have a
separate and independent means of disconnect.
E. Grounding. All meter cabinets, troughs and instrument transformers
shall be grounded with copper wire, not smaller than No. 4, except that
if the supply wires are smaller than No. 4, such smaller wire size may be
used for grounding. All single-phase services shall be grounded. All
three-phase four-wire services shall have the neutral wire grounded. In
any event all grounding shall conform to the provisions of the National
Electrical Code of 1993.
F. The owner of any property within the Borough upon which there is
erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy and/or use by human beings shall make service connection
therewith for the purpose of that unit utilizing electric energy from the
Borough. The Borough shall hold right to reject or waive, for any valid
§ 107-10 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-10
99:144
§ 107-11. Service to multiple customer structures.
§ 107-12. Installation requirements.
reason, such service connection. [Added 3-16-2011 by Ord. No.
3-2011]
A. If more than one unit (not using electric heat) is supplied from a
common service, each unit shall have a three-wire service entrance of
not less than 100 amperes. The following list is the minimum rating of
common service entrance conductors:
Units Amperes
2 to 4 150
5 to 6 200
More than 6 unit in excess of 6
B. For units with electric heat, the minimum wire size shall be rated to
carry at least 80% of the total connected load.
C. Each unit shall be metered separately. In addition, a separate meter
shall be supplied for consumption which is common to the units. The
additional meter shall be required whether or not the owner of the
building occupies one of the units.
D. Each meter base and main disconnect shall be clearly and permanently
marked indicating the unit served by the meter and main disconnect. In
the event of existing units which do not meet the requirements of
separate meters as stated above, the Borough may order compliance in
the interest of public health, safety and conformity with state laws.
E. The before-noted requirements of the within § 107-11 shall apply to all
units within the limits of the Borough, regardless of the electric utility
provider.
A. Primary service. Architects, engineers, electrical contractors and/or
consumers are requested to consult the Borough before completing
plans which include the installation of primary voltage equipment or
facilities. Due to the special nature of each installation, it is necessary
that specific information be secured from the Borough regarding
service entrance and meter requirements. (Primary voltage is any
voltage in excess of secondary service voltages.)
B. Secondary service. The Borough hereby establishes the following as its
nominal secondary voltage for supply to consumers:
Phase Wires Voltage
1 2 120
1 3 120/208
1 3 120/240
§ 107-10 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-12
99:145
§ 107-13. Single-phase service.
Single-phase service entrance conductors and service equipment shall have
a rated capacity of not less than 100 amperes for each individual
installation, except installations having only one two-wire branch circuit.
For installations having only one two-wire branch circuit the capacity of the
service entrance conductors shall be not less than 40 amperes (wire size
not smaller than No. 8 copper or equivalent), and the capacity of the service
equipment shall be not less than 30 amperes.
§ 107-14. Three-phase service.
3 4 120/208
3 4 120/240
3 3 480
3 4 277/480
C. The Borough reserves the right to specify the minimum size of load
which will be supplied at any of the secondary voltages in excess of 240
volts. In all cases where the consumer plans to utilize secondary voltage
in excess of 240 volts, the Borough shall first be consulted as to the
availability of such voltage.
D. At various points throughout the Borough's electric distribution system
the service voltage for a particular area may be established at either a
higher or a lower voltage. This information may be obtained from the
Borough Electric Department upon request.
A. Three-phase service entrance installations shall be in accordance with
the requirements of the Borough Electric Department. If there are any
questions regarding an installation, the consumer should inquire of the
Borough Electric Department.
(1) Conductors and service equipment shall have a rated capacity of
not less than 100 amperes for each individual installation, except
that where the entire load of an installation is served from one
circuit, at the Borough's discretion the capacity of conductors and
service equipment may be a lesser amount, but in any event not
less than 30 amperes.
B. Additional requirements. In addition to National Electrical Code
requirements, the Borough requires the following:
(1) Three-phase four-wire wye 120/208 volt service. The phase wires
shall be plainly and permanently marked 1, 2 and 3 or color coded
at service head and meter cabinet. The neutral wire shall be color
coded white. The ground in the main switch must be connected to
an approved ground.
§ 107-12 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-14
99:146
§ 107-15. Location of entrance and meter.
The consumer shall request of the Borough specific information concerning
the location of meter and the point of delivery of service for each
installation.
§ 107-16. Entrance cable or conduit for overhead service.
The consumer shall provide a solid support bolt and bracket for attachment
of the Borough's service wires not less than 15 feet above the ground line,
and the consumer's entrance conduit or cable shall be extended to meet this
point of attachment.
§ 107-17. Borough's metering requirement.
(2) Three-phase four-wire delta two-hundred-forty-volt service and
three-phase three-wire service will be approved only under special
conditions. The phase wires shall be plainly and permanently
marked 1, 2 and 3 or color coded. The neutral wire shall be color
coded white. The ground in the main switch must be connected to
an approved ground.
(3) If colors are used, No. 1 will be black, No. 2 will be orange and No.
3 will be red. In all cases, whether or not phase wires are colored,
the neutral wire will be color coded white. The No. 2 or orange wire
shall be the phase wire having the highest voltage to ground.
(4) When parallel services are run, each set of conductors shall be
similarly marked.
A. Right to remove Borough's equipment. All meters, transformers or
other equipment supplied by the Borough shall remain its exclusive
property. The Borough shall have the right to remove all its property
from the premises of the consumer at any time after the termination of
service, whatever may have been the reason for such termination.
B. Interference with Borough's property. Where the service metering has
been disconnected or reconnected without the permission of the
Borough and facilities or other equipment has been tampered with,
resulting in improper measurement of the service supplied, the
consumer shall be required to pay for such electric service as the
Borough may estimate, from available information, to have been used
but not registered by Borough's meters and, in addition thereto, shall
be required to bear all costs incurred by the Borough for investigations,
inspections, and repairs and for such protective equipment as, in the
judgment of the Borough, may be necessary. In addition, the consumer
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 and not to exceed $1,000
when it shall be determined that such tampering had been willfully
done. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
§ 107-14 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-17
99:147
§ 107-18. Meter errors and tests.
§ 107-19. Maintenance of service by Borough.
C. Reverse registration. The Borough may, by ratchet or other device,
control its meter so as to prevent reverse registration.
D. Special metering requirements. When, in the interests of public safety,
it is necessary to provide a separate service for exit lighting or other
emergency purposes in theaters, hospitals, hotels, etc., all such meter
readings will be combined for billing purposes.
E. Graphic meters. In all cases where the character of service rendered
requires graphic meters, the consumer shall, when requested by the
Borough, provide attendants to care and change, as required,
Borough's meter charts.
A. Adjustment of error. The consumer shall accept as a standard of
measurement the meter or meters installed by the Borough. Should the
meter or meters become defective or fail to register correctly, the
amount of energy used shall be determined by a test of the meter or
meters, by the registration of a meter or meters replacing the defective
meter or meters during the period next following or by the amount of
energy used during a corresponding period of the preceding year. In the
event that it is ascertained that the meter is registering at a rate of 1%
or more faster than normal, then the consumer shall receive a credit
adjustment based upon the consumer's (or his predecessor's) kilowatthour
consumption during the two-year period preceding the testing of
the meter.
B. Meter tests. The Borough, at its own expense, will make periodic tests
and inspections of its meters in order to maintain them at a high
standard of accuracy, but the Borough reserves the right to make a
charge, at a rate as from time to time shall be determined by Borough
Council,63 for any additional tests or inspections made at the request of
the consumer, provided that such test finds the meter to be correct
within prescribed tolerances of accuracy.
A. Notice of trouble. The consumer shall notify the Borough promptly of
any defect in, accident to or trouble with or damage to Borough lines or
property that he or she may discover.
B. Continuity of service. The Borough will use reasonable diligence to
preserve as nearly as possible the continuity of its service, but in the
event of failure of service, in whole or in part, the Borough shall not be
subject to any liability, penalty or payment for or on account of any such
failure, and in no event shall the Borough be liable for consequential
damages.
63.Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 107-17 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-20
99:148
§ 107-20. Consumer's use of service.
§ 107-21. Defects in consumer's installation.
A. Resale of service. Unless there is a tariff provision to the contrary,
service shall not be used for any purpose or in any place other than that
stipulated in the contract or rate schedule, nor shall the energy
supplied by the Borough be resold or used by other than the consumer
contracting with the Borough.
B. Unbalanced load. The consumer shall at all times take and use energy
in such a manner that it will be taken equally between phases, and the
consumer shall, at his or her own cost and expense, make all necessary
changes as provided for and regulated by this article to ensure such
balancing. In addition, when the unbalancing equals or exceeds 10% of
the lesser phase, the consumer shall be billed on the assumption that
the energy taken from each phase is equal to the amount taken from the
greater phase.
C. Fluctuations. The consumer shall not use his or her electric service in
such a manner as to cause excessive voltage fluctuations or cause or
generate R-F interference or disturbances within the Borough's electric
distribution system. The Borough shall not be obligated to supply
service or to continue to supply service to any consumer's installation
which causes fluctuations that interfere with or disturb the Borough's
electric distribution system in any manner unless corrective measures
are promptly taken or corrective equipment is promptly installed by the
consumer, as provided for and regulated by this article, at the
consumer's sole expense.
D. Change of installation. The service connections, transformers, meters
and appliances have a limited capacity, and no addition to the
equipment or load of the consumer connected shall be made without
the prior written consent of the Borough. The consumer shall be liable
for any damages resulting from his or her violation of this provision.
A. Right to inspect. The Borough shall have the right, but shall not be
obliged, to examine the consumer's installation at the time service is
first supplied or at any time thereafter.
B. Defective installations. If at any time the electrical wiring, fixtures or
appliances of the consumer are determined by the Borough to be
defective or dangerous, service may be refused or discontinued until
the consumer has the condition corrected.
C. Consumer's responsibility. The consumer assumes full responsibility for
the energy at and from the point of delivery thereof and for the wires,
apparatus, devices and appurtenances thereon used in connection with
the service. The consumer is responsible for the risk of damage to
property and the risk of fire or personal injury resulting from improper
wiring and manner of attachment or use and maintenance of electrical
§ 107-20 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-21
99:149
§ 107-22. Extensions.
wiring, equipment, appliances, fixtures and apparatus, and no one,
except electricians licensed pursuant to § 107-4 of this article, shall
install or make any change, alteration, addition or repair to any part of
consumer's installation. The consumer shall indemnify, save harmless
and defend the Borough against all claims, demands, costs or expenses
for loss, damage or injury to persons or property in any manner directly
or indirectly arising from, connected with or growing out of the
transmission or use of current by the consumer at or on consumer's side
of the point of delivery.
A. Extension of single-phase and three-phase from overhead distribution
lines. The Borough's single-phase and three-phase overhead
distribution system will be extended to supply a new consumer, the cost
of such construction to be paid by the new consumer. Prior to such
extension being made, the consumer shall deposit with the Borough
Manager an amount equal to the cost of such construction as estimated
by the Borough Manager. Any excess of said deposit shall be refunded
to the consumer without interest within 45 days after completion of the
extension; in the event, however, that the consumer's deposit is less
than the actual costs incurred by the Borough, the consumer shall
reimburse the Borough for the additional amount within said forty-fiveday
time period.
(1) Where application is received for overhead extension of service
into a tract of land being subdivided or proposed to be subdivided
for residential purposes, the applicant shall deposit with the
Borough a non-interest-bearing deposit in the amount of the
estimated costs to serve the entire tract of land, said estimate to be
prepared by the Borough Manager. Upon completion of all
extensions within the subdivision or proposed subdivision, the
Borough shall refund to the applicant, without interest and within
45 days after such completion, any excess of said deposits; in the
event that the deposit is less than the actual costs incurred by the
Borough, the applicant shall reimburse the Borough for the amount
of such additional costs within said forty-five-day time period.
(2) The contract for service shall be for a term of not less than one year
and the minimum charge is applicable under this line extension of
the contract term.
(3) The applicant or applicants requesting the line extension shall
furnish without expense to the Borough all necessary rights-of-way.
(4) The Borough may delay the construction of any line extension until
the applicant or applicants have completed the wiring and
installation of equipment necessary to receive and use service.
B. Other extensions. The Borough's obligation to extend its facilities to a
new point of delivery, other than as set forth above in this section, is
§ 107-21 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-22
99:150
§ 107-23. Disconnection by Borough.
§ 107-24. Discontinuance of service by consumer.
limited to the assumption of new investment to the extent warranted
by the revenue anticipated from the service to be supplied. Where the
anticipated revenue does not warrant the investment required to serve,
the Borough will determine in each case what guaranties of revenue,
financing or terms of contract shall be required of the consumer.
A. Nonpayment shutoff. The Borough reserves the right to disconnect its
service to any consumer on 10 calendar days' notice and remove its
equipment in case of nonpayment of bill.
B. Violation of rules and regulations. The Borough may, upon 10 days'
notice, disconnect service to any consumer because of violation of this
article or any of the Borough's applicable rules and regulations.
C. Safety shutoff. The Borough may disconnect without notice its service
to any consumer if the consumer's installation has become dangerous
or defective or if upon examination of the consumer's installation by an
inspection agency approved by the Borough a certificate of approval is
refused.
D. Shutoff for fraud. The Borough may disconnect its service to any
consumer without notice for abuse, fraud or tampering with the meters,
connections or other equipment of the Borough.
E. Reconnection charge. Service disconnected by the Borough under the
provisions of Subsections A, B and D of this section will be restored only
on payment in advance of a fee, which shall be from time to time
determined by resolution of Borough Council,64 in addition to all
arrearages due by the consumer, except when it has been necessary to
remove service wires to affect discontinuance of service. In the latter
case, service will be restored only on payment to the Borough of all
costs of discontinuance and restoration in addition to all such
arrearages.
A. Notice to discontinue. The consumer shall give the Borough at least
three days' notice to discontinue service, and the consumer shall be
liable for service taken until the meter shall have been disconnected.
Such notice prior to the expiration of a contract term will not relieve the
consumer from any minimum or guaranteed payments under any
contract rate.
B. Final bill. The final bill for service is due and payable immediately after
notice is received by the Borough to discontinue and the final billing is
sent to the consumer.
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 107-22 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-25
99:151
§ 107-25. Administration of rates.
§ 107-26. Temporary service for construction from overhead
facilities (120/240 volt single-phase).
A. Load inspections. Where the supply of service is under rates which base
the billing demand or minimum charge upon the consumer's connected
load, the Borough's representative shall have access to the premises of
the consumer at all reasonable times to inspect and count the
connected load.
B. Billing changes. Where, as a result of investigation made at the
consumer's request or by routine inspection, demands are reassessed
or redetermined or power factor recomputed or remeasured or the
consumer is found to be on an improper rate, the change of billing to
the new demand or power factor or to the proper rate will apply to the
bill for the month during which the investigation is made and each
month thereafter.
C. Change in rate. The Borough will, after notice of service conditions,
compute bills under the applicable rate most advantageous to the
consumer and will notify the consumer in writing or by new contract of
the change in rate contemplated, provided that not more than one such
change of rate shall be made in any twelve-month period, except as
hereinafter provided in Subsection D.
D. Billing during period of construction or emergency.
(1) The Borough reserves the right to base its bills for service upon the
applicable rate most advantageous to the consumer or to modify or
waive the requirements of the applicable rate as to billing demand,
minimum billing demand and/or minimum monthly charge when:
(a) The consumer is forced to suspend operations, in part or
entirely, due to fire or flood;
(b) Unusual high demands are established by emergency pumping
or other abnormal load conditions; or
(c) The consumer's plant is under construction or gradual
electrification.
(2) Written request for relief must be made stating fully the
circumstances upon which the request is based. If appropriate, the
contract term shall be extended for a period equal to that of the
relief granted.
A. The applicant shall:
(1) Apply for service at the office of the Borough Electric Department,
45 Railroad Street, Kutztown, Pennsylvania, or such other location
as from time to time designated by the Borough Council.
§ 107-25 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-26
99:152
§ 107-27. Temporary service for construction from underground
facilities (120/240 volt single-phase).
(2) Supply and install the following facilities at a location designated
by a representative of the Borough Electric Department:
(a) Pole if minimum four-by-four-inch timber with bracing.
(b) Disconnect switch.
(c) Eight-foot ground rod.
(d) Ground wire.
(e) Entrance cable.
(f) Service attachment.
(g) Meter base.
(3) Install facilities according to the Borough's specifications, which
will be furnished to the applicant upon request.
(4) File application with an electrical inspection agency approved by
the Borough.
B. The Borough shall:
(1) Designate temporary facility location.
(2) Supply and install service cable.
(3) Make service connection upon receipt of approval from electrical
inspection agency approved by the Borough.
C. General.
(1) If the Borough's secondary facilities do not come within
approximately 100 feet of the applicant's service location, the
Borough shall extend facilities after the party requesting services
has secured rights-of-way from all property owners involved.
(2) Temporary pole must be strong enough to support service cable
and crew men making installation.
(3) Any exceptions to the policy set forth in this section must be
approved by the Borough Manager prior to installation.
D. Charges. Charges for such services shall be established as from time to
time determined by resolution of Borough Council.65
A. The applicant shall:
65.Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 107-26 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-27
99:153
§ 107-28. Underground policy for secondary service of four hundred
amperes or less.
(1) Apply for service at the office of the Borough Electric Department,
45 Railroad Street, Kutztown, Pennsylvania, or such other location
as from time to time designated by the Borough Council.
(2) Supply and install the following facilities at a location designated
by a representative of the Borough Electric Department (location to
be a maximum of 20 feet from underground secondary facilities):
(a) Pole of four-by-four-inch timber or portable electrical board
structure.
(b) Disconnect switch.
(c) Eight-foot ground rod.
(d) Ground wire
(e) Conduit riser.
(f) Meter base.
(3) Install facilities according to the Borough's specifications, which
will be furnished to the applicant upon request.
(4) Excavate and backfill cable trench (minimum depth of 24 inches)
from temporary structure to the consumer's secondary facilities.
(5) File application with an electrical inspection agency approved by
the Borough.
B. The Borough shall:
(1) Designate temporary facility location.
(2) Supply and install service cable.
(3) Make service connection upon receipt of approval from electrical
inspection agency approved by the Borough.
C. General. Any exceptions to the policy set forth in the section must be
approved by the Borough Manager prior to installation.
D. Charges. Charges for such services shall be established as from time to
time determined by resolution of Borough Council.66
A. Exceptions to policy. The policy set forth in this section shall not be
applicable to any project which fails to meet any requirements herein
set forth; provided, however, that reasonable variances to such
requirements shall be considered and may be agreed upon by the
applicant and the Borough Manager, but the applicant shall be
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 107-27 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-28
99:154
responsible for any additional costs; provided, further, that where the
applicant desires to convert existing overhead facilities to
underground, the Borough Electric Department will provide
underground service to such areas upon the payment by the applicant
of a charge which shall be the estimated cost for the underground
system, plus removal cost for the overhead system (with a credit to be
applied for salvage).
B. Required agreement. In the case of each underground project, the
Borough and the applicant shall enter into an appropriate written
agreement covering all essential arrangements.
C. Applicant's facilities. All applicant-owned facilities installed by the
applicant shall be in conformity with the specifications and service
entrance requirements of the Borough Electric Department, the
National Electrical Code and all other applicable regulations.
D. Applicant's charges or costs. The charges or costs applicable to each
applicant shall be paid, or other arrangements made which shall be
satisfactory to the Borough Electric Department, before construction is
commenced. The applicant shall be entitled to no refund, rebate or
credit by reason of the fact that any building shall not, in fact,
thereafter be constructed or that service is not taken by the applicant at
any particular point of delivery.
E. Changes. The applicant shall pay to the Borough any additional costs
incurred by the Borough Electric Department in providing underground
facilities that vary from the underground construction practices and
standards established by the Borough Electric Department, where such
variances were requested by the applicant. In addition, any additional
costs incurred by the Borough Electric Department which result from
actions of the applicant or from the applicant's failure to act shall also
be charged to and be paid by the applicant.
F. Overhead systems. Overhead facilities, whether for transmission or
main distribution lines, which are in existence prior to the execution of
an agreement or application for underground installations are not to be
subject to the agreement or application and may remain in place.
Likewise, the agreement or application shall not affect or impair the
rights of the Borough Electric Department to construct, operate and
maintain new and additional overhead transmission facilities under
preexisting easements or rights-of-way, nor shall it preclude the
acquisition and use of new rights-of-way for future overhead
transmission facilities. An agreement or application for underground
service shall apply only to facilities for distribution service to the
applicant within the area covered by the agreement or application.
G. Communication cables. Primary, secondary and service cables may
jointly occupy trenches with communication cables, provided that they
are installed so as to comply with the National Electrical Safety Code,
any and all applicable laws and all legally effective regulations and
§ 107-28 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-28
99:155
requirements and the requirements of all parties involved in such joint
occupancy.
H. Classifications; standard secondary voltage.
(1) The installation of underground service of 400 amperes or less at
secondary voltages to a permanent point of delivery shall be
classified and is hereinafter referred to as "service lateral" and
"service lateral replacement," the former being applicable to a new
underground service and the latter to the replacement of an
existing overhead service lateral with a new underground service.
(2) The standard secondary voltages for each of the above
classifications are nominally 120/240 volts, single-phase, or 120/
208 volts, three-phase. The Borough Electric Department's
primaries, transformers, secondaries and other accessories shall
be overhead.
I. Mutual obligations. The applicant shall, to the extent applicable:
(1) In accordance with the Borough Electric Department's System
Underground Distribution Standards:
(a) Provide all excavation and backfilling for installation of the
Borough Electric Department's facilities, including (but
without limitation thereto) all sand, fill and concrete, as
required, and install warning tape provided by the Borough
Electric Department. All service cables installed on the
permanent service areas (including but not limited to streets,
alleys, driveways, patios and the like) shall be placed in
metallic conduit, and the cost of said installation shall be paid
for by the applicant. When a trench crosses a street, the
applicant shall perform work under and in accordance with the
Borough Electric Department's permit(s), shall pay the
Borough for any permit fees and be responsible for resurfacing
costs.
(b) Provide and install meter base and conduit riser in accordance
with the Borough Electric Department's requirements for
service and meter installations.
(2) Agree that all facilities installed by the applicant under Subsection
I(1)(a) and (b) above shall be and remain the property of the
applicant.
(3) At his own cost, clear the ground in which the lines and related
facilities are to be laid of trees, stumps and other obstructions and
rough grade it to within six inches of final grade, so that the
Borough Electric Department's part of the installation shall consist
only of laying of the lines and related facilities.
§ 107-28 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-28
99:156
(4) Request electric service at such time that the lines and related
facilities may be installed before curbs, pavements and sidewalks
are laid; keep the route of lines clear of machinery and other
obstructions when the installation crew is scheduled to work; and
otherwise cooperate with the Borough Electric Department to
avoid unnecessary costs.
J. The Borough Electric Department shall:
(1) Design its underground system with the location of facilities to be
mutually agreeable to applicant and the Borough Electric
Department.
(2) Provide, install [except as provided in Subsection I(1)(a) and (b)
above], own and maintain all secondary service facilities to but not
including the meter base and conduit riser.
K. Treatment of costs.
(1) In addition to the performance of all obligations hereinabove set
forth, the applicant shall pay the Borough in accordance with the
schedule of charges, which shall be made as from time to time
determined by resolution of Borough Council.67
(2) For purposes of determining charges under this subsection, service
lateral length from an overhead secondary system shall be
measured from the nearest convenient pole location to the point of
delivery.
L. Trench excavation. All locations and requirements for secondary and
service conduit trenches shall be coordinated with the Borough Electric
Department before commencing excavation.
(1) All Borough Electric Department conduits and cables shall be
separated from sewer, water and gas lines by earth for a minimum
horizontal distance of 24 inches. There shall also be a minimum
vertical separation of 12 inches of earth where the Borough
Electric Department conduits cross other utilities. The conduits or
pipes of sewer, water and gas companies must never be in the same
trench with Borough cables. There shall be a twelve-inch minimum
separation between any telephone facilities.
(2) The trench shall be excavated to the minimum dimensions and in
accord with the trench details shown on Standard Detail S-E-05 in
the Public Improvement Requirement Manual of the Borough for
the specific conditions and as approved by the Borough Electric
Department.
M. Trench backfill. A four-inch bed of sand shall be laid and hand tamped
before the Borough Electric Department facilities will be installed.
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 107-28 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-28
99:157
§ 107-29. Three-phase pad-mounted transformers.
(1) The backfill around all cables shall be with sand and shall be lightly
hand tamped. Upon completion of hand tamping, there shall be a
minimum of six inches of sand over the top of the cables.
(2) The remaining backfill shall be air tamped and water soaked for
good earth compaction.
(3) Any settling or washing out of earth after the initial installation
shall be corrected by the developer or consumer.
(4) The Borough Electric Department will provide warning tape for
consumer installation 12 inches below grade level.
A. Large three-phase service, nonresidential.
(1) This section applies to the installation of three-phase underground
service to a point of delivery for other than residential purposes
having a demand estimated by the Borough to be in excess of 50
kilowatts.
(2) Delivery of secondary voltage shall be at the secondary terminals of
the transformer, nominally 120/208 volts wye for demand in excess
of 50 kilowatts or 277/480 volts for demands in excess of 300
kilowatts. Delivery of the available primary voltage will be at the
metering point designated by the Borough.
B. Mutual obligations:
(1) The applicant shall:
(a) Provide the Borough with two copies of the plan of the site
showing preferred location of electrical facilities, which plan
shall meet all applicable governmental requirements.
(b) Grant or cause to be granted to the Borough, without cost to
the Borough, all rights-of-way required for all facilities
involved in furnishing service to the applicant.
(c) Provide all excavation and backfilling for installation of
Borough facilities, including (but not limited to) all sand, fill
and concrete, as required, and install warning tape provided by
the Borough.
(d) Provide, install, own and maintain the concrete pad or vault for
the Borough's equipment, such as (but not limited to) stepdown
transformers and switching equipment.
(e) When service is at secondary voltage, provide, install, own and
maintain all secondary facilities, including cables, conduit and
connectors.
§ 107-28 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-29
99:158
[1] Current design of pad-mounted transformers limits the
secondary cabled usage to six cables per phase. Where
designs exceed these amounts, it becomes a nonstandard
pad design, and the Borough shall be consulted to consider
the possibility of installing a freestanding trough with buss
bars and/or a buss duct terminating in a freestanding
trough.
[2] Minimum length: five feet of cable length recommended
above pad.
(f) When service is at primary voltage, provide, install, own and
maintain all facilities beyond the point of delivery.
(g) At the applicant's own cost, clear the ground in which the lines
and related facilities may be installed; keep the route of lines
clear of machinery and other obstructions when the line
installation crew is scheduled to appear; and otherwise
cooperate with the crew to avoid unnecessary costs.
(h) The consumer will be responsible for the installation of
Borough-supplied metering transformers. In addition, both the
meter base and conduit between the metering transformers
and meter base will be supplied and installed by the consumer.
(i) Both primary and secondary conduits (if metallic) shall be
bonded to the ground and to the tank. When a pit is provided
under compartments, conduits should extend into the pit and
be bonded to common ground.
(2) The Borough shall:
(a) Approve location of the pad-mounted transformer and inspect
all phases of pad installation. A working space of 10 feet shall
be furnished in front of the terminal compartment.
(b) Make all connections to the transformer.
(c) Mark the meter location.
(d) Provide trenching and pad mount specifications (including, but
not limited to, those set forth in Subsection C below).
C. Trenching specifications. The purpose of the specifications set forth in
this subsection is to promote the highest possible construction quality
and efficiency in the installation of an underground electrical system.
To accomplish these objectives, it is vital that each party involved
understands his or her responsibilities for both the quality of work and
the sequence in which each operation is to be done. All locations and
requirements for primary service conduit trenches shall be coordinated
with the Borough Electric Department before commencing excavation.
(1) Trench excavation.
§ 107-29 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-29
99:159
(a) All trenches shall be excavated to the minimum dimension and
in accordance with the trench details shown on Standard
Detail S-E-05 in the Public Improvement Requirement Manual
of the Borough for the specific conditions and as approved by
the Borough Electric Department.
(b) A four-inch bed of approved screening or sand shall be laid the
entire length of the trench.
(2) Trench backfill.
(a) After the Borough has installed the required cable, the
applicant shall immediately backfill the trench in accordance
with the following specifications:
[1] Backfill around all cables with approved screening or sand
for a minimum of four inches over the top of the cables.
[2] The remaining backfill shall be soil free of rock and other
foreign objects and compacted.
[3] Any settling or washing out of earth after the initial
installation shall be corrected by the applicant.
[4] Cables and/or conduits must not be left uncovered in the
trench overnight.
[5] The Borough will provide warning tape for consumer
installation 12 inches below final grade level.
(b) All Borough conduits and cables shall be separated by earth for
a minimum horizontal distance of 24 inches from sewer, water
and gas lines. There shall be a minimum vertical separation of
12 inches of earth where Borough cables cross other utilities.
The conduits or pipes of sewer, water and gas companies must
never be in the same trench with Borough cables. Unless
random lay is specified, there shall be a twelve-inch minimum
separation, either horizontally or vertically, between Borough
cables and telephone or cable television facilities.
(3) Foundation.
(a) All foundation pads shall be of concrete and shall be
constructed in accordance with Borough specifications which,
together with diagrams illustrative thereof, will be given to any
applicant by the Borough Electric Department upon the
request of such applicant.
(b) All primary and secondary conduit bends shall be installed and
terminated flush with the top of the transformer pad. Primary
conduits will be placed against the left side of the conduit
opening, and the secondary conduits will be placed against the
right of the conduit opening.
§ 107-29 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-29
99:160
§ 107-30. Large single- and three-phase services.
(c) All concrete shall meet or exceed the design and test
specifications of the American Concrete Institute (ACI),
American National Standards Institute (ANSI and ASA) and
American Society of Testing Material (ASTM), where
applicable. Line loading shall be for H-20 and/or H20-S16 per
American Society of State Highway Officials (ASSHO)
specifications.
(d) When the pad is located in areas exposed to vehicular traffic, a
barrier shall be provided to protect the transformer. Such
barriers shall consist of a concrete-filled four-inch steel post
with three feet below grade and a minimum of four feet above
grade or approved protection of equal strength.
(e) A twelve-inch moat area, designed to contain the oil in case of a
transformer leak, shall surround the pad and remain
uncovered.
(f) The transformer pad shall be located as far as practical from
windows, doors, fire escapes, entrances and ventilating ducts
so as not to present physical obstructions. It shall be the
applicant's responsibility to secure the approval of an
approved electrical inspection agency and to comply with any
insurance regulations affecting the installation.
D. Treatment of costs. Predicated on a first-year demand estimated by the
Borough to be 50 kilowatts or more from data supplied by the applicant
and subject to the applicant's performance of all obligations as
hereinabove set forth, the Borough will, at no charge to applicant,
install a primary cable length not to exceed 300 feet measured from the
nearest convenient location of the Borough's facilities to the point of
delivery. The Borough's charge to the applicant for the installation of
any additional cable length shall be as set from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council per linear foot or such other charge
as shall from time to time be established by resolution of Borough
Council.68 [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 1995]
A. This section applies to the installation of large single- and three-phase
services supplied overhead to underground in which the underground
wiring is to be installed in conduit from an overhead point of delivery.
Delivery of secondary voltage shall be at the conduit service head(s).
B. Mutual obligations:
(1) The applicant shall:
68.Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 107-29 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-30
99:161
§ 107-31. Additional provisions pertaining to subdivisions.
(a) Provide the Borough with two copies of the plan of the site
showing preferred location of electrical facilities, which plan
shall meet all applicable governmental requirements.
(b) Grant or cause to be granted to the Borough, without cost to
the Borough, all rights-of-way required for all facilities
involved in furnishing service to the applicant.
(c) Provide, own, maintain and install in accordance with the
Borough's specifications and in accordance with the National
Electrical Code all underground secondary, conduit, conduit
risers and service head(s) required for service to the applicant
from the Borough's point of delivery.
(d) Be responsible for the installation of metering transformers
supplied by the Borough. In addition, both the meter base and
conduit between the metering transformers and the meter
base will be supplied and installed by the applicant.
(e) Provide, install, own and maintain a metering transclosure,
said transclosure and its installation to be in accordance with
Borough specifications.
(f) Bond to the ground both the secondary and metering conduits
if said conduits are metallic.
(2) The Borough shall:
(a) Provide, own, install and maintain an overhead connection
point for the applicant at a location mutually agreeable to both
the applicant and the Borough.
A. At least 150 days prior to the time service will first be required, the
applicant will provide the Borough with the following:
(1) The estimated date electric service will initially be required and the
time schedule for construction of the development or subdivision.
(2) Three copies of the approved preliminary subdivision plan of the
development and a detailed listing of the electrical load planned for
each unit. All measurements for the determination of charges
under the current applicable policy shall be taken from such plans
which will show specific locations of all streets, curblines, property
lines, sidewalks and house locations in sufficient detail to permit
the Borough to design the required electric distribution system. No
facilities will be installed until the applicant agrees, in writing, to
pay for the cost of relocating any facilities which are improperly
placed due to error in the information and plans supplied by the
applicant or due to subsequent changes in the plans supplied.
§ 107-30 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-31
99:162
(3) Where a development or subdivision is divided into sections for
purpose of approval by appropriate authorities and construction,
the applicant will provide, at the time of the initial application, a
preliminary or tentative subdivision map of all the property which
the applicant owns or intends to acquire (directly or through an
affiliated organization) for subsequent subdivision. This is required
to enable the Borough to plan for the ultimate supply of the
development. If the applicant subsequently expands the anticipated
area or increases the number of units or anticipated electrical load
per unit, the applicant will promptly so notify the Borough.
B. Prior to the start of construction, the applicant will provide the
Borough, at no cost to the Borough, all necessary rights-of-way over
lands owned or controlled by the applicant.
C. Foreign utility installations. Prior to excavating the electrical trench,
the applicant will install any utility, such as water or sanitary sewer
lines, which shall be installed at a minimum depth of 48 inches below
finished grade. If any utilities are installed above the forty-eight-inch
minimum depth, causing the Borough additional expense to tunnel
under and around said facilities or to relocate the electrical facilities,
the additional expense will be borne by the applicant.
D. Grading. The applicant will bring the area to be occupied by the electric
facilities to within six inches of its final grade and will clear such areas
of trees, tree stumps and other obstructions above or below grade to a
width sufficient to permit the use of machinery and equipment required
for installation of the electrical facilities. Such clearances and grading
shall be maintained by the applicant during all construction by the
Borough. If additional costs are incurred because of the applicant's
failure to comply with this provision or because of the applicant's
changing street or curblines or building location, the applicant shall
forthwith pay to the Borough any increases in its anticipated costs
before the work progresses further.
E. Survey and staking. The applicant will stake and clearly identify the
property lines, curblines or street right-of-way lines and the locations of
any existing foreign utilities. On apartment and townhouse projects, the
staking of parking lot boundaries and sidewalks will also be required.
F. Staking of electric facilities. Upon completion of the requirements of
Subsections C, D and E above, and prior to the applicant commencing
trenching, the Borough will stake the location of the electrical facilities
and establish a work schedule for the installation of these facilities.
Coordination for staking shall be through the Borough Electric
Department.
G. Underground facility clearances.
(1) All Borough cables shall be separated by earth for a minimum
horizontal distance of 24 inches from sewer, water and gas lines.
§ 107-31 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-31
99:163
(2) There will be a minimum vertical separation of 12 inches of earth
where Borough cables cross other utilities.
(3) The conduits or pipes of the sewer, water and gas companies must
never be in the same trench with Borough cables. Unless random
lay is specified on the construction sketch, there shall be a twelveinch
minimum separation, either horizontally or vertically, between
Borough cables and telephone or cable television facilities.
(4) Cable should be installed with sufficient clearance from other
underground structures, such as steam or cryogenic lines, to avoid
thermal damage to the cable.
H. Trenching specifications. After the applicant has completed all of the
above requirements, trench excavation may commence in accordance
with the following specifications:
(1) Trench excavation.
(a) Excavate a trench to a minimum of 30 inches deep by six
inches wide for all service cables, 40 inches deep by six inches
wide for all primary and all street crossings and a trench five
feet zero inches by five feet zero inches by 36 inches deep for
pad-mounted transformer foundations. The width of a trench
for any specified condition is a minimum. Equipment or method
used for trenching may demand a wider trench for
convenience.
(b) A four-inch bed of approved screening or sand shall be laid the
entire length of the trench.
(c) A six-inch fill of approved screening or sand shall be laid for
each pad-mounted transformer base.
(d) The applicant will obtain at his cost all necessary permits for
completion of each project.
(e) The contractor of the applicant shall make all arrangements
relative to blocking streets, driveways and sidewalks and the
placing of barriers.
(f) It shall be the responsibility of the applicant and his contractor
to see that the job is done in a safe manner at all times. The
requirements for proper shoring and bracing shall conform to
the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
Regulations for Excavations and Construction as well as any
rules of the Borough that may be applicable. The safety of the
public is also the responsibility of the applicant and his
contractor.
(2) Trench backfilling.
§ 107-31 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-31
99:164
§ 107-32. Dusk-to-dawn lighting.
(a) After the Borough has installed the required cable, the
applicant shall immediately backfill the trench in accordance
with the following specifications:
[1] Backfill around all cables approved screening or sand for a
minimum of six inches over the top of the cables.
[2] The remaining backfill shall be soil free of rock and other
foreign objects and compacted.
[3] Any settling or washing out of earth after the initial
installation shall be corrected by the applicant.
[4] The Borough will provide a warning tape to be installed 12
inches below rough grade level.
(b) The applicant should coordinate the installation of any and all
utilities who jointly occupy the trench so as to avoid any delays
in performing the backfilling requirements.
I. Payment of costs. The applicant will pay the Borough, in advance or
under such credit terms as the Borough may require, such applicable
charges as are provided for in the Borough's schedule of charges, which
shall from time to time be established by resolution of Borough
Council,69 for each lot for which the applicant seeks electric service.
A. In the case where the consumer requests installation of dusk-to-dawn
lighting on existing facilities and adequate clearances can be
maintained:
(1) The Borough will provide and install the necessary equipment to
install the dusk-to-dawn lighting, including up to 100 feet of twowire
overhead cable; and
(2) The monthly rental fee shall be governed by the rate schedule of
charges for dusk-to-dawn lighting as from time to time adopted by
resolution of Borough Council.70
B. In the case where the consumer requests installation of dusk-to-dawn
lighting and there are no existing facilities or the proper clearance
cannot be maintained on existing facilities:
(1) The consumer will be required to deposit in advance an amount
equal to the estimated cost of constructing the facilities necessary
for providing the dusk-to-dawn lighting;
(2) If upon completion of the installation it is found that a balance is
due, the consumer will be responsible for said balance, which shall
69.Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
70.Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 107-31 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-32
99:165
§ 107-33. Inspection.
be paid within 30 days after being billed therefor by the Borough.
However, should there be an overpayment, the Borough will refund
said balance at no interest within 30 days of date construction was
completed; and
(3) The monthly rental fee shall be governed by the rate schedule of
charges for dusk-to-dawn lighting as adopted from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council.71
C. Responsibilities.
(1) The consumer shall:
(a) Provide to the Borough, without cost, right-of-way and free and
clear access to the dusk-to-dawn fixtures and their
appurtenances for the purpose of maintaining said equipment.
(b) Be responsible for reimbursing the Borough for any damage
the consumer has caused to said fixtures or their
appurtenances.
(2) The Borough shall:
(a) Perform all maintenance on said dusk-to-dawn fixtures and
their appurtenances so as to keep them in proper operating
condition.
A. The Borough Council by resolution shall from time to time designate
electrical inspection agencies which shall be authorized to make
inspections of electrical wiring, equipment and/or apparatus as herein
defined and installed within the Borough or upon property served by
the Borough Electric Department for the purpose of this article. The
appointment of an inspection agency hereunder may be terminated by
resolution at any time by Borough Council in its sole discretion. Any
such electrical inspection agency designated by the Borough Council as
hereinbefore provided shall not be an agent of the Borough in any
respect whatsoever but in all instances shall remain and be an
independent contractor, and the Borough shall not be responsible or
liable for any actions, nonactions, approval, disapproval or any other
action of any such electrical inspection agency or for any reliance
thereon by any consumer.
B. Prior to making any such inspections, such inspection agency shall file
with the Borough's Code Enforcement Office a certificate of insurance
evidencing general public liability insurance coverage for such
inspection agency in the minimum occurrence amounts of $1,000,000
for death and bodily injury and $500,000 for property damage. Such
certificate of insurance shall confirm that the Borough has been named
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 107-32 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-33
99:166
as an additional insured for the purposes of such coverage and that the
Borough shall be given at least 30 days prior written notice before the
cancellation of such insurance coverage. A new certificate of insurance
shall be delivered to the Borough before the expiration of the thencurrent
insurance policy. Upon the cancellation of such insurance
coverage at any time that replacement coverage is not in effect, the
aforesaid designation of such inspection agency shall automatically be
denied, revoked and terminated without further action of the Borough
Council. [Added 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
C. The consumer's electrical wiring, equipment and apparatus shall be
installed, operated and maintained in conformity with any and all local
or other governmental requirements and with all rules and
requirements of the National Electrical Code 1993 and shall be
inspected and approved by an approved inspection agency prior to
connection to the Borough's system, as provided for and regulated by
this article. All subsequent installations or changes shall also be
inspected and approved in advance of connection to the Borough's
system. The Borough may examine the consumer's installation at any
time and may refuse to make connection to commence or continue
service whenever such installation is not in proper operating condition.
[Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
D. As authorized by the Borough Council, the Borough Code Enforcement
Officer or other designated Borough employee may make inspections of
permitted electrical work as follows:
(1) The inspections shall be limited to the addition of branch circuits in
one- and two-family dwellings and/or dwelling units licensed under
the Borough Housing Code.72
(2) The Borough reserves the right to refer any such inspection to the
inspection agencies noted in Subsection A.
(3) A fee as from time to time determined by resolution of Borough
Council73 shall be charged for inspections performed by the
Borough.
E. The inspection agencies noted in Subsection A, the Borough and any
agency authorized by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall perform
inspections of permitted electrical work within the limits of the Borough
in the event that the utility provider is other than the Borough.
F. Inspection and enforcement. Notwithstanding anything in this article to
the contrary, inspection and enforcement of the wiring and connections
between the Borough's electric lines and the consumer's main breaker
panel shall be done by the Borough's Electric Department. Enforcement
of the provisions of this article insofar as they apply to wiring and
connections from the main breaker panel and throughout the
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 135, Housing Standards.
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 107-33 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-33
99:167
§ 107-34. Inspection before use. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No.
12-1995]
Persons, firms, corporations, associations, trusts, partnerships or other
entities shall not permit electrical energy to be used in connection with
or introduced into any new installation of electrical wiring, equipment
or apparatus unless and until such installation has been approved by an
approved inspection agency and until a cut-in card is duly issued and signed
by the person making the inspection in accordance with the provisions of
§ 107-33 of this article and received by the Borough Electric Department
certifying that the installation has been inspected and approved. Where
electrical permits are required for electrical work in existing buildings, the
registered electrician or owner shall, upon completion, apply for inspection.
§ 107-35. Notice and certification of inspections. [Added
12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
The approved inspection agencies, upon final inspection of any electrical
wiring, equipment or apparatus, shall notify the Borough, in writing, and
such notice shall be signed by the person making such inspection certifying
that the installation has been inspected and approved. Any inspection
agency which does not comply with the requirements of this section and
§ 107-34 may, upon resolution of the Borough Council, be prohibited from
making inspections within the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 107-36. Inspection fees.
The schedule of fees of said authorized inspection agencies from time to
time in effect are hereby approved and adopted as a schedule of fees to be
paid to the inspection agencies for inspection as provided for in this article.
§ 107-37. Stop-work order.
consumer's property shall be done by the Code Enforcement Office of
the Borough.
A. The Borough Manager, Code Enforcement Officer or other designated
employee shall have the authority to stop electrical work when such
work is being performed in a manner not in conformity with the
National Electrical Code or this article or upon notification of an
authorized inspection agency.
B. In the case of an existing building, if upon inspection it is found that the
existing electrical wiring, equipment or apparatus is defective and/or
unsafe, upon notification by the Borough Manager and/or Code
Enforcement Officer, all use thereof shall be discontinued until it has
been corrected and made to conform to the requirements of the
National Electrical Code and this article and approved by an authorized
inspection agency or the Borough as provided for in § 107-33 of this
article.
§ 107-33 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-38
99:168
§ 107-38. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord.
No. 12-1995]
Any person, partnership, agency, corporation, trust or other legal entity
subject to the provisions of this article who or which shall do or perform
any electrical work or who, as owner or lessee, shall permit any electrical
work to be done or performed as provided herein without complying with
the provisions of this article or who shall in any way violate the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any District Justice, be
fined an amount not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 for each offense
and, in default of payment thereof, undergo imprisonment in the county jail
for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation continues shall
be deemed as a separate offense.
§ 107-39. Amendments to Electrical Code. [Added 7-13-1999 by
Ord. No. 9-1999]
Section 90-4 of the National Electrical Code 1996, entitled "Enforcement,"
is amended and restated in its entirety so as to henceforth read as follows:
§ 90-4. Enforcement.
This Code is enacted to be suitable for mandatory application by
governmental bodies exercising legal jurisdiction over electrical
installations and for use by insurance inspectors. The Code Enforcement
Officer of the Borough of Kutztown is responsible for enforcement of
the applicable provisions of this Code. The Borough of Kutztown Code
Enforcement Officer has the responsibility for making interpretations of
the rules, for deciding upon the approval of equipment and materials and
for granting the special permission contemplated in a number of the rules.
The Borough of Kutztown Code Appeals Board (Code Appeals Board) may
waive specific requirements in this Code or permit alternate methods
where it is assured that equivalent objectives can be achieved by
establishing and maintaining effective safety.
This Code may require new products, constructions or materials that may
not yet be available at the time the Code is adopted. In such event, the
Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Kutztown may permit the
use of the products, constructions or materials that comply with the most
recent previous addition of this Code adopted by the Borough.
§ 107-40. Appeals. [Added 7-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-1999]
Any person shall have the right to appeal or request a permitted
modification or waiver with respect to a decision of the Code Enforcement
Officer of the Borough of Kutztown. An application for appeal or request
for permitted modification or waiver shall be based on a claim that the
true intent of this Code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not fully apply or an
equivalent form of construction is to be used. Such appeals and request
§ 107-38 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-40
99:169
shall be filed and heard as prescribed in Chapter 12 of the Code of the
Borough of Kutztown.
§ 107-41. through § 107-44. (Reserved)
§ 107-40 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-41
99:170
ARTICLE II
Aggregation of Demand Response of Retail Customers
[Adopted 1-27-2009 by Ord. No. 1-2009]
§ 107-45. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Kutztown
Aggregation of Demand Response on behalf of its Retail Customers
Ordinance."
§ 107-46. Authority to bid into ancillary services markets and
organized electric markets.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown, as the retail electric
regulatory authority for the municipality and its retail electric consumers,
determines it to be desirable that the aggregation of demand response on
behalf of its retail customers to be bid directly into the organized electric
and ancillary services markets administered by the regional transmission
organization that includes the Borough be performed by the Borough or its
authorized designee.
§ 107-47. Borough sole entity permitted to aggregate and bid.
The Borough, or its authorized designee is the sole entity permitted to
aggregate retail customers' demand response and bid demand response on
behalf of retail customers of the Borough directly into any Commissionapproved
independent system operator's or regional transmission
organization's organized electric markets.
§ 107-48. Establishment of program to bid.
Retail customers on the Borough's electric system desiring to bid their
demand response into a Commission-approved independent system
operator's or regional transmission organization's organized electric
markets may do so only by participating in the program established by the
Borough or its authorized designee.
§ 107-49. Borough sole entity permitted to bid on behalf of retail
customers.
The Borough or its authorized designee is the sole entity permitted to bid
demand response on behalf of retail customers of the Borough directly
into any Commission-approved independent system operator's or regional
transmission organization's organized markets for energy imbalance,
spinning reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive power and voltage
control, or regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or its
functional equivalent in the Commission-approved independent system
operator's or regional transmission organization's tariff).
§ 107-45 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-50
99:171
§ 107-50. Retail customers desiring to bid must participate in
program.
Retail customers of the Borough's electric system desiring to bid their
demand response into a Commission-approved independent system
operator's or regional transmission organization's organized markets for
energy imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive
power and voltage control, or regulation and frequency response ancillary
services (or its functional equivalent in the Commission-approved
independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's
tariff) may do so only by participating in the program established by the
Borough or its authorized designee.
§ 107-51. through § 107-54. (Reserved)
§ 107-50 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-51
99:172
ARTICLE III
Customer Generation
[Adopted 10-19-2010 by Ord. No. 7-2010]
§ 107-55. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Kutztown Borough
Customer Generation Ordinance."
§ 107-56. Customer eligibility.
§ 107-57. Application for interconnection.
A customer seeking to interconnect an eligible electric-generating facility to
the Borough's system must submit to the Borough's designated personnel a
completed interconnection application on the form designated the Borough,
and a one-line diagram showing the configuration of the proposed net
metering facility. The Borough will provide copies of all applicable forms
upon request.
A. For the purpose of this article, an eligible customer generator's electricgenerating
facility must comply with all of the following requirements:
(1) Generate electricity using photovoltaic systems, fuel cell, hydro or
wind;
(2) A residential customer generator's rate capacity shall not be in
excess of 10 kilowatts;
(3) A commercial/industrial customer generator's rate capacity shall
not be in excess of 50 kilowatts.
(4) Be owned and operated by the customer and be located on the
customer's premises;
(5) Be intended for the primary purpose of supplying all or part of the
customer's own electricity requirements; and
(6) Be designed and installed to operate in parallel with the Borough's
electric distribution system without adversely effecting the
operation of equipment and service of the Borough and its
customers and without presenting safety hazards to Borough
personnel and Borough residents.
B. Requests for interconnection which meet all of the above requirements
except for the fact that the proposed customer generator's rate capacity
is in excess of the above established limits will be considered on a caseby-
case basis, and the Borough Council may permit exceptions to the
above limits when the exception is deemed to be in the best interest of
the Borough.
§ 107-55 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-58
99:173
§ 107-58. Interconnection agreement.
An interconnection agreement between the Borough and the eligible
customer generator must be executed before the net metering facility may
be interconnected with the Borough's system. Said agreement shall be
provided by the Borough and a sample of same may be obtained from the
Borough Secretary.
§ 107-59. Technical specifications.
A customer generator's equipment and installation must comply with the
Borough's technical requirements for customer-owned generation. Said
requirements shall be kept on file with the Borough Secretary. All customer
generator equipment shall be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's specifications as well as all applicable provisions of the
National Electrical Code and state and local codes. All customer generator
equipment and installations shall comply with all public safety, performance
and power quality standards established by the National Electrical Code,
the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers and the credited testing
laboratories.
§ 107-60. Qualified installation required.
The customer generator shall provide the Borough with proof of qualified
installation of the net metering facility. Certification by a licensed
electrician shall constitute acceptable proof.
§ 107-61. Maintenance, safety and inspections.
A. The customer generator shall install, operate and maintain the electric
generating facility in accordance with the manufacturer's suggested
practices for safe, efficient and reliable operation in parallel with the
Borough's electrical system.
B. All customer generator facilities shall be capable of being isolated from
the Borough's electrical system by means of an outdoor, weatherproof,
lockable, visible-break, alternating current (AC) isolation device
[Customer Owned Generation Disconnect Switch(s)] which is readily
accessible to Borough personnel and is clearly labeled.
C. The Borough may, at its own discretion, isolate any customer generator
facility if the Borough has reason to believe that continued
interconnection with said electric-generating facility creates or
contributes to a system of emergency.
D. The Borough may perform reasonable on-site inspections to verify the
proper installation and continuing safe operation of the net metering
facility and the interconnection facilities, at reasonable times and upon
reasonable advance notice to the net metering customer.
§ 107-58 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-62
99:174
§ 107-62. Insurance.
The customer generator operating an electric-generating facility shall
maintain homeowners', commercial or other insurance providing coverage
in the amount of at least $100,000 for the liability of the insured against
losses or damages arising from the use of the customer's electric-generating
facility. The customer must submit evidence of such insurance to the
Borough with the interconnection application. The Borough's receipt of
evidence of liability insurance does not imply an endorsement of the terms
and conditions of the coverage.
§ 107-63. Transfer of facilities.
An eligible customer generator installation is transferable to other persons
at the same location upon notification to the Borough and verification
that the installation is in compliance with all applicable safety and power
quality standards. All other conditions of service set forth in this article or
referenced herein shall apply to the transferee.
§ 107-64. Metering.
Net energy metering shall be accomplished using a standard kilowatt-hour
meter capable of measuring the flow of electricity in two directions. If the
existing electrical meter installed at the customer's facility is not capable
of measuring the flow of electricity in two directions, the customer shall
be responsible for all expenses for the purchase and installation of an
appropriate meter or meters with such capability. In the case where two
meters are used, the reading of the meter measuring the flow of energy
from the customer to the company shall be subtracted from the reading of
the meter measuring the flow of energy from the company to the customer
to obtain a measurement of the net kilowatt-hours for billing purposes.
§ 107-65. Billing provisions. [Amended 7-19-2011 by Ord. No.
7-2011]
A. Customer net purchase of electricity. If at the end of the billing month,
the customer generator has consumed more kilowatt-hours of
electricity then the customer’s facility has produced, than all applicable
charges of the appropriate rate schedule shall be applied to the net
kilowatt-hours of Borough-supplied electricity that the customer
generator has consumed.
B. Customer generator net sale of electricity. If at the end of the billing
month, the customer generator facility has produced more kilowatthours
of electricity than the customer has consumed from Boroughsupplied
electricity, then the customer generator will receive a dollar
credit for each net excess kilowatt-hour received by the Borough from
the customer generator. This dollar credit will be based on the current
billed kilowatt-hours for the billing period. This credit will be reflected
on the bill as a line item. The customer will see the billed kilowatt-hours
and a line item for the credited kilowatt-hours in dollars. Should the
§ 107-62 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-65
99:175
§ 107-66. Violations and penalties.
The Borough may disconnect the customer generator's service from the
Borough's electric system if the customer generator fails to comply with any
of the provisions of this article or the referenced technical specifications.
credit exceed the billed kilowatt-hours, a dollar balance forward will
continue on the account into the next billing period. The customer
generator is, in all cases, responsible for the customer charge and other
charges in the applicable rate schedule.
C. Customer generator net sale of electricity resulting in a buy-back in
excess of kilowatt-hours generated. A credit to repurchase excess
kilowatt-hours will be issued in terms of a dollar credit to purchase back
excess generated electricity at a buy-back price of 4.127 cents per
kilowatt-hour for this initial 2011 year. Annually thereafter, this price
will be revised to reflect the sale of excess energy rate included in the
current period approved budget. This credit will carry forward as a
balance on the customer statement and be applied during the next
billing cycle. A line item credit will appear on the customer bill
depicting the credit buy-back.
D. Customer net sale of electricity resulting in fifty-percent reduction in
electricity purchases. If, in any calendar year, a customer generator
receiving service under this rider self-generates electricity equal to
50% or more of the customer generator’s total purchase of electricity
through the Borough’s transmission and distribution network for the
calendar year immediately prior to the installation of the customer
generator facility, then the Borough reserves the right to begin to bill
the customer generator a surcharge equal to its pro rata share of
stranded delivery costs (SDC surcharge).The SDC surcharge, if applied,
is intended to prevent interclass or intraclass shifting of the delivery
cost to other Borough customers, in order to prevent other Borough
customers from being required, in effect, to subsidize service to
customer generators. The Borough, upon specific determination that a
customer's customer generator has or will exceed its fifty-percent
electricity reduction limitation, may at its sole option, and at any time
notify the customer generator of the Borough’s intent to apply the SDC
surcharge to the customer generator’s monthly bill. When deemed
necessary or appropriate by the Borough, the Borough will assess the
applicability of any imposed SDC surcharge. In the event the Borough
determines the SDC surcharge to be no longer applicable, the Borough
will discontinue billing the same to the customer generator.
§ 107-65 KUTZTOWN CODE § 107-66
99:176
Chapter 110
FIBER-OPTIC COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code Enforcement — See Ch. 11.
Code Appeals Board — See Ch. 12.
Officers and Employees — See Ch. 29.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 107.
Private communications systems — See Ch.
166.
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A230.
Fees — See Ch. A231.
§ 107-66 DANCES, PUBLIC § 107-66
99:177

ARTICLE I
Operation Standards
[Adopted 7-16-2002 by Ord. No. 9-2002]
§ 110-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Fiber-Optic
Communications Network Standards" of the Borough.
§ 110-2. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the United States of America,
including, but not limited to, § 1201(4) of the Pennsylvania Borough Code
(53 P.S. § 46201(4)), § 2471 of the Pennsylvania Borough Code (53 P.S.
§ 47471), §§ (31) and (74) of § 1202 of the Pennsylvania Borough Code (53
P.S. §§ 46202(31) and 46202(74)), and the Federal Telecommunications Act
of 1996 (47 U.S.C. § 151, et seq.), as each of the same is amended from
time to time, which provisions authorize the Borough to enact all such
ordinances, rules and regulations as may be expedient or necessary for
the proper management, care and control of the Borough and its finances
and the maintenance of peace, good government, safety and welfare of the
Borough, and its trade, commerce and manufactures and to own, operate
and manage the network.
§ 110-3. Purpose and intent.
The Borough provides electric power, water supply, wastewater treatment
and solid waste disposal and recycling services to its residents and property
owners. The Borough initially constructed a portion of the network for
the purpose of operating, managing, monitoring, metering and billing such
utility services, as well as for the purpose of augmenting the Borough's
capability to provide security for such public utility facilities and to protect
the public health, safety and welfare through augmented police protection
capabilities. After extensive study, the Borough has concluded that the
public health, safety and welfare will be further protected and improved
by utilizing the network to also provide the services. The purpose and
intent of this article is to set forth provisions governing that portion of the
operations of the network which will consist of the rendering of the services
to consumers (as defined hereinbelow in this article), and to provide rates,
charges and regulations which shall be applicable to the use of such
services by the consumers.
§ 110-4. Application and administration.
A. Application of article. This article shall apply to the use and operation of
the network for all purposes and by all persons except such use of the
network as may be made by the Borough in the performance of its
governmental and proprietary functions, including, without limitation,
§ 110-1 DANCES, PUBLIC § 110-4
99:179
§ 110-5. Word usage and definitions.
use of the network in the regulation and operation of the public utility
facilities and operations of the Borough.
B. Administration. The Borough Manager shall administer the provisions
of this article and may make rules, regulations, procedures, and forms
of application and service contracts, as may be necessary or desirable
for the administration of this article. Such rules, regulations,
procedures, and forms of application and service contracts shall not be
in conflict with this article and shall be submitted to the Borough
Council for approval. If the rules, regulations, procedures, and forms of
application and contracts so submitted to the Borough Council are
approved by the Borough Council, the same shall be filed in the office of
the Secretary of the Borough of Kutztown.
C. Trade name. Services may be marketed and sold as Hometown
Utilicomsm services. The Borough utilizes and owns the name Hometown
Utilicomsm, and related marks or logos, as a service mark, trade name
and fictitious name in the provision of utility services to its customers.
References herein to the Borough shall be deemed to refer to the
Borough in all matters involving the network, including in those
instances when the Borough identifies itself as Hometown Utilicomsm.
A. Word usage. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms
shall, for the purpose of these regulations, have the meanings
indicated:
(1) Words in the singular include the plural, and those in the plural
include the singular.
(2) Words in the present tense include the future tense.
(3) The words "person," "applicant" and "consumer" shall include a
firm, corporation, association, trust, partnership, or other legal
entity, as well as an individual.
(4) The words "should" and "may" are permissive; the words "shall,"
"must" and "will" are mandatory and directive.
(5) Words in the masculine gender include the feminine and the neuter.
B. Definitions. Other terms or words used herein shall be interpreted or
defined as follows:
APPLICANT — The person who or which applies to the Borough to
obtain service.
APPLICATION — The form to be completed and executed by any person
who or which desires to obtain service from the Borough. The
application shall be in such form as may be set forth by the Borough
Manager.[Amended 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]
§ 110-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 110-5
99:180
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania,
and its authorized agents, contractors and successors and assigns.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Kutztown.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The corporate official appointed by the
Borough Council as the Borough Manager in accordance with Chapter
29 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown or such officials properly
designated representative.
BUILDING — Any combination of materials forming any structure
which is erected on the ground and permanently affixed thereto,
designed, intended or arranged for the housing, sheltering, enclosure
or structural support of persons, animals or property of any kind.
CODE OFFICER — The person so designated in accordance with
Chapter 11 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown.
CONSUMER — The person being served by or using the service.
CONSUMER'S INSTALLATION — Except as provided in § 110-6A of this
article, all wire, coaxial cable, fiber-optic cable, electrified metallic-wire
cable, switches, transformers, circuit breakers, computers, peripheral
equipment, televisions, telephones, and other appliances, apparatus
and equipment of every kind and nature whatsoever used in connection
with or forming a part of an installation for utilizing service for any
purpose ordinarily located on the consumer's side of the point of
demarcation, whether such consumer's installation is owned outright
by the consumer or used by the consumer under lease or otherwise.
DEMARCATION UNIT — Any home, business or multiple unit
demarcation device and enclosure box, which is intended to serve as
the interface device between the network and the conventional or
traditional wiring of the unit(s), as well as any functionally similar
device and enclosure box, the purpose of which is to convert light
signals emanating from the fiber-optic cables of the network into
electrical signals for transmission to the consumer's installation at the
point of demarcation contained in such demarcation unit. The term
"demarcation unit" shall include devices which serve a single unit and
devices which serve more than one unit. The version of a demarcation
unit currently in use by the Borough is commonly referred to as a
"fiberpoint."
INTERNET — The global computer network comprising interconnected
networks using standard protocols, including the World Wide Web or
WWW.
NETWORK — Fiber-optic cables, connectors, demarcation units, utility
poles, conduits, transmitting and switching equipment, television
headend equipment, antennas and receivers, computers, and other
facilities and properties, together with the appurtenant equipment,
facilities and properties which the Borough now owns or hereafter may
acquire from time to time, including all property (real, personal and
mixed), rights, powers, licenses, easements, rights-of-way, privileges,
§ 110-5 DANCES, PUBLIC § 110-5
99:181
§ 110-6. Permissible consumer uses.
franchises and other property and interests in property of any nature
whatsoever used or useful in connection with all such facilities and
together with all additions, extensions, alterations and improvements
thereof or thereto which may be made or acquired from time to time
by the Borough, including all such facilities and property located upon,
over, across, or under any lands or building not owned by the Borough,
up to each point of demarcation and including the demarcation unit.
NETWORK HAZARD — Condition posing an actual or potential threat
of damage to the physical properties of the network, the consumer's
installation or an endangerment to the public's safety, health and
welfare, including, but not limited to, any such condition posing an
actual or potential disruption or interruption of communication on the
network.
POINT OF DEMARCATION — The point in the demarcation unit where
the network is connected to the connecting leads of the consumer's
installation.
SCHEDULE OF RATES AND SERVICES — The schedule of rates and
services adopted by the Borough Council under the authority of this
article, including, but not limited to, §§ 110-11 and 110-12, and
included in Chapter A231 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown,
as the same may be modified, amended, restated, expanded and/or
superceded from time to time.
SERVICE(S) — The furnishing or delivery of video, voice and/or data
services, and/or other services utilizing video, voice and/or data
communications to supply such service, by the Borough to consumers,
as referred to in this article, in the schedule of rates and services, and
in service contracts with consumers.
SERVICE CONTRACT(S) — The contracts and agreements by and
between the consumer and the Borough, either written or agreed to by
the consumer by virtue of receiving service from the Borough, for the
furnishing of services by the Borough to the consumer, all as is more
fully described in this article and in the schedule of rates and services.
The service contract shall be in such form as may be set forth by the
Borough Manager.[Amended 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]
UNIT(S) — Any individual residential dwellings, residential dwelling
units, commercial occupancies, industrial occupancies, public and/or
institutional occupancies, as well as any other building, or portion
thereof; inhabited, occupied or utilized by a consumer.
WHOLESALE PROVIDER — Any person (excluding the Borough) who
or which is supplying video, voice and/or data services directly to users
of the network and is subject to either a tariff or wholesale agreement
under § 100-12 of this article.
§ 110-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 110-6
99:182
§ 110-7. Maintenance of services by Borough.
A. Retail use. Except to the extent provided for and permitted by § 110-12
of this article, pertaining to tariffs and wholesale agreements, service
shall not be used by any consumer for any purpose or in any place other
than that stipulated in the service contract and in the schedule of rates
and services, nor shall service supplied by the Borough be resold, on
either a wholesale or retail basis, or used by any person other than the
consumer contracting with the Borough, except with the prior written
permission of the Borough.
B. Bound by regulations. Each applicant, upon entering into a service
contract with the Borough and becoming a consumer pursuant to the
terms thereof, shall also be deemed to have agreed to be bound by and
subject to the terms of this article, the schedule of rates and services,
and all regulations promulgated under the authority of this article, as
the same may be amended from time to time.
C. Unauthorized use. Unauthorized connection to the network may be
terminated by the Borough without notice. Use of any service without
first notifying the Borough, or the provision of any service to network
users by a person who is not a wholesale provider is strictly prohibited,
and may subject the unauthorized user to prosecution, fines and
penalties.
D. Illegal use. The network may be used only for lawful purposes.
Transmission, distribution or storage of any material in violation of any
applicable law or regulation is prohibited.
E. Prohibited network use. The Borough may from time to time
promulgate rules and regulations which further define uses of the
network which are prohibited and which define privacy rules and
expectations for network use. Consumers may be subject to criminal
and civil liability as a result of their violation of such rules and
regulations. The Borough may investigate any potential violations of
such rules and regulations and will take appropriate enforcement
measures if violations are suspected.
A. Notice of network hazard. The consumer shall immediately notify the
Borough promptly of any network hazard that the consumer may
discover. Such notification shall be made to such persons and in such
manner as the Borough may designate from time to time.
B. Continuity of service. The Borough will use reasonable diligence to
preserve, as nearly as possible, the continuity and availability of service
provided to consumers, subject to:
(1) Acts of God or of a public enemy;
(2) Fires, severe weather, floods, earthquakes, natural disasters,
explosions or other catastrophes;
§ 110-6 DANCES, PUBLIC § 110-7
99:183
§ 110-8. Borough liability.
Acceptance and receipt of service shall be deemed conclusive evidence that
the recipient has agreed to the following:
(3) Embargoes, epidemics or quarantine restrictions;
(4) Technical causes beyond the control of the Borough in furnishing
services, including, but not limited to, breakdown or failure of
equipment and failure of outside communications capabilities
interfacing or connecting with the network and the Internet; and/
or
(5) Unauthorized, intentional and/or negligent acts constituting a
network hazard, including, without limitation, computer viruses
and attempts to overload computers or the network;
(6) Delays of suppliers or transportation;
(7) Shortages of goods, labor strikes, labor slowdowns, differences
with workers or labor stoppages of any kind; and/or
(8) Acts of the United States or any state or subdivision or
instrumentality thereof; except the Borough.
A. Liability limitations. The services provided by the Borough (and any
information, data and software contained therein or in the network) are
provided as is and as available, without warranty of any kind to
consumer or any third party, including, but not limited to, any express
or implied warranties of merchantability; fitness for a particular
purpose; effort to achieve purpose; quality; accuracy; noninfringement;
quiet enjoyment; title; and continuity, reliability and availability of
service. The consumer agrees that any efforts by the Borough to modify
its services shall not be deemed a waiver of these limitations, and that
any Borough warranties shall not be deemed to have failed of their
essential purpose. The consumer further agrees that the Borough shall
not be liable to the consumer or any third party for any loss of profits,
loss of use, interruption of business, or any direct, indirect, incidental
or consequential damages or any penalties of any kind whether under
this article, any service contract, or otherwise, even if the Borough was
advised of the possibility of such damages or was grossly negligent. The
Borough's liability is limited to the greatest extent permitted by law.
Acceptance of delivery of services shall constitute a waiver and release
of the Borough by the consumer for any claim for damages, setoff,
discount or other liability on account of delay.
B. Third-party transactions at consumer's peril. The consumer expressly
recognizes that the Borough does not operate, control or endorse any
information, products or services offered on the Internet, and that any
entities that do offer such information, products or services are not
affiliated with the Borough. The Borough does not make any express or
implied warranties, representations or endorsements to the consumer
§ 110-7 KUTZTOWN CODE § 110-8
99:184
§ 110-9. Application and service contract.
or any third party whatsoever with regard to any information, products
or services provided through the network and obtained or contracted
over the Internet, including, without limitation, warranties of
merchantability; fitness for a particular purpose; effort to achieve
purpose; quality; accuracy; noninfringement; quiet enjoyment; title;
and continuity, reliability and availability of service. The Borough shall
not be liable to any consumer or any third party for any cost or damage
arising either directly or indirectly from any transaction involving the
information, products or services offered by third parties or by the
consumer.
C. Downloading of data or files at consumer's peril. The consumer
expressly recognizes that the Borough cannot and does not guarantee
or warrant that files available for downloading through the network will
be free of infection, viruses, worms, Trojan horses or other code that
manifests contaminating or destructive properties. The consumer
agrees that it shall be solely responsible for implementing sufficient
procedures to satisfy the consumer's particular requirements for
accuracy of data input and output and for maintaining a means external
to the network for the reconstruction of any lost data. The consumer
also expressly recognizes that the Internet contains unedited materials,
communications and conduct, some of which are unlawful, indecent or
may be offensive to the consumer, and access to such materials,
communications and conduct by the consumer is done at the
consumer's sole risk.
A. Application and service contract. Receipt of the service shall constitute
the receiving person a consumer of service under this article and
subject the consumer to its rules and regulations. Any person desiring
to receive service may be required to complete an application for
service. The Borough may, at its discretion, require the applicant to sign
a written service contract setting forth the conditions under which
service is to be supplied. [Amended 2-21-2006 by Ord. No. 1-2006]
B. Right to reject application. The Borough reserves the right to reject, for
any valid reason, any application. The Borough may require service
contracts for a suitable period of time and reasonable guaranties when
unusual expense is necessary to furnish the service.
C. Right-of-way and access to property. The consumer shall provide (or
shall cause the landlord of the consumer to provide), without charge
(unless a change is agreed upon in writing by the Borough), a right-ofway
acceptable to the Borough for fiber-optic cables, demarcation units
and other network facilities across, over, under and on property owned
or controlled by the consumer (or the consumer's landlord) as in the
judgment of the Borough are necessary to furnish the service. When the
premises of the consumer (or the consumer's landlord) is so located
that right-of-way across, over, under and on the property of another
person is required for the supply of service, the consumer (or the
§ 110-8 DANCES, PUBLIC § 110-9
99:185
§ 110-10. Guarantee of payment.
consumer's landlord) shall reimburse the Borough for any and all costs
incurred by the Borough in acquiring such a right-of-way. The Borough
shall have the right to request the consumer (or the consumer's
landlord) to deposit with the Borough the estimated costs to be
incurred before undertaking to acquire the right-of-way. In addition, the
consumer shall provide the Borough with access to indoor facilities for
the installation of power backup battery modules and any necessary
electrical power connection for the demarcation unit.
D. Short-term service contracts. Service may be supplied under the rate
applicable under the schedule of rates and services for periods less
than the standard service contract period. In the case of such seasonal
or short-term consumers, the Borough may require such consumers to a
guaranty in advance, said advance to apply on bills rendered during
such seasonal or short-term service contracts.
E. Prior debts. Service and a service contract will not be furnished to a
former consumer until any indebtedness of said former consumer to the
Borough for previous service rendered to such consumer has been
satisfied, unless otherwise permitted by rules and regulations adopted
hereunder.
A. Deposits. A deposit may be required from any consumer to insure
payment of any bill in compliance with this article, the schedule of rates
and services, and all other applicable rules and regulations. A consumer
whose credit standing has become impaired through failure to pay
service bills may be required to furnish an additional deposit.
B. Amount of deposits. Deposits required from consumers entering into a
service contract for a period of less than 30 days shall equal the
estimated gross bill for such temporary period. Deposits required from
all other consumers shall be in accordance with the schedule of rates
and services which shall be determined from time to time by resolution
of Borough Council. In the event that any consumer is delinquent in the
payment of a service bill, as hereinafter provided in § 110-13 of this
article, more than one time within any six-month period, then, upon
notice from the Borough to the consumer, the consumer shall be
required to post a deposit, in the amount set forth in the schedule of
rates and services, within 10 days from the receipt of such notice, and
in the event that the consumer shall fail to post such deposit, the
Borough shall discontinue the provision of service to the consumer.
C. Interest on deposits. No interest shall be payable by the Borough on any
deposits.
D. Refund of deposits. Upon discontinuance of service, the Borough may
apply any deposit then in its possession toward the final settlement of
the consumer's account, and any remaining balance thereof will be
refunded to the consumer.
§ 110-9 KUTZTOWN CODE § 110-11
99:186
§ 110-11. Services available.
§ 110-12. Rates and fees.
A. Approved services. Only those services which have been approved by
resolution of the Borough Council for inclusion in the schedule of rates
and services shall be made available to consumers by means of the
network. The delivery of any product or service by a wholesale provider
to any person by means of the network shall be subject to such approval
by resolution of the Borough Council.
B. Service criteria. The Borough Council may, by resolution, from time to
time adopt rules, regulations and criteria which shall govern whether or
not a product or service is suitable or permissible for inclusion as a
service.
C. New service requests. If a consumer desires to obtain, by means of the
network, a particular product or service which is not currently a
service, the consumer shall deliver a written request for such service to
the Borough Manger, who shall, after due investigation, forward such
request to the Borough Council with a recommendation as to whether
or not the proposed service should be included as a service.
A. Consumers. The rates, charges and fees applicable to the services and
payable by consumers as well as all ancillary fees and charges to
consumers pursuant to this article, such as installation charges, are
hereby imposed and shall be such as are approved by the Borough
Council by resolution, from time to time, as part of a schedule of rates
and services to be kept on file in the office of the Borough Secretary and
made available to the public for inspection during the normal hours of
operation of the Borough of Kutztown. [Amended 8-18-2009 by Ord.
No. 7-2009]
B. Tariffs and wholesale agreements. In those instances where the
Borough is willing to make the network available to a wholesale
provider, in order to permit the wholesale provider to directly deliver
video, voice and/or data services to network users, the terms and
conditions of such network usage by the wholesale provider, including
all fees and charges payable by the wholesale provider to the Borough,
shall be governed by:
(1) A tariff applicable and available to all wholesale providers offering
services of the same type and character (subject to network
availability and capacity) and which is adopted as part of the
schedule of rates and services. Such tariff may require the
execution of a contract with the Borough setting forth additional
terms and conditions; or
(2) A wholesale agreement by and between the wholesale provider and
the Borough, subject to all statutory prerequisites to the award and
execution of such wholesale agreement.
§ 110-11 DANCES, PUBLIC § 110-13
99:187
§ 110-13. Billing and payment. [Amended 1-28-2003 by Ord. No.
14-2002]
All bills for service shall be rendered by the Borough monthly for services to
be rendered in the immediately succeeding month. Such bills shall include
the service charges for the immediately succeeding month, reflecting the
service and consumption for which the consumer currently has a service
contract at the time of billing. All such bills shall be due and payable on
or before the due date set forth on the bill. All bills remaining unpaid after
the due date may be subject to a penalty and interest as adopted from
time to time by resolution of Borough Council as part of the schedule of
rates and services, which penalty plus interest shall be computed on the
unpaid balance. Adjustments to reflect changes to the services which a
consumer actually received during the month, including new services and
any disconnections, shall be reflected in the monthly billing issued after
such month.
§ 110-14. Disconnection by Borough.
A. Nonpayment shutoff. In the case of any failure of a consumer to pay any
bill for services within three days of the date due, the Borough reserves
the right to disconnect service to such consumer on five calendar days'
notice and, if the Borough so desires, to remove the Borough's
equipment.
B. Violation of rules and regulations. The Borough may, upon five days'
notice, disconnect service to any consumer because of violation of this
article or any of the applicable rules and regulations promulgated
pursuant to the authority of this article.
C. Safety shutoff. The Borough may disconnect without notice its service
to any consumer if the consumer's installation has become dangerous
or defective or if the consumer's installation is determined by the
Borough to interfere with the operation of the network or to otherwise
violate this article, the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder or
other applicable law. Upon correction of the dangerous, defective or
interfering condition, the Borough will restore service upon payment of
its disconnection and reconnection costs.
D. Shutoff for fraud or illegal use. The Borough may disconnect without
notice its service to any consumer and remove the Borough's equipment
for abuse, fraud, tampering with the demarcation unit or other
equipment of the Borough or for verified illegal use. [Amended
5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]
E. Reconnection charge. Service disconnected by the Borough under the
provisions of Subsections A, B and D of this section will be restored only
on payment in advance of a fee, which shall be from time to time
determined by resolution of Borough Council as part of the schedule of
rates and services, in addition to all arrearages due by the consumer.
Service will be restored only on payment to the Borough of all costs of
§ 110-13 KUTZTOWN CODE § 110-14
99:188
§ 110-15. Discontinuance of service by consumer.
§ 110-16. Service connection.
discontinuance and restoration, in addition to all such arrearages,
including penalties and interest, in those instances where the Borough
removed its equipment.
F. Tenant rights. In cases involving a residential rental unit, the
procedures to be followed to effect a disconnection or termination of
service by the Borough shall comply with the Pennsylvania Utility
Service Tenants Rights Act, Act No. 299 of 1978,74 as amended from
time to time and as applicable to the Borough.
G. Suspected illegal use. The Borough may, upon five days' notice,
disconnect service to any consumer because of a suspected illegal use,
if the consumer does not, within five days of receiving notice, verify to
the Borough that all services are being used in compliance with all
applicable law. [Added 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]
H. Bound by the third party terms. The Borough may disconnect without
notice its service to any consumer whom the Borough has received
notice from its third party internet bandwidth service provider that the
customer has violated the terms of service of the Borough's third party
internet bandwidth service provider. The terms of service of the
Borough's third party internet bandwidth service provider shall be
available to all consumers at the Borough Municipal building. [Added
5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]
I. Trademark. The Borough may, upon five days' notice, disconnect
service to any consumer because of suspected trade mark violation, if
the consumer does not, within five days of receiving notice, verify to the
Borough that a trademark violation has not occurred, or has been
corrected. [Added 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]
A. Notice to discontinue. The consumer shall give the Borough at least
three working days' notice to discontinue service, and the consumer
shall be liable for service taken until the service disconnect date
specified by the consumer. Such notice prior to the expiration of a
service contract term will not relieve the consumer from any minimum
or guaranteed payments under any contract or under the schedule of
rates and services.
B. Final bill. The final bill for service is due and payable immediately after
notice is received by the Borough to discontinue service and the final
billing is sent to the consumer.
A. Facilities supplied by Borough. The Borough will install on the private
property of a consumer (or on the property of the landlord of the
74.Editor's Note: See 68 P.S. § 399.1 et seq.
§ 110-14 DANCES, PUBLIC § 110-16
99:189
§ 110-17. Borough's equipment.
consumer), and for the exclusive use of such consumer, the demarcation
unit, a fiber-optic cable connection extending from the network to the
demarcation unit, and such other appurtenant equipment and facilities
as the Borough deems necessary to provide power for the demarcation
unit and a connection from the demarcation unit to any network
interface device (even though such cables and equipment may be on
the consumer's side of the point of demarcation). All other wiring and
equipment on private property of the consumer and all portions of the
consumer's installation which is not installed by the Borough shall be
furnished and installed by the consumer, as provided for and regulated
by this article. The Borough shall not in any manner be responsible for
any portion of the consumer's installation. The cost to the consumer of
the aforesaid demarcation unit and fiber-optic cable to be supplied by
the Borough shall be set forth in the schedule of rates and services.
B. Connection. Only the Borough, or the agents of the Borough, or a
wholesale provider, in the case of a service provided by such wholesale
provider, shall make connections of the consumer's installation to the
network at the point of demarcation in the demarcation unit.
C. Location. In general, a demarcation unit will be located on the outside
of the building. If an outdoor location is not practical, a demarcation
unit may be located at another location approved by the Borough. The
inside and/or outside location selected shall be accessible at all times to
both the consumer and the Borough. The location shall be clear of all
heating systems, plumbing and other obstructions, and there shall be
not less than three feet of clear area in front of the demarcation unit.
The placement of the demarcation unit shall be in accordance with the
Borough policy as determined by the Borough.
D. Extensions. The Borough shall have no obligation to extend its facilities
for a consumer to a new point of demarcation, after the installation of a
demarcation unit. Where a consumer makes a request for such
extension, the Borough will determine in each case what guaranties of
revenue, financing or terms of service contract shall be required of the
consumer.
A. Right to remove Borough's equipment. All demarcation units, fiberoptic
cable or other equipment supplied by the Borough, as described in
§ 110-16A of this article, shall remain its exclusive property. The
Borough shall have the right to remove all of its property serving a
consumer from the premises of that consumer or any other person at
any time after the termination of service, whatever may have been the
reason for such termination.
B. Interference with Borough's property. Where the service has been
disconnected or reconnected without the permission of the Borough
and the demarcation unit or other equipment has been tampered with,
resulting in improper measurement of the service supplied, the
§ 110-16 KUTZTOWN CODE § 110-17
99:190
§ 110-18. Consumer's installation.
All portions of the consumer's installation to which the Borough supplies
service shall conform, as applicable, to the following requirements. The
Borough Council may adopt, from time to time, rules and regulations
regarding any necessary specifications and operational parameters for the
consumer's installation.
§ 110-19. Service to multiple consumer structures.
The Borough Council may adopt, from time to time, rules and regulations
regarding the providing of service to multiple buildings for a single
consumer.
§ 110-20. Service to multitenant structures.
The Borough Council may adopt, from time to time, rules and regulations
regarding the providing of service to multitenant or multiunit buildings.
§ 110-21. Defects in consumer's installation.
consumer served by such equipment shall be required to pay for such
service as the Borough may estimate, from available information, to
have been used but not registered by the Borough and, in addition
thereto, such consumer shall be required to bear all costs incurred
by the Borough for investigations, inspections, and repairs and for
such protective equipment as, in the judgment of the Borough, may
be necessary. Willful or intentional tampering with the Borough's
equipment is a violation of this article and subject to prosecution.
C. Equipment tests. The Borough, at its own expense, will make periodic
tests and inspections of its network and demarcation units in order to
maintain them at the proper standard of performance, but the Borough
reserves the right to make a charge, at a rate as shall be determined by
Borough Council as part of the schedule of rates and services for any
additional tests or inspections made at the request of the consumer,
provided that such test finds the Borough's equipment to be within
prescribed tolerances of performance.
A. Right to inspect. The Borough shall have the right, but shall not be
obliged, to examine the consumer's installation at the time service is
first supplied or at any time thereafter, in accordance with § 110-24 of
this article.
B. Defective installations. If at any time all or any portion of the
consumer's installation is determined by the Borough to be defective or
dangerous, service may be refused or discontinued until the consumer
has the condition corrected.
C. Consumer's responsibility. The consumer assumes full responsibility for
the service at and from the point of demarcation thereof. The consumer
§ 110-17 DANCES, PUBLIC § 110-21
99:191
§ 110-22. (Reserved)
§ 110-23. Enforcement.
is responsible for the risk of damage to property and the risk of fire
or personal injury resulting from improper wiring and manner of
attachment or use and maintenance of electrical wiring, equipment,
appliances, fixtures and apparatus, and all installations, changes,
alterations, additions or repairs to any part of the consumer's
installation which do not constitute consumer products or equipment
permitted to be installed by nonelectricians, shall be made in
accordance with Chapter 107 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown.
The consumer shall indemnify, save harmless and defend the Borough
against all claims, demands, costs or expenses for loss, damage or
injury to persons or property in any manner directly or indirectly
arising from, connected with or growing out of the transmission or use
of services by the consumer at or on the consumer's side of the point
of demarcation. This indemnification shall include if employees of the
Borough attempt to correct any problems on the consumer's side of the
point of demarcation. [Amended 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]
A. Notice. Whenever the Borough, through the Borough Manager or the
Code Officer believes or has cause to believe that there has occurred
and/or is continuing any violation of the provisions of this article or any
rules, regulations, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this article,
whether such violation is observed by the Borough Manager or Code
Officer or the Borough Manager or the Code Officer acts in consultation
with the Borough's technical staff and consultants, the Borough
Manager or the Code Officer shall give notice of such violation to each
person responsible therefor, and such notice shall: [Amended
5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]
(1) Be in writing and state the place and location of the violation;
(2) State the nature, condition and manner of the violation;
(3) State the determination of the Borough Manager or the Code
Officer with respect to the violation;
(4) State the name of the consumer and each other person deemed
responsible by the Borough Manager or the Code Officer for such
violation;
(5) State the date of the notice and the period of time, if any, allowed
for compliance with this article, as such period of time is specified
in Subsection B of this section;
(6) Be served upon the consumer involved and all other persons, if any,
named in the notice pursuant to Subsection A(4) of this section, and
service of such notice shall be made upon the consumer and each
such other person, if any, either personally or by certified first class
§ 110-21 KUTZTOWN CODE § 110-23
99:192
mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, sent to the last
known address of such owner and such other person.
B. Time. The period of time within which a consumer and each other
person determined to be responsible, pursuant to Subsection A(4) of
this section, for any violation shall comply with the specific provisions
of this article, following the issuance of a notice, shall be the period of
time determined by the Code Officer, taking into consideration the
nature of the violation, the degree of danger to public health and safety
posed by such violation, any resulting network hazard, and the advice of
the Borough's technical staff and consultants. The notice of any
violation may require immediate compliance with this article (any such
notice requiring immediate compliance hereinafter referred to as an
"emergency order") when it is determined by the Code Officer that the
violation in question presents an immediate and present danger or
nuisance to the health, safety and welfare of the public, such as a
network hazard which may impede vital communications, and, in such
cases, notice of the violation constituting such emergency order may be
verbal (which verbal notice shall thereafter be confirmed with a written
notice) and shall be served personally upon the consumer and each
other person, if available, who has caused or is responsible for or in
control of said violation, and such notice constituting such emergency
order may require the immediate correction and discontinuance of the
violation and compliance with this article.
C. Legal proceedings. In case of violation of this article, the Borough,
through the Borough Manager or Code Officer, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violation or to prevent any act,
conduct, business or use constituting such violation. In view of the
critical importance to the public of maintaining the availability and
integrity of communications on the network, all network hazards are
hereby deemed to be public nuisances and, as such, shall be abatable
by the Borough through appropriate proceedings at law and/or in
equity.
D. Borough abatement. Notwithstanding the imposition of any penalty
prescribed in this article, upon the neglect, failure or refusal of any
person to comply with the requirements of this article, following the
expiration of the period of time, if any, set forth in any notice of violation
of this article, the Borough may, but shall not be required to, perform or
cause the performance of work or other actions necessary to remove,
correct, remedy, alter or otherwise abate the conditions which
constitute the violation of this article. Any person who is found to have
violated any provisions of this article shall, in addition to the penalties
provided for herein, bear all costs incurred by the Borough in the event
that the Borough has elected to perform or cause to be performed any
such remedial action. Any such costs may be collected by the Borough
from any such person in the manner provided by law.
§ 110-23 DANCES, PUBLIC § 110-24
99:193
§ 110-24. Inspections.
Borough representatives, who are properly identified, shall have full and
free access to the premises of each consumer and to any premises on which
any portion of the network, including, but not limited to a demarcation
unit, is located at all reasonable times (between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
prevailing time) for the purpose of inspection and repairs, for removal of
Borough property or for any other purpose incident to the service. The
consumer should immediately contact the Borough in case of any question
as to the authority or credentials of Borough representatives.
§ 110-25. Stop-work order.
§ 110-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person subject to the provisions of this article who or which shall in any
way violate any provisions of this article, or use or render any service, or
who or which shall do or perform any work or who or which, as owner or
lessee, shall permit any work to be done or performed, or use or render any
service, as provided herein without complying with the provisions of this
article, shall, upon conviction thereof before any District Justice, be fined
an amount not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 for each offense and, in
default of payment thereof, undergo imprisonment in the county jail for a
period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed as a separate offense.
§ 110-27. Appeals.
Any person shall have the right to appeal or request a permitted
modification or waiver with respect to a decision under this article and/or
any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, by the Borough Manager,
Code Officer or other official of the Borough of Kutztown. An application for
appeal or request for permitted modification or waiver shall be based on a
claim that the true intent of this article or the rules and regulations adopted
hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this article
A. Stop work. The Borough Manager, Code Officer or other designated
employee shall have the authority to stop work on a consumer's
installation when such work is being performed in a manner not in
conformity with Chapter 107 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown or
this article or upon notification of an authorized inspection agency.
B. Discontinue use. In the case of an existing consumer's installation, if
upon inspection it is found that the existing consumer installation is
defective and/or unsafe, or is or may be harmful to the network, upon
notification by the Borough Manager and/or Code Officer, all use
thereof shall be discontinued until it has been corrected and made to
conform to the requirements of Chapter 107 of the Code of the Borough
of Kutztown and this article and approved by an authorized inspection
agency or the Borough as provided for in Chapter 107 of the Code of the
Borough of Kutztown.
§ 110-24 KUTZTOWN CODE § 110-27
99:194
or do not fully apply. Such appeals and requests shall be filed and heard as
prescribed in Chapter 12 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 110-28. Savings clause.
The provisions of this article shall not affect or repeal the provisions of
Chapter 166, entitled "Private Communications Systems," nor the
provisions of Chapter A230, entitled "Cable Television Franchise," of the
Code of the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 110-29. Conflicts and repealer.
§ 110-30. Severability.
It is the intention of the Borough Council that each separate provision of
this article shall be independent of all other provisions herein and is further
the intention of the Borough Council that if any of the provisions of this
article be declared to be invalid, all other provisions hereof shall remain
valid and in full force and effect.
§ 110-31. When effective.
This article shall become effective after enactment on the earliest date
permitted by law.
§ 110-32. through § 110-34. (Reserved)
A. Conflicts. Whenever there is a difference between the minimum
standard specified in this article and those included elsewhere in the
Code of the Borough of Kutztown or in other Borough regulations, the
more stringent requirement shall apply.
B. Repealer. Except as provided in § 110-28 of this article, all existing
ordinances or parts of ordinances and provisions of the Code of the
Borough of Kutztown which are contrary to the provisions of this article
are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this article full force
and effect.
§ 110-27 DANCES, PUBLIC § 110-32
99:195

ARTICLE II
Telecommunications Advisory Commission
[Adopted 10-20-2009 by Ord. No. 12-2009; amended in its entirety
9-20-2011 by Ord. No. 10-2011]
§ 110-35. Title.
The short title of this article shall be the "Borough of Kutztown
Telecommunications Advisory Commission," and the same may be cited in
that manner.
§ 110-36. Establishment.
There is hereby established a commission of the Borough of Kutztown. Said
commission shall be an advisory commission and shall remain in existence
until an ordinance terminating its existence is passed by the Borough
Council.
§ 110-37. Composition and organization.
§ 110-38. Borough Council liaison.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown may appoint one of its
members or their designee to serve as the Borough Council's liaison to
the Borough of Kutztown Telecommunications Advisory Commission. The
Council liaison shall have the ability to engage in the discussion of the
Commission and provide useful input to the Commission. However, the
A. The Commission shall be made up of seven members, who shall be
appointed by the Borough Council. The seven members or
commissioners shall consist of the following: seven Borough residents
and/or owners or operators of businesses located within the Borough or
receiving telecommunications services from Home Net. Beginning with
appointments which are to be effective on or after February 1, 2012,
four Commissioners shall be appointed for terms to expire two years
from their appointment and three Commissioners shall be appointed for
terms of one year. Each appointment or reappointment of a
Commissioner occurring after the seven appointments are made to fill
the terms expiring on February 1, 2012, shall be for a period of two
years.
B. The Commission shall annually elect one of its members to serve as
Chairperson and shall elect such other officers and adopt procedural
rules and regulations as it deems appropriate.
C. The Commission shall adopt bylaws, rules and procedures not
inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance as may be necessary
for the proper execution of its business.
D. The Commission shall meet at least monthly. Special meetings may be
called by the Chairperson or a majority of the Commission as needed.
§ 110-35 DANCES, PUBLIC § 110-38
99:197
Council liaison shall not have a vote in the affairs of the Commission nor
shall be/she be eligible for election as an officer of the Commission.
§ 110-39. Purpose, powers and duties.
A. The purpose of the Commission shall be to advise the Borough Council
with regard to the operation and functioning of Home Net, taking into
account the following: the performance of the existing
telecommunications operations of the Borough; emerging
telecommunications technology and the future telecommunications
needs and interests of the community.
B. The Commission's duties shall include the following:
(1) Review rates and fees of the Borough's telecommunications
services to insure that they remain competitive with the
surrounding market.
(2) Review suggested system improvements and to make
recommendations to the Borough Council regarding future capital
improvements.
(3) Review and offer input to potential expansion of Home Net's
service area.
(4) Serve as an advisor to the Borough Council with respect to the
public, educational and government access channels and
scheduling for the use of such; encourage the use of the public
access channels among the widest range of institutions, groups and
individuals within the Borough and its service area.
(5) Provide recommendations and suggestions to the Borough Council
on policies and procedures which may improve the customer
service aspects of the services provided via Home Net.
(6) Apply for and receive grants and expend funds appropriated for its
use for the purposes set forth in this subsection, provided that no
expense may be incurred by the Commission without the prior
approval of the Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown.
(7) Undertake such other tasks related to the Borough's
telecommunications services and fiber optic system as requested or
assigned by the Borough Council.
C. The Commission shall file an annual report with the Borough Council
which shall contain recommendations concerning the Borough's
telecommunications policies and methods to improve thereon. The
report shall also set forth an outline of the Commission's goals and
objectives for the upcoming year.
§ 110-38 KUTZTOWN CODE § 110-39
99:198
Chapter 116
FIREARMS
§ 116-1. Definitions.75
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREARM — Includes but is not limited to any gun, shotgun, rifle, handgun,
pistol, pellet gun, BB gun, crossbow, bow and arrow, slingshot or any other
device which impels a projectile through the use of force.
§ 116-2. Discharge prohibited; violations and penalties.76
No person shall, except in necessary defense of person or property or in
pursuit of official duties, fire or discharge any gun or other firearm within
the Borough of Kutztown. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon summary conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.) and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days.
Chapter 119
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction Code — See Ch. 75.
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 107.
Housing standards — See Ch. 135.
Plumbing — See Ch. 163.
§ 119-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as and cited as the "Borough of Kutztown Fire
Prevention Code."
§ 119-2. Reenactment of provisions.
The provisions contained in § 119-3 of this chapter were reenacted on April
20, 2004, pursuant to Act 45 of 1999, also known as the "Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code" which allowed for the reenactment of all
building code ordinances which equal or exceed the specific requirements
75.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 110-39 FIREARMS § 119-2
116:199
of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code and were in effect prior to
July 1, 1999.
§ 119-3. Amendments and changes to code.
A. Enforcement Officer. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Code
Enforcement Officer (Building Code Official) and/or Chief of Kutztown
Fire Company No. 1 (Fire Chief) to enforce the provisions of this Code.
The enforcement officer of this Code is herein referred to as the “Code
Official."
B. Investigation of fires. The Code Official and Fire Chief shall investigate,
or cause to be investigated, every fire or explosion occurring within the
jurisdiction that is of a suspicious nature or which involves the loss of
life or serious injury or causes destruction or damage to property. Such
investigation shall be initiated immediately upon the occurrence of such
fire or explosion, and if it appears that such an occurrence is of a
suspicious nature, the Fire Chief shall immediately take charge of the
physical evidence and, in order to preserve any physical evidence
relating to the cause or origin of such fire or explosion, the Code Official
shall take means to prevent access by any person or persons to the
building, structure or premises until such evidence has been properly
processed. The Fire Chief shall notify those persons designated by law
to pursue investigations into such matters and shall further cooperate
with the authorities in the collection of evidence and prosecution of the
case and shall pursue the investigation to its conclusion. The Fire Chief
shall file a report of the fire investigation with the Code Official.
C. Service of notice. The written notice of violation of this Code shall be
served upon the owner, a duly authorized agent or upon the occupant or
other person responsible for the conditions under violation. Such notice
of violation shall be served either by delivering a copy of the same to
such person or persons by certified first class mail, return receipt,
postage prepaid, to the last known address or delivering it in person or
leaving it in the possession of any person in charge of the property or by
affixing a copy in a conspicuous place upon the property in the absence
of any of the forenoted persons.
D. Failure to correct violations.
(1) If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time
specified by the Code Official, the Code Official shall prosecute
such violation:
(a) Civilly at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such
violation or to require the removal or termination of the
unlawful use; or
(b) Criminally by issuing, or causing to issue, a citation to the
owner or to the occupant or other person responsible for the
conditions under violation.
§ 119-2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 119-3
119:200
Chapter 123
FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appeals Boards — See Ch. 12.
Construction code — See Ch. 75.
Housing standards — See Ch. 135.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 189.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
195.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
Fees — See Ch. A231.
(2) The foregoing legal actions shall be cumulative and may be
prosecuted concurrently or in such order as the Code Official
deems appropriate and, to the extent permitted by law, as often as
violation therefor shall occur; or the Code Official may request the
Police Department of the Borough of Kutztown to make arrests for
any offense against this Code or orders of the Code Official
affecting the safety of the public during emergency conditions.
E. Penalty for violations. Any person who shall fail to comply with any of
the provisions of this Code or who fails to comply with any notice issued
pursuant to this Code shall, upon conviction, whether civilly or
criminally, thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $1,000. In default of payment of the fine, the convicted
person shall be liable to imprisonment for not more than 60 days. Each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
F. Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein described
shall not prevent the Code Official and/or Solicitor of the Borough of
Kutztown from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful
construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation or to prevent
illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises or to stop an
illegal act, conduct of business or use of a building or structure on or
about any premises.
§ 119-3 FIRE PREVENTION § 119-3
119:201

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 123-1. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 123-2. Applicability.
§ 123-3. Abrogation; greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 123-4. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 123-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units and its residents by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Borough of Kutztown unless a
building permit has been obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs, as herein defined, to
existing buildings or structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
§ 123-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 123-5
119:203
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas or that land
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Kutztown or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 123-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 123-5
119:204
ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 123-6. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
The Code Enforcement Officer within the Community Development Office is
hereby appointed to administer and enforce this chapter and is referred to
herein as the "Floodplain Administrator."
§ 123-7. Building permits required.
Building permits shall be required before any construction or development,
other than for minor repairs as herein defined, is undertaken within any
area of the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 123-8. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);77 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);78 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);79 and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. 1344. No permit shall be issued until
this determination has been made.
C. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
D. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
E. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
77.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
78.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
79.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 123-6 FIRE PREVENTION § 123-8
119:205
§ 123-9. Building permit application procedures and requirements.
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Borough Council for
whatever action it considers necessary.
F. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated with
the requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 PA
Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a building permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Borough of
Kutztown. Such application shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the land on which the
proposed construction is to occur.
(3) The name and address of the contractor.
(4) Site location, including address.
(5) A listing of other permits required.
(6) A brief description of the proposed work and estimated cost,
including a breakout of the flood-related cost and the market value
of the building before the flood damage occurred, where
appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform to the requirements of this chapter and all
other applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
§ 123-8 KUTZTOWN CODE § 123-9
119:206
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement.
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant.
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used.
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed building permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of
the site expressed in acres or square feet;
(d) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(e) The location of all existing streets, drives and other
accessways; and
(f) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale as determined by the
Floodplain Administrator showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988.
(b) The elevation of the base flood.
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 PA
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC, or latest revision thereof.
(4) The following data and documentation:
§ 123-9 FIRE PREVENTION § 123-9
119:207
§ 123-10. Review of application.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
(a) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood.
(b) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an AE Area/District without floodway [See
§ 123-18A(2).], when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point.
(d) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(e) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 123-24F, Storage, and § 123-25, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 123-24F and 123-25 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 123-25
during a base flood.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's Planning Module for Land
Development.
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
§ 123-9 KUTZTOWN CODE § 123-10
119:208
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., planning commission, municipal engineer,
etc.) for review and comment.
§ 123-11. Changes after issuance of permit.
After the issuance of a building permit by the Floodplain Administrator,
no changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of
the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the application
without the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator.
Requests for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by
the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 123-12. Placards.
In addition to the building permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue
a placard which shall be displayed on the premises during the time
construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the
building permit and the date of its issuance and be signed by the Floodplain
Administrator.
§ 123-13. Expiration of permit; start of construction.
§ 123-14. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Work on the proposed construction and/or development shall begin
within 180 days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within
12 months after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall
expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The actual "start of construction" means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of
construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
B. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request, which sets
forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator
to approve such a request, is submitted by the applicant.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
§ 123-10 FIRE PREVENTION § 123-14
119:209
§ 123-15. Appeals.
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance.
(3) Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for the
performance of any act it requires.
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state.
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine
to the Borough of Kutztown of not less than $25 nor more than $600,
plus costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other
actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue, and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the
Borough Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Borough Council. Such appeal must be filed,
in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or action of
the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Borough Council shall set a time and
place, within not less than 10 or not more than 30 days, for the purpose
of considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place at which the
appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.
§ 123-14 KUTZTOWN CODE § 123-15
119:210
§ 123-16. Fees.
The Borough Council shall establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees,
charges, and expenses for appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board and for the
administration of this chapter.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Borough Council may seek
relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this state,
including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.80
80.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 123-15 FIRE PREVENTION § 123-16
119:211

ARTICLE III
Floodplain Areas
§ 123-17. Identification.
§ 123-18. Description; special requirements.
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of the Borough of Kutztown, classified as special flood
hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), dated July 3,
2012, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital
data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study; and
(2) Any community-identified flood hazard areas.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments are hereby adopted by the Borough of Kutztown and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific
areas:
(1) The Floodway Area/District identified as "floodway" in the FIS
which represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
by more than one foot at any point. This term shall also include
floodway areas which have been identified in other available
studies or sources of information for those special floodplain areas
where no floodway has been identified in the FIS.
(a) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill,
new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development shall be permitted unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(b) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
(2) The AE Area/District without floodway shall be those areas
identified as an "AE Zone" on the FIRM included in the FIS
prepared by FEMA and for which base flood elevations have been
provided in the FIS but no floodway has been delineated. In AE
Area/District without floodway, no new development shall be
§ 123-17 FIRE PREVENTION § 123-18
119:213
§ 123-19. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Borough
Council where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or
person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such
change, approval must be obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as
practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information
becomes available, the applicant shall notify FEMA of the changes by
submitting technical or scientific data.
§ 123-20. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Borough of Kutztown Planning
permitted unless it can be demonstrated that the cumulative effect
of all past and projected development will not increase the BFE by
more than one foot.
(3) The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an "A Zone" on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no
one-percent-annual-chance flood elevations have been provided.
For these areas, elevation and floodway information from other
federal, state, or other acceptable source shall be used when
available. Where other acceptable information is not available, the
elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on
the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site. In lieu of the above, the municipality may require
the applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or
others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the
technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be
submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review
by the municipality.
B. No permit shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the
BFE.
C. No permit shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any AE Area/District without floodway unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development
would not, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE than one foot at any point.
D. No new construction or development shall be located within the area
measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse,
unless a permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
§ 123-18 KUTZTOWN CODE § 123-20
119:214
Commission, and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may
appeal to the Borough Zoning Hearing Board. The burden of proof shall be
on the appellant.
§ 123-21. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 123-20 FIRE PREVENTION § 123-21
119:215

ARTICLE IV
Technical Provisions
§ 123-22. General requirements.
§ 123-23. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have been
first obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. Technical or scientific data shall be submitted by the applicant to FEMA
for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) as soon as practicable but within
six months of any new construction, development or other activity
resulting in changes in the BFE. The situations when a LOMR or a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) are required are:
(1) Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway; or
(2) Any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone AE without a
designated floodway that will cause a rise of more than one foot in
the base flood elevation; or
(3) Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to
installing culverts and bridges).
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
D. Within any identified floodplain area (See § 123-18.), no new
construction or development shall be located within the area measured
50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
A. Residential structures.
§ 123-22 FIRE PREVENTION § 123-23
119:217
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to or above the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to or above
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 123-18A(3) of this chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 PA Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to or above the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to or above the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 123-18A(3) of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations,"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the abovereferenced
standards.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
§ 123-23 KUTZTOWN CODE § 123-23
119:218
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 PA Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized.
C. Space below the lowest floor. [Amended 6-26-2012 by Ord. No.
3-2012]
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
that will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access,
or incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall be
designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on
exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes crawl
spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. See § 123-35, definition of "substantial
improvement," for requirements for the substantial improvement of any
historic structures.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet. Accessory structures
in excess of 200 square feet shall comply with all the requirements
of this chapter.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be at least 1 1/2 feet above the
regulatory flood elevation.
§ 123-23 FIRE PREVENTION § 123-23
119:219
§ 123-24. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
§ 123-23 KUTZTOWN CODE § 123-24
119:220
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages, and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or that, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 123-25, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of building and structures. All buildings and structures shall
be designed, located and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
§ 123-24 FIRE PREVENTION § 123-24
119:221
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained 34 PA Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009, or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612 and 3402 and
Appendix G.
§ 123-24 KUTZTOWN CODE § 123-24
119:222
§ 123-25. Development which may endanger human life.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009, or the latest
edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109 and R323 and Appendix
AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,81
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject
to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following list of materials and substances is considered
dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
81.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 123-24 FIRE PREVENTION § 123-25
119:223
§ 123-26. Special requirements for subdivisions.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 123-27. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A above shall be prohibited.
C. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved structure of the kind described in Subsection A
above shall be elevated, or in the case of a nonresidential structure
elevated or designed, and constructed to remain completely dry up to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; designed to prevent
pollution from the structure or activity during the course of a base
flood. Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992), or with some
other equivalent watertight standard.
A. Within any Floodway Area/District, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
B. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation.
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
C. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
§ 123-25 KUTZTOWN CODE § 123-27
119:224
§ 123-28. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited.
Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto shall apply and
34 PA Code Chapters 401 through 405.
D. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34
PA Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturer's standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the unit(s) proposed installation.
§ 123-27 FIRE PREVENTION § 123-28
119:225

ARTICLE V
Prohibited Activities Within Floodplain Areas
§ 123-29. Enumeration of prohibited activities.
The following activities are strictly prohibited within any identified
floodplain area:
A. Hospitals;
B. Nursing/retirement homes;
C. Jails or prisons; and/or
D. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
§ 123-29 FIRE PREVENTION § 123-29
119:227

ARTICLE VI
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 123-30. Changes not required.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 123-31 shall apply.
§ 123-31. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any increase in
BFE.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within AE Area/District without floodway that would, together with all
other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 PA Code, as
amended and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or latest revisions
thereof.
§ 123-30 FIRE PREVENTION § 123-31
119:229

ARTICLE VII
Variances
§ 123-32. Grant of variance permitted.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Borough of Kutztown may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 123-33. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing
Board of the Borough of Kutztown in accordance with the procedures
contained in § 123-15 and the following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any Floodway Area/District that would cause
any increase in the BFE.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway that
would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
(3) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated by Article V, Prohibited Activities, or to § 123-25,
Development which may endanger human life.
(4) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(5) In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board of the Borough
of Kutztown shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and
safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare and to achieve the objectives of this
chapter.
(6) Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board of the
Borough of Kutztown shall notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(7) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board
of the Borough of Kutztown shall consider, at a minimum, the
following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
§ 123-32 FIRE PREVENTION § 123-33
119:231
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will neither result in an
unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public
expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(8) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Borough of Kutztown. In addition, a report of
all variances granted during the year shall be included in the
annual report to FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual-chance flood.
§ 123-33 KUTZTOWN CODE § 123-33
119:232
ARTICLE VIII
Definitions
§ 123-34. Interpretation.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 123-35. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE or ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the
same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to,
the principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
"one-percent-annual-chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
BUILDING PERMIT — An official document or certificate issued by the
authority having jurisdiction over performance of a specific entity relating
to a building or structure.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officer or other designated
authority charged with the enforcement of this chapter, including the
issuance of a building permit; also known as the "Floodplain Administrator."
CODE OFFICIAL — The official or the designated authority charged with
the administration of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
§ 123-34 FIRE PREVENTION § 123-35
119:233
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXISTING STRUCTURE — A structure for which the start of construction
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1,
1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing structure" may also be
referred to as "existing construction."
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
§ 123-35 KUTZTOWN CODE § 123-35
119:234
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
§ 123-35 FIRE PREVENTION § 123-35
119:235
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after May 15, 2012, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after May 2,
1977, and before May 15, 2012, is subject to the ordinance in effect at the
time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was within
180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent chance of occurring
each year). See also "base flood."
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated May 2,
1977, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated May 2, 1977,
whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with
the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis.
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections.
B.
§ 123-35 KUTZTOWN CODE § 123-35
119:236
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods, plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99 or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days from the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck.
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
D.
§ 123-35 FIRE PREVENTION § 123-35
119:237
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement.
This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions.
A.
Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement as defined in this chapter must
comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause
removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the
Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any
exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
B.
§ 123-35 KUTZTOWN CODE § 123-35
119:238
ARTICLE IX
When Effective
§ 123-36. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on July 3, 2012, and shall remain in force
until modified, amended or rescinded by the Borough of Kutztown, Berks
County, Pennsylvania.
§ 123-36 FIRE PREVENTION § 123-36
119:239
Chapter 135
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing License Appeals Board — See Ch. 12,
Art. II.
Construction Code — See Ch. 75.
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 107.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 136.
Plumbing — See Ch. 163.
§ 135-1. Purpose; history; short title; authority.
§ 135-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter and the policy of the Borough
of Kutztown, in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the Borough of Kutztown, to establish standards
governing the rights and obligations of owner and occupants relating to
the letting of certain dwelling units in the Borough of Kutztown. It is
also the policy of the Borough of Kutztown that owner and occupants
share responsibility for obeying applicable laws adopted to protect and
promote public health, safety and welfare, including, but not limited to,
fire prevention and property maintenance codes. As a means to those
ends, this chapter provides for a system of inspections and issuance and
renewal of housing licenses, and sets penalties for violations. A
substantial portion of the dwellings in the Borough of Kutztown are
rental units and a large portion of the dwellings which are not owneroccupied
are let to students attending Kutztown University. This
chapter shall be liberally construed and applied to promote its purposes
and policies.
B. History. This chapter is an amendment and partial reenactment of the
previous Chapter 135, entitled "Housing Standards," of the Code of the
Borough of Kutztown, which codified the enactment originally adopted
as ordinance No. 15-1969 on November 11, 1969, as amended in its
entirety by Ordinance No. 7-1988, and by subsequent amendments.
C. Short title. This chapter shall be cited as the "Housing Standards" of the
Borough of Kutztown.
D. Authority. This chapter is enacted in accordance with the authority
contained in the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including,
but not limited to, Borough Code Sections 1202(6), 1202(21), 1202 (24)
and 1202(74).82
82.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46202, Subsections (6), (21), (24) and (74).
§ 123-36 KUTZTOWN CODE § 135-2
119:240
A. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this chapter:
AGENT — A person representing and acting on behalf of an owner.
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit occupied by one family and containing
at least one bathroom and separate eating and cooking facilities with
bath.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A one-family dwelling occupied by the owner
thereof (and his family, if applicable), portions of which building the
owner lets rooms for lodging.
CLOSED DCR — A closed DCR shall be a DCR as to which the owner or
agent:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any person specifically designated
as such by the Council of the Borough of Kutztown to enforce this
chapter, and shall include the duly authorized representatives of said
Code Enforcement Officer.
COMMON AREA — Any open area within a structure shared by
occupants or that the occupants have the right to share, including,
but not limited to, kitchens, bathrooms, living rooms, dining rooms,
attics, basements and any room used for parties, social events or the
congregation of people, excepting bedrooms.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT — Any form of conduct, action, incident or
behavior perpetrated, caused or permitted by any occupant or visitor
of a regulated unit that is so loud, untimely (as to hour of the day),
offensive, riotous or that otherwise disturbs other persons of
reasonable sensibility in their peaceful enjoyment of their premises
such that a report is made to police and/or to the Code Enforcement
Officer complaining of such conduct, action, incident or behavior. It
With respect to a Level 1 DCR, responds by complying with the
procedures set forth in § 135-6E(3) of this chapter within 10
business days of receipt of a written notice of a Level 1 DCR.
(1)
With respect to a Level 2 DCR, responds by complying with the
procedures set forth in § 135-6E(4) of this chapter within 20
business days of receipt of a written notice of a Level 2 DCR,
and the Code Enforcement Officer has made a determination that
the remedial plan proposed by the owner or agent pursuant to
§ 135-6E(4) has been performed by the owner or agent in all
material respects. The owner or agent may request the Code
Enforcement Officer to make such determination at the time of
approval of the remedial plan or at any time thereafter. An owner
or agent shall not be deemed to have failed to substantially perform
a remedial plan as a result of the refusal of any judicial authority
to order the eviction of any occupant, so long as the owner or
agent has diligently pursued any eviction proposed in the owner
or agent's remedial plan by appropriate legal proceedings to the
Court of Common Pleas.
(2)
§ 135-2 FIRE PREVENTION § 135-2
119:241
is not necessary that such conduct, action, incident or behavior
constitutes a criminal offense, nor that criminal charges be filed against
any person in order for a person to have perpetrated, caused or
permitted the commission of disruptive conduct, as defined herein;
provided, however, that no disruptive conduct shall be deemed to have
occurred unless the Code Enforcement Officer or police shall
investigate and make a determination that such did occur, and keep
written records, including a disruptive conduct report, of such
occurrence.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT OR DCR — A Level 1 DCR and/or a
Level 2 DCR, as the context may require.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT LEVEL 1 OR LEVEL 1 DCR — A
written report of disruptive conduct on a form to be prescribed therefor,
in accordance with § 135-5 of this chapter, to be completed by the Code
Enforcement Officer or police officer, as the case may be, who actually
investigates an alleged incident of disruptive conduct and which shall
be maintained by the Code Enforcement Officer. Disruptive conduct
reports shall be separate from any other action taken by the police and
shall be considered public documents. A DCR shall be deemed a Level
1 DCR when no criminal citation or prosecution is issued in response
to the disruptive conduct and other legal action in the judicial system
is not pursued by the Borough Police Department or Code Enforcement
Officer.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT LEVEL 2 OR LEVEL 2 DCR — A
written report of disruptive conduct on a form to be prescribed therefor,
in accordance with § 135-5 of this chapter, to be completed by the
police officer who actually investigates an alleged incident of disruptive
conduct and which shall be maintained by the Code Enforcement
Officer. A DCR shall be deemed a Level 2 DCR when the disruptive
conduct results in the issuance of an actual criminal citation, a criminal
offense is actually charged or other legal action is pursued in the
judicial system by the police or Code Enforcement Officer. A Level 2
DCR may also be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer as provided
in §§ 135-7C and 135-6E(3) of this chapter. Level 2 DCR's shall be
those DCR's in which owner and occupants shall accrue penalties, if
applicable, under this chapter.
DWELLING — Any building or structure (except temporary housing)
which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or
sleeping by human occupants.
DWELLING UNIT — Any group of rooms located within a dwelling
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living or sleeping.
FAMILY — As used in this chapter, the term "family" shall be defined as:
One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or other
decree of legal custody living together as a single housekeeping
unit and using cooking facilities and certain rooms in common;
(1)
§ 135-2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 135-2
119:242
FORMAL WARNING — The warning described in § 135-10C(1) of this
chapter.
GUEST — A person on the premises with actual or implied consent of
an occupant, who is not an occupant.
HOUSING LICENSE — The license issued to the owner or agent of
regulated units under this chapter, which is required for the lawful
letting and occupancy of regulated units.
HOUSING LICENSE APPEALS BOARD — The Housing License Appeals
Board established pursuant to Article II of Chapter 12 of the Code of
the Borough of Kutztown.
LET, LETTING, LEASE, RENT, RENTING, RENTAL OR WORDS OF
SIMILAR MEANING — The act of permitting a unit to be used to
provide a living arrangement for one or more persons not the ownerof-
record thereof, whether or not for compensation.[Amended
4-17-2007 by Ord. No. 5-2007]
LICENSE YEAR — As used in this chapter, the term "license year" shall
mean August 1 of any year through July 31 of the succeeding year.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units.
NONRENEWAL — The nonrenewal described in § 135-10C(2) of this
chapter.
OCCUPANT — Any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking
or eating in a unit.
OPEN DCR — A DCR which has been issued and has not become a
closed DCR.
OWNER — Any person who, individually, jointly or severally with
others, shall have legal or equitable title to or have any other legal or
beneficial interest in any unit, whether or not such person occupies the
unit or any part thereof.
Not more than three persons unrelated, as set forth in Subsection
(1) above, living together as a single housekeeping unit and using
cooking facilities and certain rooms in common; provided, however,
that no related dependent of such unrelated persons shall be
counted in determining the number of unrelated persons living
together; or
(2)
More than three unrelated handicapped persons living
permanently together as a single housekeeping unit and using
cooking facilities and certain rooms in common; provided, however,
that such persons shall be under the supervision of a
nonhandicapped resident of the dwelling and provided, further,
that the dwelling is owned and operated by a Pennsylvania
nonprofit corporation.
(3)
§ 135-2 FIRE PREVENTION § 135-2
119:243
PERFORMANCE CODES — All codes of the Borough of Kutztown, and
specifically: Chapter 136 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown,
entitled "Property Maintenance," adopting the International Property
Maintenance Code of 2003, as such chapter is amended from time to
time; Chapter 225 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown, entitled
"Zoning," as such chapter is amended from time to time; Chapter 185
of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown, entitled "Solid Waste," and
Chapter 119 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown, entitled "Fire
Prevention," as such chapters are amended from time to time.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, corporation, company,
association, partnership, trust, agent or other entity. When referring
to occupancy or maximum dwelling unit occupancy pursuant to this
chapter, person shall refer only to an individual.
POLICE — The Police Department of the Borough of Kutztown,
established pursuant to Chapter 38 of the Code of the Borough of
Kutztown, or any properly authorized member or officer thereof or any
other law enforcement agency having jurisdiction within the Borough
of Kutztown.
PREMISES — Any lot, tract or parcel of real property in the Borough
of Kutztown, including the land and all buildings and appurtenant
structures or appurtenant elements, on which one or more regulated
units are located.
REASONABLE NOTICE — In the case of nonemergency notice, five
business days' advance notice by United States first class mail.
Reasonable notice in emergency situations shall be determined in
accordance with § 135-9C of this chapter.
REGULATED UNIT — Any unit subject to regulation under this chapter.
REMEDIAL PLAN — The plan required to be filed by the owner or agent
pursuant to § 135-6E(4) of this chapter.
RENTED ROOM — A room which is let and which is occupied by
persons who share certain facilities in common with the owner and/or
with other occupants of the dwelling, boardinghouse, rooming house or
multiple dwelling in which the let housing is located.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any parent of, legal guardian of or other adult
legally responsible for any minor individual (under 18 years of age) who
would be considered an occupant for purposes of this chapter. All minor
occupants shall provide the name of the responsible party to the owner
or agent of the regulated unit at the time of the entry into a particular
lease or rental agreement, and the owner or agent shall provide this
information to the Borough.
REVOCATION — The revocation described in § 135-10C(4) of this
chapter.
ROOMING HOUSE — A building, other than a fraternity house, sorority
house, hotel or a motel, in which building the owner provides rooms for
lodging of individuals.
§ 135-2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 135-2
119:244
§ 135-3. Housing licenses.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
rooming house forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be
used for living or sleeping purposes.
SUSPENSION — The suspension described in § 135-10C(3) of this
chapter.
UNIT — Any apartment, rented room, rooming unit, boardinghouse,
rooming house, multiple dwelling or other dwelling unit or dwelling, or
any room or portion thereof that is offered for let.
B. Word usage.
(1) Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "multiple
dwelling," "boardinghouse," "rented room," "rooming house,"
"rooming unit," "apartment," "regulated unit," "unit," and
"premises" are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as
though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof."
(2) Tense, gender and number. Words used in the present tense include
the future; words used in the masculine gender include the
feminine and the neuter; the singular number includes the plural,
and the plural the singular.
A. Application.
(1) No person shall operate or let to another for occupancy any unit,
unless such person shall first apply for and obtain annually a
housing license issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(2) No housing license shall be issued or renewed unless such
applicant designates in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer
the name of said owner's agent for the receipt of service of notice of
violation of the provisions of this chapter and for service of process
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and accurately and
truthfully provides all of the information required by § 135-5 and
Subsections A, B, C and D of § 135-6 of this chapter.
(3) This chapter shall not apply to a unit which is let during any license
year for one or more periods of time, provided no such period
exceeds 10 continuous days.
B. Housing licenses shall be issued for the period of one license year. Upon
expiration of any housing license, a new housing license shall be
required for a further period of one license year.
C. The Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall allow owner or agents
who are required to obtain housing licenses under this chapter to
obtain such new housing licenses for 1/2 of the fee for the prescribed
housing license when the application is received by the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer on or after February 1 of any year. Housing
§ 135-2 FIRE PREVENTION § 135-3
119:245
licenses for less than the full license year will not be issued at the
beginning of a license year. All housing licenses shall have as their
termination date the 31st day of July next occurring.
D. Every housing license issued under this chapter shall be maintained in
the regulated unit and shall be posted in a conspicuous location in the
entryway of every licensed regulated unit in such a way so as to
minimize tampering and removal and in such a way that it may be seen
at all times.
E. For the purpose of determining the number of units or rooms and the
maximum number of occupants of a regulated unit to be included in a
housing license, the following shall apply:
(1) Any apartment or room occupied as a dwelling unit by the owner of
a boardinghouse shall be excluded from the total number of units
or rooms.
(2) All buildings which are owned by the same person and which are
under the same roof or connected by breezeways, passageways or
similar connecting facilities or which are constructed upon
contiguous sites and operated and managed as one complex of
units may be combined to determine the total number of units or
rooms.
F. Each housing license issued shall set forth the maximum number of
occupants permitted to occupy the regulated unit, determined by
reference to and in accordance with the Performance Codes.
G. Housing licenses shall not be transferable in the event of a change in
ownership of the regulated unit.
H. Housing permits or licenses previously issued and applications
previously filed under the previous enactment of Chapter 135 of the
Code of the Borough of Kutztown are not invalidated by the provisions
of this chapter and shall be treated as if the same had been issued or
filed under this chapter.
I. No housing license shall be issued until the regulated unit and the
premises upon which the regulated unit is located have been inspected
by the Code Enforcement Officer and the regulated unit and the
proposed use thereof have been found to be in compliance with the
Performance Codes; provided, however, that no inspection shall be
required prior to the issuance of a housing license, the application for
which is made by the owner of the regulated unit within 90 days after
becoming the owner of the premises and so long as there is not
outstanding in the records of the Code Enforcement Officer any
unresolved violations or inspection requests pertaining to the regulated
unit. If any deficiencies as set forth under Chapter 136 of the Code of
the Borough of Kutztown, entitled "Property Maintenance," are
detected during inspection, no housing license shall be issued until all
§ 135-3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 135-3
119:246
§ 135-4. Fees.
such deficiencies are corrected, as confirmed by subsequent
inspections by the Code Enforcement Officer.
A. The Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown may, by resolution,
adopt from time to time fees and charges applicable to this chapter, for
inclusion as part of Chapter A231 of the Code of the Borough of
Kutztown. Such fees and charges may include, but are not limited to,
the following:
(1) The amount of the annual fee for a license year to be paid at the
time of filing of an application for a housing license pursuant to
§ 135-3 of this chapter.
(2) Any owner or agent who fails to renew an expired housing license
within 10 days after the expiration date of the housing license shall,
in addition to the fines provided for in § 135-10A and B of this
chapter, be subject to a fee of $25 for each and every additional tenday
period or part thereof during which the expired housing license
is not renewed and the regulated unit continues to be used for
purposes subject to regulation under this chapter.
(3) Fees to be imposed for failure to permit an inspection at a time
agreed upon in advance by the owner or agent and the Code
Enforcement Officer and confirmed in writing by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(4) Such other fees and charges as are deemed to be necessary or
appropriate.
B. No fee shall be required in connection with the issuance of a housing
license in the following circumstances:
(1) When the owner or agent is the United States government, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Borough of Kutztown or any
agency thereof.
(2) When the owner or agent is a nonindividual person organized and
operated exclusively for religious, charitable and/or educational
purposes, and provided further, that no part of the net earnings or
profits of any such nonindividual person shall inure to the benefit of
any officer, director, shareholder, partner, trustee, beneficiary or
principal thereof or to any other person, other than solely for
charitable purposes.
(3) Every owner or agent thereof who rents or leases a regulated unit,
as defined in this chapter, to the mother, father or child of the
owner shall be exempt from the payment of the housing license fee,
if the owner of the regulated unit is primarily responsible for the
care of the tenant occupying the regulated unit, said tenant being
the owner’s mother, father or child, and said tenant suffers from
§ 135-3 FIRE PREVENTION § 135-4
119:247
§ 135-5. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce the provisions
of this chapter and may propose rules, regulations and forms necessary
for its administration. Such rules, regulations and forms shall not be in
conflict with this chapter or any other chapters and shall be submitted
to the Council of the Borough of Kutztown for approval by resolution. If
the rules, regulations and forms so submitted to Council are approved by
Council, the same shall be filed in the office of the Code Enforcement Officer
of the Borough of Kutztown and in the office of the Secretary of the Borough
of Kutztown. Such rules, regulations and forms as may be adopted shall then
be deemed to be a part of this chapter and to have the same effect as this
chapter.83
§ 135-6. Responsibilities of owner and agents.
some infirmity, mental handicap or disability which is the proximate
reason for the owner’s responsibility for the tenant. This exemption
shall not apply to a dependent child attending an institution of posthigh
school education and residing in a regulated unit owned by his
or her parent. [Added 9-16-2008 by Ord. No. 11-2008]
(a) An owner of a regulated unit desiring such an exemption shall
make application to the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Borough of Kutztown for said exemption. The owner shall
provide a brief explanation of the tenant’s relationship to the
owner and the tenant’s infirmity, mental health issue or
disability to the Code Enforcement Officer.
(b) In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer denies the
owner or agent’s request for an exemption pursuant to this
section, the owner or agent thereof may appeal the Code
Enforcement Officer’s ruling to the Housing License Appeals
Board.
C. The housing license fee exemptions contained in Subsection B above
shall, nevertheless, not exempt such owner or agents from compliance
with this chapter and the Performance Codes and all other applicable
rules and regulations issued in connection with it, unless specifically
otherwise exempted herein.
A. Whosoever, as owner or agent, lets or holds out to let any unit subject to
the provisions of this chapter shall supply the Code Enforcement Officer
with the following information:
(1) The street address and mailing address (if different from the street
address) of each such unit.
83.Editor's Note: Said forms, as adopted by Res. No. 20-2005, are on file in the Borough
offices.
§ 135-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 135-6
119:248
(2) The number of units for let in any dwelling, rooming house or
boardinghouse, which number shall in no event exceed the number
of such units provided for on the housing license issued to the
owner or agent on behalf of the owner.
(3) The name of each person occupying each such unit.
(4) The period of time for which the unit is let.
B. Such information shall be supplied to the Code Enforcement Officer
annually in writing, in such form as may be prescribed in accordance
with § 135-5 of this chapter. Such information pertaining to any unit
shall also be supplied in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer, in
such form as may be prescribed in accordance with § 135-9 of this
chapter, within 10 days after the occupancy of any such unit changes.
C. The owner of any unit required to obtain a housing license pursuant to
the requirements of this chapter shall designate a person to serve as
the owner's agent. The owner or agent shall be legally responsible for
operating each unit in compliance with all provisions of this chapter
and the Performance Codes, the housing license issued relating to the
maximum number of persons that may occupy such regulated unit and
all other provisions of this chapter. The agent shall reside either within
such premises where the regulated unit is located or within a five-mile
radius thereof. The owner of the regulated unit may also serve as the
agent if such owner resides within the premises where the regulated
unit is located or within a five-mile radius of the territorial boundary of
the Borough of Kutztown or if such owner resides more than five miles
from the territorial boundary of the Borough of Kutztown but has a
place of business within the Borough of Kutztown and is present at the
place of business during normal business hours. For purposes of this
section, "normal business hours" shall mean the period of time
commencing at 9:00 a.m. and continuing through and including 5:00
p.m., prevailing time, Monday through Friday, except legal holidays,
throughout the calendar year. In the absence of the owner, the agent
shall be responsible for providing access to such regulated unit so as to
permit the Code Enforcement Officer to make inspections thereof. The
agent shall be an individual not less than 18 years of age. The name,
address and phone numbers of the owner or agent shall be posted in a
conspicuous place within the regulated unit.
D. The owner of any regulated unit shall, within 10 days of becoming such
owner and thereafter annually, furnish in writing the following
information to the occupants and to the Code Enforcement Officer:
(1) The name, home and business addresses and home and business
phone numbers of each owner.
(2) The name, home and business addresses and home and business
phone numbers of the agent.
E. Regulation of occupant conduct and activities.
§ 135-6 FIRE PREVENTION § 135-6
119:249
(1) The owner or agent of any regulated unit shall be responsible for
assuring that the conduct and activities of the occupants of every
regulated unit which the owner or agent owns in the Borough of
Kutztown, which conduct or activity takes place at such regulated
unit or its premises, is in compliance with this chapter. In order to
achieve those ends, every owner or agent of a regulated unit shall
take appropriate contractual and enforcement action to cause the
conduct and activities of the occupants thereof to comply with this
chapter.
(2) Where an owner or agent does not manage the use of common
areas of the premises and the behavior of occupants and guests in
the common areas by appropriate contractual and enforcement
action, the owner or agent shall be directly responsible for the
behavior of occupants and guests in common areas of the premises
as if the owner or agent were an occupant.
(3) Within 10 business days after the receipt of written notice from the
Code Enforcement Officer that a Level 1 DCR has been issued as a
result of an occupant of a regulated unit having violated a provision
of this chapter, the owner or agent shall notify the occupants of the
regulated unit of the issuance of the Level 1 DCR and its contents,
utilizing a form letter provided with such written notice, such form
letter to be in such form as is approved in accordance with § 135-5
of this chapter. A copy of such form letter issued by the owner or
agent to the occupants shall be delivered to the Code Enforcement
Officer within such 10 business day period. Failure by the owner or
agent to comply with the foregoing provisions of this § 135-6E(3)
shall constitute sufficient grounds for the issuance to the owner or
agent by the Code Enforcement Officer of a Level 2 DCR.
(4) Remedial plan.
(a) Within 20 business days after the receipt of a written notice
from the Code Enforcement Officer that a Level 2 DCR has
been issued as a result of an occupant or owner or agent of a
regulated unit having violated a provision of this chapter, the
owner or agent shall file with the Code Enforcement Officer a
remedial plan, on such form as is approved in accordance with
§ 135-5 of this chapter, which shall, at a minimum, state the
following:
[1] Set forth what action the owner or agent has taken to
remedy the violation;
[2] What steps the owner or agent has taken to prevent a
reoccurrence of the violation; and
[3] Set forth specific steps the owner or agent will take in the
future if the violation reoccurs.
§ 135-6 KUTZTOWN CODE § 135-6
119:250
(b) The Code Enforcement Officer shall review the report, and, if
the Code Enforcement Officer determines that adequate steps
have been taken or are proposed to be taken and the remedial
plan is adequate to address future violations, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall, within 10 business days after
receipt of the remedial plan, approve the remedial plan or
reject the remedial plan and issue written notice thereof to the
owner or agent. The owner or agent shall, on his or her
initiative, enforce the remedial plan. Failure to enforce the
remedial plan diligently shall be a violation of this chapter. If
the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the remedial
plan should not be approved and rejects the remedial plan,
written notice thereof shall be issued to the owner or agent,
and within 10 business days of receiving such notice the owner
or agent shall refile a remedial plan which addresses the
deficiencies found by the Code Enforcement Officer. The owner
or agent may appeal the Code Enforcement Officer's rejection
of the remedial plan to the Housing License Appeals Board.
(5) This section shall not be construed as diminishing or relieving, in
any way, the responsibility of the occupants, responsible parties
and/or their guests for their conduct or activity, nor shall it be
construed as an assignment, transfer or projection over or onto any
owner or agent of any responsibility of the occupants, any
responsible parties or their guests for their conduct or activity, nor
shall it be construed as an assignment, transfer or projection over
or onto any owner or agent of any responsibility or liability which
occupants or their guests may have as a result of their conduct or
activity under any private cause of action, civil or criminal
enforcement proceeding or criminal law; nor shall this section be
construed so as to require an owner or agent to indemnify or
defend the occupants, any responsible party or their guests when
any such action or proceeding is brought against the occupant
based upon the occupant's conduct or activity, nor to, in and of
itself, impose any liability for negligence based upon any act or
omission of the owner or agent. Nothing herein is intended to
impose any additional civil/criminal liability upon owner or agent
other than that which is imposed by other laws or judicial decisions
or that which is imposed by this chapter. This section is not
intended to, nor shall its effect be, to limit any other enforcement
remedies which may be available to the Borough of Kutztown
against an owner or agent, occupant or guest thereof.
F. Agreements for regulated units. Regulated units shall only be let
pursuant to an agreement or lease.
(1) All rental agreements and/or leases for the Rental of regulated
units shall be in writing and shall be supplemented with the
addendum attached hereto as Appendix A.84 No oral agreements or
leases and no oral modifications of agreements or leases are
§ 135-6 FIRE PREVENTION § 135-6
119:251
permitted. All information required to be given to occupants and
responsible parties by the owner or agent, pursuant to this chapter
and/or the Pennsylvania Landlord and Tenant Act,85 shall be
furnished before the signing of the agreement or lease. The owner
or agent shall provide the occupant and responsible party with
copies of the rental agreement or lease and addendum upon
execution. Appendix A shall not be submitted to the Borough of
Kutztown unless requested pursuant to § 135-6(F)(4) hereinbelow.
(2) The owner or agent and the occupant may include in a lease or
rental agreement terms and conditions not prohibited by this
chapter or other applicable ordinances, regulations and laws,
including compensation, if applicable, term of the lease or rental
agreement and other provisions governing the rights and
obligations of the parties. Except as otherwise provided for in this
chapter, no lease or rental agreement may provide that the
occupant or owner agrees to waive or forego rights or remedies
provided under this chapter. Any provision prohibited by this
§ 135-6F included in a lease or rental agreement shall be void and
unenforceable.
(3) Commencing with the effective date of this chapter, this chapter
shall be available for purchase in the Borough Code Office and may
be made available by other appropriate means, such as
electronically at the Borough's website. Where a rental agreement
or lease has been entered into prior to the effective date of this
chapter, the owner or agent shall make the occupant aware of this
chapter within 60 days thereafter.
(4) The owner or agent shall secure a written acknowledgement from
the occupant at the time of signing the rental agreement or lease
that the occupant has received the information required by this
chapter on a form approved in accordance with § 135-5 of this
chapter and which shall contain an acknowledgement of receipt of
the information by the occupant and any responsible party. Upon
request by the Code Enforcement Officer, the owner or agent,
within 10 business days of the request, shall furnish to the Code
Enforcement Officer copies of said acknowledgement and/or copies
of the rental agreement(s) or lease(s) the owner or agent has
entered into for regulated units.
G. The owner or agent shall ensure that the regulated unit and the
premises upon which the regulated unit is located comply at all times
with the Performance Codes.
H. The owner or agent shall reply promptly to reasonable complaints and
inquiries from occupants.
84.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
85.Editor's Note: See 68 P.S. § 250.101 et seq.
§ 135-6 KUTZTOWN CODE § 135-6
119:252
§ 135-7. Responsibilities of occupants; disruptive conduct.
I. The owner or agent shall comply with all provisions of the Landlord and
Tenant Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
J. All notices served upon the owner or agent by the Code Enforcement
Officer or the Housing License Appeals Board shall be conspicuously
posted by the owner or agent within the unit to which the notice
applies.
A. Peaceful enjoyment. The occupants of a regulated unit shall each
conduct themselves and require other persons, including, but not
limited to, guests on the premises and within the regulated unit with
the occupant's consent and consistent with agreements and leases in
effect, to conduct themselves in a manner that will not disturb the
peaceful enjoyment of the premises by others, and that will not disturb
the peaceful enjoyment of adjacent or nearby premises by the persons
occupying the same.
B. Illegal activities. The occupant shall not engage in, nor tolerate nor
permit others on the premises to engage in, any conduct declared
illegal under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code (18 Pa. C.S.A. § 101 et seq.)
or Liquor Code (47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.) or the Controlled Substance,
Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act (35 P.S. § 780-101 et seq.).
C. Disruptive conduct. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
occupant or any other person to engage in disruptive conduct, as
defined in this chapter, on the premises of a regulated unit. When police
or the Code Enforcement Officer investigate an alleged incident of
disruptive conduct occurring in or about a regulated unit, the
investigating officer shall complete a disruptive conduct report upon a
finding that the reported incident did, in his or her judgment, constitute
disruptive conduct as defined in this chapter. Each disruptive conduct
report shall be conspicuously marked by the investigating officer to
indicate whether it is a Level 1 DCR or a Level 2 DCR. The information
filled in on said report shall include, to the extent possible, the identity
or identities of the alleged perpetrator(s) of the disruptive conduct and
all other obtainable information, including the factual basis for the
disruptive conduct, as requested on the prescribed form. Where the
police make such investigation, said police officer shall then submit the
completed disruptive conduct report to the Code Enforcement Officer. A
Level 2 DCR may also be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer for
the reasons set forth in § 135-6E(3) of this chapter. In all cases, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall mail a copy of the disruptive conduct
report to the owner or agent of the regulated unit in question within five
business days of the occurrence of the allege disruptive conduct,
notwithstanding whether the person making the investigation on behalf
of the Borough of Kutztown is the Code Enforcement Officer or the
police. The Code Enforcement Officer may also mail a copy of the
disruptive conduct report to other appropriate parties.
§ 135-6 FIRE PREVENTION § 135-7
119:253
§ 135-8. Inspections.
D. In addition to all obligations imposed upon occupants by this chapter,
occupants of regulated units shall comply with all other applicable
codes and ordinances of the Borough of Kutztown and all other
applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the United
States of America.
E. The occupant of a regulated unit shall comply with all lawful provisions
of the rental agreement and/or lease entered into between owner or
agent and occupant.
F. The occupant of a regulated unit shall not intentionally cause, nor
permit nor tolerate others to cause, damage to the premises. Conduct
which results in damages to a property may be considered a violation of
this chapter and the Performance Codes and may be subject to a
disruptive conduct report.
G. The occupant of a regulated unit shall permit inspections of the
premises by the Code Enforcement Officer at reasonable times and
upon reasonable notice.
H. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to remove or deface
any notice, placard or document required to be posted within a
regulated unit, and it shall be unlawful for any person to occupy the
regulated unit unless all notices, placards and documents are posted as
required by this chapter.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the occupancy, use and/or compliance with the
Code of the Borough of Kutztown of any unit, and the premises thereof,
located within the Borough of Kutztown in order to safeguard the health
and safety of the occupants thereof and the general public. The Code
Enforcement Officer is further authorized to enter for the purposes of
examining and surveying all areas of any such unit with reasonable
notice and at reasonable times, which shall be deemed to be between
8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. prevailing time. Every owner or agent or
occupant of any such unit shall extend the Code Enforcement Officer
access to such unit for the purpose of making any inspection,
examination or survey thereof.
B. In the event that permission to enter any such unit for the purpose of
inspection is denied, the Code Enforcement Officer, upon showing of
probable cause that a violation of this chapter, any other provision of
the Code of the Borough of Kutztown, or any other ordinance of the
Borough of Kutztown has occurred, or that any order, notice, rule or
regulation issued or made in connection therewith has been violated,
may apply to the appropriate authority for a search warrant to enter
and inspect the premises.
§ 135-7 KUTZTOWN CODE § 135-8
119:254
§ 135-9. Enforcement; service of notices and orders; appeals.
C. A warrant shall not be required when entry is by permission or at the
request of the occupant.
A. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer believes, or has cause to
believe, that there is a violation of the provisions of this chapter or any
rule or regulation adopted pursuant to it, including by virtue of the
issuance of a DCR, the Code Enforcement Officer shall give notice of
the violation. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing and shall state the place and manner of the violation,
including the address of the specific regulated unit in question.
(2) State the nature or condition of the violation.
(3) State the determination of the investigating officer with respect to
the violation, including a conspicuous statement that a DCR is
either a Level 1 DCR or a Level 2 DCR.
(4) State the name of the person who he deems responsible therefor,
together with name of the owner of the premises involved and any
agent for the owner.
(5) State the date of the notice and the number of days allowed for
compliance with it.
(6) Be served upon the owner or agent of the premises involved, any
relevant responsible party appearing in the records of the Code
Enforcement Officer, and all other persons, if any, named in the
notice pursuant to Subsection A(4) of this section, and any notice
served upon the owner or agent and such other person or persons,
if any, personally or by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, sent to the last known address of such owner or agent
and such other person or persons, if any, and by posting the same in
a conspicuous place in or about the premises affected by the notice,
shall be deemed to have been properly served.
(7) The notice may, in addition, contain any other pertinent data,
information or statements which the Code Enforcement Officer
deems appropriate.
B. Any person affected by a notice of violation, determination or order
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer or affected by any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter (except the establishment
of fees pursuant to § 135-4 of this chapter) may appeal said notice,
determination, order, rule or regulation to the Housing License Appeals
Board. The timing, form and substance of such appeal shall be in
compliance with the requirements of Article II of Chapter 12 of the
Code of the Borough of Kutztown. The filing of such appeal shall not
serve as a supersedeas, except in the case of appeals of enforcement or
disciplinary action pursuant to § 135-10C(3) and (4) of this chapter.
§ 135-8 FIRE PREVENTION § 135-9
119:255
§ 135-10. Violations and penalties.
C. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that an emergency
condition exists as a result of a violation of this chapter which requires
immediate action to protect public health and/or safety, he may issue an
order declaring the existence of such emergency and requiring action
to be taken to remedy such emergency. Such emergency order shall be
effective immediately upon issuance. Any person to whom such order is
directed shall comply therewith immediately. However, such person
may file an appeal to the Housing License Appeals Board as
hereinabove provided for in § 135-9B of this chapter, but such appeal
shall not serve as a supersedeas to the Code Enforcement Officer's
emergency order.
D. Notwithstanding the requirements of § 135-9A of this chapter, if the
Code Enforcement Officer determines or has reason to believe that a
violation of this chapter exists concerning the health, safety, welfare or
occupancy of the premises, he may proceed, without giving the notice
provided for in § 135-9A of this chapter, to cause a citation to be issued
to the owner or agent and, in the case of violations involving occupancy
as more particularly set forth in § 135-6E of this chapter, to the agent of
the unit which the Code Enforcement Officer determines or has
information to reasonably believe is in violation of the provisions of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to it.
E. The housing license required by this chapter, when issued to the owner
or agent on behalf of the owner of a unit, shall constitute notice to such
owner or agent of the maximum number of persons that may lawfully
occupy the unit and the residential uses therefor.
F. Any owner or agent who, upon receipt of a housing license, disputes the
use and/or maximum occupancy listed thereon, may request in writing
a meeting concerning such use and/or occupancy with the Code
Enforcement Officer, such request to be filed within 10 business days
after receipt of the housing license. If the dispute cannot be resolved in
the aforesaid meeting with the Code Enforcement Officer, the owner or
agent may appeal to the Housing License Appeals Board as provided for
in Article II of Chapter 12 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown, in
which case such appeal period shall commence on the day of such
meeting; provided, however, that any appeal of any aspect of a housing
license which sets forth a determination pursuant to Chapter 225,
entitled "Zoning," of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown, shall be
appealed in the manner set forth in said Chapter 225.
A. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter or any order, notice, rule or regulation issued or made in
connection herewith shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not
less than $50 nor more than $1,000 and, in default of the payment
thereof, shall undergo imprisonment in the Berks County Prison for a
period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 135-9 KUTZTOWN CODE § 135-10
119:256
B. Every violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense, and
each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. In the
event that any regulated unit is occupied by more than the maximum
number of persons allowed by and listed on the housing license issued
in accordance with § 135-3 of this chapter, then each day of occupancy
by each such person in excess of such maximum number of occupants
shall constitute a separate offense under this chapter. It shall be a
violation of this chapter to let a unit subject to regulation under this
chapter after nonrenewal, suspension and/or revocation of a housing
license pursuant to § 135-10C through F of this chapter.
C. Disciplinary actions. Subject to the procedure set forth in § 135-9A of
this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer may initiate the disciplinary
actions set forth in this § 135-10C against an owner or agent with
respect to a regulated unit for any of the reasons set forth in § 135-10D
of this chapter:
(1) Formal warning: the formal written notification of at least one
violation of this chapter. Upon satisfactory compliance with this
chapter and any conditions imposed by the Code Enforcement
Officer and/or the Housing License Appeals Board, formal warnings
shall be removed when the owner applies for housing license
renewal when required by this chapter.
(2) Nonrenewal: the denial of the privilege to apply for housing license
renewal for a regulated unit after expiration of the license term.
The owner shall be permitted to maintain occupants in the
regulated unit in question until the end of the current license term
but the Code Enforcement Officer shall not accept applications for
renewal of the housing license until the expiration of the time set
by the Housing License Appeals Board.
(3) Suspension: the immediate loss of the privilege to let the regulated
unit for a period of time set by the Code Enforcement Officer or the
Housing License Appeals Board. The Code Enforcement Officer
may suspend only until the matter can be scheduled for the next
possible Housing License Appeals Board meeting, at which meeting
the Housing License Appeals Board shall consider the propriety of
the suspension and set the period of time for its duration, if it is to
be continued. The owner or agent, after the expiration of the
suspension period, may apply for housing license renewal for the
regulated unit without the need to show cause why the owner or
agent's privilege to apply for an housing license should be
reinstated. Upon suspension, the owner or agent shall take
immediate steps to evict the occupants of the regulated unit in
question.
(4) Revocation: The immediate loss of the privilege to let the regulated
unit for a period of time set by the Code Enforcement Officer or the
Housing License Appeals Board and the loss of the privilege to
apply for renewal of the housing license at the expiration of said
§ 135-10 FIRE PREVENTION § 135-10
119:257
time period. The Code Enforcement Officer may revoke only until
the matter can be scheduled for the next possible Housing License
Appeals Board meeting, at which meeting the Housing License
Appeals Board shall consider the propriety of the revocation and
set the period of time for its duration, if it is to be continued.
Upon the loss of the privilege to let, the owner or agent shall take
immediate steps to evict the occupants of the regulated unit in
question.
D. Grounds for imposing discipline.
(1) Actions subject to discipline.
(a) Any of the following may subject an owner to discipline as
provided for in § 135-10C:
[1] Failure to abate a violation of the Performance Codes and/
or this chapter applicable to the premises within the time
directed by the Code Enforcement Officer.
[2] Refusal to permit the inspection of the premises by the
Code Enforcement Officer as required by this chapter.
[3] Failure to take such actions as may be required or
necessary to cause any open DCR to be deemed a closed
DCR by the Code Enforcement Officer by the end of the
license year in which the DCR was issued, including, but
not limited to, failure to respond to notice of a DCR or
failure to perform an approved remedial plan in any
material respect. Such failure occurring with respect to
one or more open DCRs in each of two license years, when
at least two of such open DCRs were issued within a period
of 60 months, shall without more, constitute sufficient
grounds for nonrenewal as of the commencement of a
license year and/or for suspension or revocation. If a DCR
is received within the last 20 business days of the license
year, the owner shall have 20 business days from the date
of receipt of the notice of the issuance of DCR to cause the
Open DCR to be deemed a closed DCR, regardless of the
date of the end of the license year.
[4] Failure to remedy and prevent further violations of this
chapter, other than with respect to disruptive conduct.
(b) For purposes of this subsection, there need be no criminal
conviction before a violation can be found to exist.
(2) No discipline involving nonrenewal, suspension and/or revocation
shall be permitted unless the discipline has been preceded by the
issuance of a formal warning involving the same grounds for
discipline at least 10 days prior to the taking of the new disciplinary
action. A formal warning shall be issued when there exists one or
§ 135-10 KUTZTOWN CODE § 135-10
119:258
more open DCRs in each of two license years and at least two of
such open DCRs were issued within a period of 60 months.
E. Criteria for application of discipline.
(1) With respect to the issuance of a Level 2 DCR, the Code
Enforcement Officer, when considering which of the discipline
options to utilize as set forth in this section, and the Housing
License Appeals Board, when deciding any discipline matter under
this section, shall consider the following:
(a) The effect of the violation on the health, safety and welfare of
the occupants of the regulated unit and other residents of the
premises.
(b) The effect of the violation on the neighborhood.
(c) Whether the owner has a record of prior violations of this
chapter and other ordinances of the Borough of Kutztown or
has received notices of violations as provided for in this
chapter, whether or not related to the regulated units in
question. In this regard, no closed DCR (and any enforcement
actions related thereto) shall be considered.
(d) Whether the owner has been subject to prior discipline under
this chapter. In this regard, no closed DCR (and any
enforcement actions related thereto) shall be considered. The
prior issuance of a formal warning in connection with the open
DCR shall be considered.
(e) The effect of disciplinary action on the occupants.
(f) The action taken by the owner or agent to remedy the violation
and to prevent future violations, including any approved
remedial plan submitted by the owner or agent in response to a
Level 2 DCR with respect to any open DCR.
(g) The suitability of the policies and rental agreement or lease
terms employed by the owner or agent to manage the
regulated unit to enable the owner or agent to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
(h) When an open Level 2 DCR is under consideration, the nature
of the associated criminal enforcement and/or other legal
actions, the nature of the owner's violations of this chapter and
the degree of the owner's unresponsiveness.
(2) In addition to applying discipline as set forth in this section relating
to a Level 2 DCR, the Code Enforcement Officer may recommend
and the Housing License Appeals Board may impose upon the
existing license [or subsequent license(s) with respect to the
Performance Codes] reasonable conditions related to the regulated
§ 135-10 FIRE PREVENTION § 135-10
119:259
unit in question for the purpose of fulfilling the goals of this
chapter.
F. Procedure for formal warning, Nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of
license.
(1) Following a determination that grounds exist for a formal warning
or for nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of a housing license,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner or agent of the
action to be taken and the reason therefor. Such notification shall
be in writing, addressed to the owner or agent, and shall contain
the following information:
(a) The address and identification of the particular regulated
unit(s) affected.
(b) A description of the violation which has been found to exist.
(c) A statement that the owner or agent will receive a formal
warning, or that the housing license for the affected regulated
unit(s) will be subject to suspension or revocation or
nonrenewal for the next license year beginning August 1. In
the case of a suspension or revocation, the notice shall state
the date upon which such suspension or revocation will
commence, and in the case of a suspension the notice shall also
state the duration of the suspension.
(d) A statement that, due to the nonrenewal, suspension or
revocation (as the case may be) of the housing license, the
owner or agent or any person acting on the owner's behalf is
prohibited from letting or permitting occupancy of the affected
regulated unit(s) from and during the period said disciplinary
action is in effect.
(e) A statement informing the owner or agent of the owner's right
to appeal the decision to issue a formal warning or to subject
the housing license in question to suspension, revocation or
nonrenewal to the Housing License Appeals Board, as provided
in this chapter.
(2) The procedures applicable to this § 135-10F shall be the same
those of § 135-9A of this chapter, excepting § 135-9A(1) and (2).
G. In addition to any other remedy, discipline or enforcement action
provided for in this chapter, the Borough of Kutztown may enforce this
chapter by pursuing a civil action, including an action in equity or other
equitable injunctive relief, including therewith:
(1) The decision by the Borough of Kutztown to pursue any such action
shall not be deemed an election of remedy so as to preclude other
enforcement, disciplinary or other remedies available to the
Borough of Kutztown for enforcement of this chapter; and
§ 135-10 KUTZTOWN CODE § 135-10
119:260
§ 135-11. Severability.
It is the intention of Borough Council that each separate provision of this
chapter shall be independent of all other provisions herein, and it is further
the intention of Borough Council that if any of the provisions of this chapter
be declared to be invalid, all of the other provisions hereof shall remain
valid and in force.
§ 135-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or resolutions, or parts of ordinances or resolutions, insofar
as they are inconsistent with this chapter, including but not limited to any
portions of Chapter 135 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown in effect on
the date of enactment of this chapter, are hereby repealed.
Chapter 136
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction Code — See Ch. 75.
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 107.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 119.
Housing standards — See Ch. 135.
Plumbing — See Ch. 163.
(2) In the Borough of Kutztown's pursuit of any such action, a prima
facie showing of a violation of any final, unappealable enforcement
or disciplinary action or final, unappealable Housing License
Appeals Board order shall be sufficient to satisfy any legal
requirement that the Borough of Kutztown demonstrate
irreparable harm as a prerequisite to obtaining injunctive relief.
H. Any discipline or enforcement action imposed under this chapter which
is in any manner related to violations of the Performance Codes shall be
applicable to the premises in question notwithstanding any change in
the owner or its ownership of the premises. Any discipline or
enforcement action imposed under this chapter with respect to any
premises for reasons other than violation of any of the Performance
Codes shall terminate, with respect to its applicability to such premises,
upon any conveyance and/or change in owner or its ownership of the
premises to a new owner, provided that:
(1) The new owner, if an individual, shall not be related to the existing
owner by blood, marriage, adoption or other decree of legal
custody; and
(2) The new owner, if a legal entity (other than an individual), shall not
be owned, wholly or partially, by the existing owner.
§ 135-10 FIRE PREVENTION § 135-12
119:261
§ 136-1. Adoption of standards.
The 2009 International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), published by
the International Code Council, is hereby adopted and amended, and shall
be cited as the "Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of Kutztown."
§ 136-2. Amendments to standards
A. In IPMC § 101.1, insert "Borough of Kutztown."
B. Amend IPMC § 101.2 to add the following:
Exception: The provisions of this Code shall not apply to the interior
of any owner-occupied one-family dwelling unit.
C. In IPMC § 102.3 amend "International Zoning Code" to read "Chapter
225 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown."
D. Delete IPMC § 103.5 in its entirety.
E. Delete IPMC § 106.4 in its entirety and restate as follows:
§ 106.4 Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter or any order, notice, rule or regulation
issued or made in connection herewith and served in accordance
with Section 107 shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not
less than $50 nor more than $1,000 and, in default of the payment
of same thereof, shall undergo imprisonment in the Berks County
Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. Every violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense,
and each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
F. Delete IPMC § 107.2(1) and restate as follows: "Be in writing to the
property owner and occupants, if applicable."
G. Delete IPMC § 107.3(2) and restate as follows: "Sent by certified U.S.
mail addressed to the last known address; or"
H. Delete IPMC § 111.1 and restate as follows:
Any person affected by notice of violation, determination or order
issued by the Building Code Official or his/her designee or affected
by any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this Chapter 136 may
appeal upon notice, determination, order, rule or regulation to the
Borough of Kutztown Appeals Board in compliance with the
requirements of Chapter 12 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 135-12 KUTZTOWN CODE § 136-2
119:262
I. In IPMC § 112.4 insert monetary sums of "$50" and "$1,000,"
respectively, in final line of section.
J. In IPMC § 302.3 add a new subsection as follows:
§ 302.3.1 All parking areas shall be cleared of snow and/or ice when
the depth of same is six inches or more in depth to the extent necessary
to provide the required off-street parking available during non-snow
and/or ice conditions within 48 hours after accumulation of the aforenoted
snow and/or ice.
K. In IPMC § 304.3, delete and restate the first sentence as follows:
"Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to
be plainly legible and visible from the street, road or alley to the front
and to the rear of the property."
L. In IPMC § 304.14, insert "May 1 to October 15."
M. Amend IPMC § 305.3 by adding the following: "All kitchen, bathroom
and toilet room floors shall have a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent and
easily cleanable surface."
N. In IPMC § 308.1, add a second sentence as follows: "The exterior
property and premises shall be free from the storage of any automotive
parts, equipment or accessories, including specifically tires, batteries
and/or any other item that is determined to pose a hazard to the public
health, safety and welfare."
O. In IPMC Section 308, add new subsections as follows:
308.2.3 Tires and mechanical parts and equipment. Any items
intended for the construction and/or repair of automobiles, lawn
equipment and other similar machinery shall be stored in a fully
enclosed building.
308.4 Prohibited furniture. Interior-type furniture which would be
adversely affected by the elements and susceptible to infestation by
insects, rats or other vermin is prohibited from being placed or stored
on the exterior of any property. Such prohibited furniture shall include,
but not limited to, upholstered couches, chairs, davenports, beds,
divans and/or other fabric-covered article not designed or intended for
use on the exterior of the property. Damaged or deteriorated furniture
or motor vehicle seats, including interior and exterior furniture or any
portion of a motor vehicle designed to accommodate seating for a
driver, passenger or both, which presents a hazard to the public by
virtue of its state or condition of disrepair. The following conditions are
examples of a state or condition of disrepair:
(a) Rusted and/or jagged metal or exposed springs on or projecting
from an above-described item(s);
(b) Broken or missing legs, arms or other structural or supporting
components which would make the above-described item(s)
unstable or unsafe.
§ 136-2 FIRE PREVENTION § 136-2
119:263
P. In IPMC § 403.2, add the following: "Any bathroom and/or toilet room
which is renovated or installed after the date of this chapter shall be
equipped with a mechanical ventilation system vented to the exterior of
the building."
Q. Restate IPMC § 404.4.1 as follows:
Every living room shall contain at least 120 square feet (11.2 square
meters) and every bedroom shall contain at least 70 square feet (6.5
square meters) for the first occupant and an additional 50 square feet
(4.6 square meters) for each additional occupant.
R. In IPMC § 404.4.3, add the following:
Exception: One-family dwelling units.
S. In IPMC § 404.5, add the following: "Dwelling units shall not be
occupied by more persons than as stated on the housing license."
T. Delete IPMC § 404.6.1 and restate as follows:
Efficiency apartments may be occupied by no more than two persons,
and shall have a minimum floor space of 250 square feet for the initial
person and 100 additional square feet for a second person.
U. Delete IPMC § 404.6.4 in its entirety.
V. Delete IPMC § 502.2 and restate as follows:
Boarding and rooming houses. Every boarding and/or rooming
house shall have at least one water closet, one lavatory, and one
bathtub and/or shower which shall be provided for each five persons
who reside therein.
W. In IPMC § 602.3, insert "October 1 to April 30."
X. In IPMC § 602.4, insert "October 1 to April 30."
Y. In IPMC Section 604 add a new subsection as follows:
604.4. The electrical means of disconnect and overload devices for
all occupied buildings and dwelling units shall be accessible to the
occupants of such buildings and dwelling units at all times.
Z. Delete IPMC § 605.2 and restate as follows:
§ 136-2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 136-2
119:264
Chapter 138
INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 119.
Housing standards — See Ch. 135.
Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling unit shall contain
a minimum of three separate and remote duplex receptacles outlets.
Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle
or ground-fault circuit interrupter receptacle. Every bathroom and/or
toilet room shall contain at least one ground-fault circuit interrupter
receptacle; if more than one receptacle is provided, all shall be groundfault
circuit interrupter protected. All kitchen receptacles which serve
counter tops shall be ground-fault circuit interrupter protected. All
nonresidential spaces shall contain ground-fault circuit interrupter in
compliance with § 210.8(B) of the National Electrical Code.
AA. In IPMC Section 605, add a new subsection as follows:
605.4. Every hallway within a residential building shall be equipped
with one grounded-type or ground-fault circuit interrupter receptacle.
BB. In IPMC Section 704, add new subsections as follows:
704.5. Maintenance. The occupant(s) of each dwelling unit shall
notify the property owner and/or agent in the event a smoke detector
needs to be repaired and/or replaced. The owner of each dwelling unit
shall provide new batteries for smoke detectors at least annually. It
shall be the responsibility of the occupant to insure that the batteries
are not removed for any reason. Any one tampering or interfering with
the operation or effectiveness of a smoke detector shall be considered
to be in violation of this Code and shall be subject to the penalties as
set forth in Section 106.4 of this Code.
704.6. Fire extinguishers.
704.6.1 Fire extinguishers shall be provided and maintained as
required by Section 906.2 of the International Fire Code and Chapter
10 of the National Fire Codes.
704.6.2 Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a minimum of one
2-A, 10-B.C. fire extinguisher and shall be inspected yearly as required
by Section 704.6.1 of this Code.
§ 136-2 INSURANCE § 136-2
138:265

ARTICLE I
Fire Loss Claims
[Adopted 7-11-1995 as Ord. No. 7-1995]
§ 138-1. Requirements for payment of claim.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insurer")
doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim of
a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the borough
where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all
policies exceeds seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.) unless the
insurer is furnished by the borough's Treasurer with a certificate pursuant
to § 508(b) of the Act86 and unless there is compliance with the procedure
set forth in § 508(c) and (d) of the Act.
§ 138-2. Procedure for recouping unpaid municipal claims and
expenses.
A. Where there are delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user
charges against the property damaged by fire ("municipal claims"), or
there are expenses which the borough has incurred as costs for the
removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure on the
property (collectively, "municipal expenses"), the Manager of the
borough shall immediately render a certificate and bill for such
municipal claims and municipal expenses, if he has not already done so.
B. Upon written request of the named insured specifying the tax
description of the property, the name and address of the insurer and the
date of receipt by the insurer of a loss report of the claim, the Treasurer
shall furnish, within fourteen (14) working days after the request, to the
insurer, a certificate (or at his discretion an oral notification confirmed
in writing) either:
(1) Stating that there are no unpaid municipal claims or municipal
expenses against the property; or
(2) Specifying the nature and amount of such municipal claims or
municipal expenses, accompanied by a statement for such
amounts. Taxes, assessments, penalties and user charges shall be
deemed delinquent for this purpose, if a lien could have been filed
for such claims under applicable law.
C. Upon receipt of a certificate and bill pursuant to Subsection B(2), the
insurer shall transfer to the Borough Treasurer an amount from the
insurance proceeds sufficient to pay such sums prior to making
payment to the names insured, subject to the provisions of § 138-3
hereof.
86.Editor's Note: The Insurance Company Law of 1921, as amended by Act 98 of 1992 and Act
93 of 1994. See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 138-1 INSURANCE § 138-3
138:267
§ 138-3. Payment of claim to insured; claims exceeding aggregate
limits of liability.
When all municipal claims and municipal expenses have been paid pursuant
to § 138-2, or where the Treasurer has issued a certificate described in
§ 138-2B(1) indicating that there are no municipal claims or municipal
expenses against the property, the insurer shall pay the claim of the named
insured; provided, however, that if the loss agreed upon by the named
insured and the insurer equals or exceeds sixty percent (60%) of the
aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building or
structure, the following procedures must be followed:
A. The insurer shall transfer, from the insurance proceeds to the Borough
Treasurer, in the aggregate, two thousand dollars ($2,000.) for each
fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.) of such claim or fraction thereof.
B. If at the time a loss report is submitted by the insured such insured has
submitted to the insurer, with a copy to the borough, a contractor's
signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure in an amount less than the amount
calculated under the foregoing formula, the insurer shall transfer to the
Borough Treasurer, from the insurance proceeds, the amount specified
in the estimate. If there is more than one (1) insurer, the transfer of
proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all insurers insuring the
building or other structure.
C. Upon receipt of the above-described portion of the insurance proceeds,
the Borough Treasurer shall do the following:
(1) Place the proceeds in a separate fund to be used solely as security
against the total municipal expenses anticipated by the borough to
be required in removing, repairing or securing the building or
structure. Such costs shall include, without limitation, all
engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the borough
in connection with such removal, repair or securing or any
proceedings related thereto.
(2) Mail to the named insured, at the address received from the
insurer, a notice that the proceeds have been received by the
borough and that the procedures enacted herein shall be followed.
(3) After the transfer of the proceeds into the separate fund, the named
insured may submit to the borough a contractor's signed estimate
of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or other
structure, in which event the Borough Treasurer shall, if such
estimate is deemed by the Treasurer to be reasonable, return to the
insured the amount of the funds transferred to the borough in
excess of that required to pay the municipal expenses already
incurred, provided that the borough has not commenced to remove,
repair or secure the building or other structure, in which case the
borough will complete the work and deduct the municipal expenses
incurred from such separate fund.
§ 138-3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 138-3
138:268
§ 138-4. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or insurer who violates the
provisions of this Article or who shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements hereof shall be liable, upon summary conviction, to a fine and
penalty of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.), which fine and penalty may be collected by suit
or summary proceeding.
(4) Pay to the Borough Manager, for reimbursement to the borough
general fund, the amount of the municipal expenses paid by the
borough.
(5) Pay the remaining balance in the separate fund (without interest)
to the named insured upon receipt of a certificate issued by the
Code Enforcement Officer of the borough (or other applicable
official of the borough) that the repair, removal or securing of the
building or other structure has been completed in accordance with
all applicable ordinances, codes and regulations of the borough.
D. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to limit the ability of the
borough to recover any deficiency in the amount of municipal claims or
municipal expenses recoverable pursuant to this Article or recoverable
under any other state law, or other ordinance, or to insurance proceeds,
by an action at law or equity to enforce the ordinances, codes and
regulations of the borough or to enter into an agreement with the
named insured with regard to such other disposition of the proceeds as
the borough may deem reasonable.
§ 138-3 INSURANCE § 138-4
138:269
Chapter 155
PARADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 38.
Police jurisdiction — See Ch. 39.
Public dances — See Ch. 99.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 158.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 212.
§ 155-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "parade Regulations"
of the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 155-2. Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority of the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including, but not limited to, Subsections
(1), (6), (17), (20) and (74) of § 1202 of the Pennsylvania Borough Code (53
P.S. § 46202).
§ 155-3. Purpose and intent.
A. The Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown (the "Council") has
determined that parades are a pleasant, enjoyable and entertaining
event for all members of the community. The Council recognizes,
however, that because such events can draw substantial spectator
crowds, proper planning, including but not limited to, essential
emergency and police services, public restroom facilities, solid waste
removal and traffic control are essential to maintaining the health,
safety and welfare of all persons involved. The Borough of Kutztown
has, in the past, been the host of a Halloween parade drawing
spectators from a wide region that numbered four or five times larger
than the population of the Borough. The enormity of the crowd of
spectators as well as parade participants stressed the resources of the
Kutztown Borough Police Department beyond its capacity to promptly
respond and react to emergency situations. Consequently, it was
necessary to enlist the aid of other law enforcement agencies to provide
assistance in maintaining peace and good order.
B. The Borough Council recognizes the right of the people to peaceably
assemble and speak freely as guaranteed by the United States
Constitution and the Pennsylvania Constitution. The Borough Council,
through the enactment of this chapter, intends only to establish
regulations requiring organizers of parades in our streets to properly
estimate and plan for the public health and safety aspects of proposed
§ 138-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 155-3
155:270
§ 155-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICATION — The form approved by the Borough Council and available
at the Borough Hall that a person seeking a parade permit must complete
and submit to the Borough Secretary.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The Borough Manager of the Borough of
Kutztown, or his or her designee.
BOROUGH SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Borough of Kutztown, or
his or her designee.
CARTWAY — The portion of a street right-of-way, paved or unpaved,
intended for vehicular use.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Kutztown Borough Police
Department, or his or her designee.
PARADE — Any march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession
of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any public street, requiring
the closing of the cartway to regular vehicular traffic, in the Borough. The
term "parade" shall refer to each of a "standard parade," a "special parade"
and a "spontaneous parade", unless the context requires otherwise.
PARADE SERVICES FEE — The amount of money to be paid by a person
seeking a parade permit necessary to pay the Borough's cost in providing
pedestrian and vehicular traffic control, solid waste/refuse removal, and
public sanitation/restroom services, determined in accordance with § 155-6
of this chapter, but excluding police and related public safety costs which
are not directly related to pedestrian and vehicular traffic control. For a
spontaneous parade, this fee shall be a maximum of $1,500.
PARTICIPANT — persons standing, attending, observing, marching,
walking, running, exhibiting, parading or otherwise participating in a
parade (either on foot or while riding on an animal, vehicle, float or other
objects) in the cartway. The term "participant" includes vendors,
concessionaires, amusement ride operators, and all other persons
performing services or engaging in activities within the cartway in
connection with the parade.
PERMIT — The permit required by this chapter to be issued prior to the
conduct of a parade. Such permit shall be in such form as the Borough
parades within the Borough and to pay for certain additional public
safety costs associated with and incidental to such an event.
C. This chapter does not regulate the use of public sidewalks and public
park areas.
§ 155-3 PARADES § 155-4
155:271
Council shall determine by resolution from time to time and shall set forth
the criteria with which the permittee is required to comply.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, trust, organization or entity of any kind.
SPECIAL PARADE — Any parade having a total number of participants
exceeding 2,000.
SPONTANEOUS PARADE — A parade permitted by § 155-6F of this chapter.
SPONTANEOUS PARADE DISTRICT — East Main street bordering
Kutztown Public Park between South Laurel street and Kemp Street.
STANDARD PARADE — Any parade other than a special parade or a
spontaneous parade.
STREET — Shall have the meaning set forth in Section 111(6) of the
Pennsylvania Borough Code,87 as amended from time to time, with respect
to all such public streets.
§ 155-5. Permit required; exceptions.
A. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade
unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the Borough
Secretary.
B. Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Funeral and wedding processions, provided the same do not
require closure of any street to vehicular traffic.
(2) Elementary, middle school and high school students going to and
from school classes or participating in educational or school
sponsored activities, provided that such conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school
authorities.
(3) Traffic control involving closing of a street cartway with the
approval of the Borough Council.
(4) Local merchants desiring to close a street cartway or a portion of a
street cartway for a street or craft fair, but only after receipt of
Borough Council permission and Borough Council approval of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic control plans for such closure.
(5) Local youth organizations desiring to close a portion of a street for
an educational activity, provided such activity is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the adult leaders of such
organization, but only after receipt of Borough Council permission
and Borough Council approval of pedestrian and vehicular traffic
control plans for such closure.
87.See 53 P.S. § 45111, Subsection (6).
§ 155-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 155-6
155:272
§ 155-6. Permit applications; planning process.
A. Form. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file a
completed parade permit application with the Borough Secretary. All
applications must be submitted on a parade permit application
("application") in the form approved from time to time by resolution of
the Borough Council. The application form shall provide a location on
which the applicant shall specify whether the request for a permit seeks
to hold a special parade, a standard parade or a spontaneous parade.
B. Information. The application submitted by a person seeking a parade
permit shall, at a minimum, provide the following information, with
specificity, in order to address criteria essential to the interests of
public safety:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade.
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and
responsible heads of such organizations.
(3) The signature of the person or authorized head of organization
seeking to conduct such a parade who will be responsible for its
conduct.
(4) A sketch of the proposed parade route showing the starting and
ending points, the width of the streets to be traversed, the
designation of the streets (state highway, borough ordained, etc.),
the width of the public right-of-way along all streets on the
proposed parade route, and the existence of any public sidewalks,
if any, along the proposed parade route.
(5) The proposed date and time of the parade.
(6) The estimated number of participants, including the number and
type of vehicles and/or animals.
(7) The proposed staging area and the time of assembly at the staging
area.
(8) The method by which participants will be returned to the staging
area from the point of termination.
(9) The estimated number of spectators.
(10) The proposed parking areas for participants.
(11) The number and location of emergency vehicle break points in or
crossing the proposed parade route.
§ 155-6 PARADES § 155-6
155:273
(12) The number and location of fire-fighting personnel and fire
suppression devices to be stationed along or in the vicinity of the
proposed parade route.
(13) The number and location of waste receptacles along the proposed
parade route and the means of removal and disposal of refuse and
solid waste accumulating in the public streets and rights-of-way
during the parade.
(14) The number and location of restroom facilities to be made available
to the public and located along the proposed parade route,
including through the use of portable facilities.
(15) The proposed number of Borough Police Department and other
public safety personnel and traffic control devices necessary to
control pedestrian and vehicular traffic along and across the
proposed parade route.
(16) The proposed number of police personnel and traffic control
devices necessary to reroute traffic around the proposed parade
route.
(17) The number and location of public volunteers essential to the
conduct of the parade.
(18) The number and proposed location of food vendors, amusement
rides, and amusement games, and the name, address and
telephone number of the operators of the same.
C. Review procedure for standard parade.
(1) Filing period. applications for standard parade permits must be
submitted to the Borough Secretary no more than 180 days nor less
than 10 days prior to the proposed date of the standard parade.
Thereafter, the Borough Secretary shall forward copies of the
standard parade application to the Borough Council, the Borough
Manager and the Chief of Police.
(2) Consultation. The person seeking a standard parade permit shall,
upon the reasonable request of the Borough Manager and/or Chief
of Police, respond to any questions which may be posed by the
Borough Manager or Chief of Police regarding the content of the
application, in order to complete any incomplete items or to clarify
any information which is unclear.
(3) Borough Manager review and decision. The Borough Manager
shall, in consultation with the Chief of Police, review the needs of
the Kutztown Borough Police Department and/or other law
enforcement agencies to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the Borough, the standard parade participants and
the standard parade spectators, and shall review, specifically,
whether the application fulfills the requirements of the criteria set
§ 155-6 KUTZTOWN CODE § 155-6
155:274
forth in § 155-6E of this chapter. In addition, the Borough Manager
and the Chief of Police shall determine the costs incident to
providing such traffic control and sanitation services as are
reasonably necessary to accommodate the standard parade
participants and the estimated number of spectators in a manner
consistent with the maintenance of public health and safety. The
Borough Manager and Chief of Police shall prepare an itemized
bill of costs reflecting only those costs and expenses which may
be included as a part of the parade services fee. The Borough
Manager shall, within 72 hours after the filing of the standard
parade application, make a finding as to whether the standard
parade application has adequately addressed all criteria set forth
in § 155-6E.
D. Review procedure for special parade.
(1) Filing period. applications for special parade permits must be
submitted to the Borough Secretary no more than 180 days nor less
than 60 days prior to the proposed date of the special parade.
Thereafter, the Borough Secretary shall forward copies of the
special parade application to the Borough Council and place the
person seeking a special parade permit on the agenda for a future,
regularly scheduled Borough Council meeting for a special parade
application presentation in accordance with Subsection D(4) below.
(2) Consultation. The person seeking a special parade permit shall,
within no less than 15 days nor more than 30 days after the filing of
the special parade application, meet with the Borough Manager
and Chief of Police on no less than one occasion to review the
application and discuss any issues which may arise.
(3) Reports. Within 15 days of the meeting with a person seeking a
special parade permit, the Chief of Police shall prepare and submit
a written report to the Borough Secretary addressing the needs of
the Kutztown Borough Police Department and/or other law
enforcement agencies to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the Borough, the special parade participants, and
the special parade spectators, including, specifically, whether the
special parade application fulfills the requirements of the criteria
set forth in Subsection E(1), (4), (5), (6) and (7). Within 15 days of
the meeting with a person seeking a special parade permit, the
Borough Manager shall prepare and submit a written report to the
Borough Secretary addressing whether the special parade
application fulfills the requirements of the criteria set forth in
Subsection E(2) and (3). The Borough Secretary shall immediately
deliver such reports to the Borough Council. In addition, the Chief
of Police and the Borough Manager shall determine the costs
incident to providing such traffic control and sanitation services as
are reasonably necessary to accommodate the special parade
participants and the estimated number of spectators in a manner
consistent with the maintenance of public health and safety. The
§ 155-6 PARADES § 155-6
155:275
Chief of Police and the Borough Manager shall prepare an itemized
bill of costs and deliver a report of the same to the Borough
Council within such fifteen-day period, reflecting only those costs
and expenses which may be included as a part of the parade
services fee.
(4) Borough Council review and decision. Upon receipt of the reports
required by § 155-6D(3), the Borough Secretary shall place such
reports and the application on the agenda of the next regularly
scheduled Borough Council meeting, at which meeting the reports
and application shall be reviewed and approved or denied or a
revised application may be required. A person filing an application
shall be present or have an authorized representative present at
such meeting. If the Borough Council is not satisfied that such
application adequately addresses the criteria set forth in § 155-6E,
the Borough Council may direct that the person filing the
application meet with the Borough Manager and Chief of Police to
address the issues raised by the Borough Council. Thereafter, the
person filing the application may present a revised application to
the Borough Council at the next regularly scheduled Borough
Council meeting for approval or denial at such meeting.
E. Review criteria. In reviewing an application, the Borough shall not
consider the political or social affiliation of the person filing the
application, nor that of the parade participants, nor the content of the
message the parade will convey. Rather, the Borough shall use the
following criteria in evaluating an application before making a decision
to issue or refuse to issue a parade permit:
(1) Whether the application has adequately addressed the availability
of parking for participants.
(2) Whether the application has adequately addressed the number and
location of waste receptacles and the removal and disposal of solid
waste and refuse.
(3) Whether the application has adequately addressed the number and
location of restroom facilities to be made available to the public and
to be provided at the sole cost and expense of the applicant.
(4) Whether the application has adequately addressed the number and
location of emergency vehicle break points in or crossing the
proposed parade route.
(5) Whether the application has adequately addressed the number and
location of fire-fighting personnel and fire suppression devices to
be stationed along or in the vicinity of the proposed parade route.
(6) Whether the application has adequately addressed the number of
police personnel and traffic control devices necessary to control
pedestrian and vehicular traffic along and across the proposed
parade route.
§ 155-6 KUTZTOWN CODE § 155-6
155:276
§ 155-7. Action on application for parade permit.
(7) Whether the application has adequately addressed the number of
police personnel and traffic control devices necessary to reroute
traffic around the proposed parade route.
(8) Whether the proposed date, time and/or route of the proposed
parade present specific dangers with respect to pedestrian and
vehicular traffic control, emergency access and/or public safety,
resulting from the unique conditions present at such date and time
and/or along such route, which cannot be reasonably be remedied
unless a modification is made to the proposed date, time and/or
route. If the Borough finds that such specific dangers are
presented, it must then offer alternative dates, times and routes for
the proposed parade.
(9) In determining the parade services fee, the Borough shall
determine the amount of the projected cost to the Borough for the
proposed parade which is attributable to the cost of providing
pedestrian and vehicular traffic control, solid waste/refuse removal
and public sanitation/restroom services, but excluding police and
related public safety costs which are not directly related to
pedestrian and vehicular traffic control.
F. Spontaneous parades.
(1) Application. persons or organizations who seek to hold a parade
after the latest date permitted for filing a permit application
required to conduct such a parade under § 155-6C or D (10 days
prior to the proposed date for a standard parade and 60 days prior
to the proposed date for a special parade) may apply for a permit to
hold a spontaneous parade. Such applicants must follow the
procedure set forth in § 155-6C for standard parade permits,
except that applications for spontaneous parade permits may be
filed less than 10 days prior to the proposed date of the parade.
(2) Consultation, review and decision. The process for consultation and
review of a permit application set forth in § 155-6C(2) through (3)
shall be followed in the case of a permit application for a
spontaneous parade; provided, however, that the Borough Manager
shall make a finding as to whether the spontaneous parade
application has adequately addressed all criteria set forth in
§ 155-6E within 24 hours after the filing of the permit application.
(3) Limitation on parade route. A spontaneous parade shall be limited
to the streets within the spontaneous parade district for no more
than four hours per twenty-four-hour period. Nothing in this
limitation shall prevent participants or attendees of a spontaneous
parade from using public sidewalks within or outside of the
spontaneous parade district or the public park during its
operational hours.
§ 155-6 PARADES § 155-7
155:277
§ 155-8. Payment of fees.
Before issuing a parade permit, the Borough Secretary shall insure that
the person to whom the parade permit is to be issued has paid the parade
services fee in full.
A. Issuance. After finding that an application has adequately addressed all
criteria, set forth in § 155-6E, the Borough Council or Borough
Manager, as required by § 155-6, shall determine the amount of the
parade services fee and direct the Borough Secretary to provide notice
of the approval to the applicant, prepare a parade permit and issue the
same to the applicant upon payment of the parade services fee. The
permit shall state whether it is for a special parade, standard parade, or
spontaneous parade.
B. Denial. An application shall be denied if a different parade or other
event has previously been issued a permit for the date requested by the
applicant requiring the closing of public streets and/or the need for
additional police and emergency services personnel; or the Borough
Council or Borough Manager, as required by § 155-6, fails to make the
finding required by § 155-7A of this chapter. If either such event occurs,
the Borough Secretary shall be directed to provide written notification
of such denial and the specific reasons therefor to the applicant.
C. Notice. In the case of a standard or spontaneous parade, the Borough
Secretary shall provide written notice of approval or denial of the
application within 24 hours after the approval or denial by the Borough
Manager. In the case of a special parade, the Borough Secretary shall
provide written notice of the approval or denial of the application within
72 hours after the approval or denial by the Borough Council. Such
written notice shall be provided to the person who filed the application
at the address as stated in the application.
D. Appeal of standard or spontaneous parade decision. If an applicant for a
standard or spontaneous parade believes that any aspect of the
Borough Manager's decision with respect to the application therefor is
incorrect or illegal, the applicant shall, within 10 days after issuance of
notice of the decision, file a written request with the Borough Secretary
for review of such decision by the Borough Council, stating with
specificity the reasons for the requested review. The Borough Council
shall review the Borough Manager's decision at a Borough Council
meeting, either regularly scheduled or specially scheduled within 10
days after receipt of such request, and shall hear the comments of the
applicant at such meeting. A final decision shall be rendered by the
Borough Council at such meeting. If the Borough Council does not
render a final decision on a request for review of the Borough
Manager's decision by such time that is 48 hours prior to the starting
time for the proposed parade, the request for review shall be deemed
denied.
§ 155-7 KUTZTOWN CODE § 155-9
155:278
§ 155-9. Public conduct during parades.
§ 155-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be guilty of a summary offense and be punished by a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000 and/or by imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 155-11. Duties of Chief of Police and Borough Manager.
A. Permit compliance. A person to whom a parade permit has been issued
hereunder shall comply with all permit directions, directions from
public safety officials and with all applicable laws.
B. Possession of permit. The person or authorized head of organization
who signed the application for a parade permit shall carry the parade
permit upon his or her person during the conduct of the parade.
C. Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede
or interfere with any parade or with any person, vehicle or animal
participating or used in a parade.
D. Driving through parades. Unless otherwise directed by a police officer
or other authorized emergency services officer, no person operating a
motor vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a
parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are
participating in a permitted parade.
E. Parking on parade route. The Chief of Police shall have the authority,
when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of
vehicles along a street, or part thereof, constituting a part of the route
of a parade for which a permit has been issued. The Chief of Police or
Borough Manager shall cause signs to be posted to such effect, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle
in violation thereof.
F. All persons involved in controlling pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic or
controlling any traffic control device in connection with any parade
must be police officers, fire police, or other persons having the training
required by Pennsylvania law for the direction and control of vehicular
traffic on streets.
A. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to meet with the person
requesting a parade permit to review the criteria established in
§ 155-6E. Thereafter, the Chief of Police shall prepare a written report
in accordance with § 155-6C or § 155-6D and shall appear before the
Borough Council at the meetings required by § 155-6D and respond to
any questions posed by the Borough Council. The Chief of Police shall
direct his subordinate officers to enforce this chapter in all respects,
arrest, cite and prosecute any person who, without a parade permit,
§ 155-9 PARADES § 155-11
155:279
§ 155-12. Revocation of permits.
§ 155-13. Temporary forbearance.
The Borough Council is aware that during its consideration of the
enactment of this chapter and while seeking public comment on its
enactment, citizens may have been planning one or more potential parades.
The Borough Council does not wish to abridge the rights of those persons
contemplating such events. The Borough has also begun public safety
preparations, in advance of the enactment of this chapter and in an effort
to anticipate applications for such parades. Accordingly, all applications
submitted for a special parade, as defined herein, shall be processed in
the same manner as a standard parade, as defined herein, with respect to
parades proposed to be held on or before November 20, 2003.
§ 155-14. Conflicts; repealer.
conducts, engages in or participates in a parade on the streets of the
Borough. The Chief of Police shall not make any final arrangements
financially obligating the Borough with any other law enforcement
agency for additional police protection unless and until a parade permit
has been issued.
B. It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager and Chief of Police to take
such action as may be necessary with respect to a standard parade for
which a permit is issued to safeguard the public safety, provide for
traffic control and to effectuate the criteria set forth in § 155-6E with
respect to such standard parade, without the need of further action of
the Borough Council.
A. The Borough Manager or the Chief of Police shall have the authority to
revoke a parade permit upon violation of the conditions or standards for
issuance as set forth in this chapter or when a public emergency arises
where the public safety resources required for that emergency are so
great that deployment of public safety services for the parade would
have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of
persons or property. The parade services fee shall be refunded only if a
parade permit is revoked 48 hours prior to the commencement of the
parade.
B. Within 10 days of the scheduled date of the parade, the person to whom
the parade permit has been issued shall cause an authorized
representative to meet with the Borough Manager and provide
sufficient assurance of compliance with the parade permit. If such
person cannot demonstrate compliance with such parade permit, the
Borough Manager may revoke such parade permit.
A. Conflicts. Whenever there is a difference between the specifications in
this chapter and those included elsewhere in the Code of the Borough of
Kutztown, the more stringent requirement shall apply.
§ 155-11 KUTZTOWN CODE § 155-14
155:280
§ 155-15. Severability.
It is the intention of the Council that each separate provision of this chapter
shall be independent of all other provisions herein and it is further the
intention of the Council that if any of the provisions of this chapter be
declared to be invalid, all other provisions hereof shall remain in full force
and effect.
§ 155-16. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective after enactment on the earliest date
permitted by law.
Chapter 156
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 96.
B. Repealer. All existing ordinances or parts of ordinances and provisions
of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown which are contrary to this
chapter are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this chapter
full force and effect.
§ 155-14 PARKS AND RECREATION § 155-16
156:281

ARTICLE I
Kutztown Borough Park
[Adopted 8-12-1966 as Ord. No. 12-1966]
§ 156-1. Title.
This Article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Kutztown Park
Code."
§ 156-2. Park designated.
The tract of land located in the southeastern part of the Borough of
Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania, and situate along the south side
of East Main Street in said borough and running in a southerly direction
therefrom, together with all additions which may hereafter be made to the
same, which tract of land is owned by the Borough of Kutztown, is hereby
established as a public park of said borough, to be designated "Kutztown
Borough Park" (hereinafter referred to as the "park").
§ 156-3. Hours of operation. [Amended 11-13-1973 by Ord. No.
11-1973; 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
The park shall be opened daily to the public between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 10:30 p.m., prevailing time; provided, however, that if in the opinion
of the Mayor of the Borough of Kutztown the closing of said park at a
time earlier than 10:30 p.m. prevailing time is necessary to protect the
safety, health, morals or general welfare of the citizens and residents of
the Borough of Kutztown or of the persons then in the park, said Mayor is
hereby empowered to order the closing of said park at a time earlier than
10:30 p.m. prevailing time. In the event that said Mayor shall exercise the
authority herein granted to him, said Mayor shall cause the police of the
Borough of Kutztown to immediately go upon the premises of the park and
notify all persons then in the park as to the time that the park shall be
closed. Except as hereinabove provided in this section or any other section
of this Article, at 10:30 p.m. prevailing time all activities in the park shall
cease, and all persons in the park shall leave as soon as possible thereafter;
provided, however, that in the event that the park is closed prior to 10:30
p.m. prevailing time in accordance with the authorization herein granted
to the Mayor of the Borough of Kutztown, all activities in the park shall
cease as soon as directed by the police of the Borough of Kutztown, and all
persons in the park shall leave as soon as possible thereafter. No persons
other than authorized employees or officials of the Borough of Kutztown
shall be in the park at any time between 10:30 p.m. prevailing time or any
other time the park is closed and 6:00 a.m. on the following morning.
§ 156-4. Group functions. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No.
12-1995]
No group shall hold or continue any function within the park after the
hour of 10:30 p.m. prevailing time and before the hour of 6:00 a.m., except
§ 156-1 PARKS AND RECREATION § 156-4
156:283
with the written permission of the Mayor of the Borough of Kutztown. Said
Mayor is hereby empowered to grant written permission to any person or
group desiring to hold such a function within the park area subsequent
to the hour of 10:30 p.m. prevailing time whenever, in the opinion of the
Mayor, the holding or continuing of such function will not adversely effect
the safety, health, morals or general welfare of the persons attending said
function or the safety, health, morals or general welfare of the citizens or
residents of the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 156-5. Designation of parking areas.
The Mayor of the Borough of Kutztown is hereby authorized and empowered
to designate parking areas within the park. The Borough Police are hereby
authorized and empowered to designate temporary parking areas within
the park, to temporarily close any road or roads within said park and to
otherwise regulate and direct the operation of vehicles and other modes of
transportation within said park. Whenever any road within said park has
been temporarily closed as hereinabove provided, such closed road shall not
be considered a road within the meaning of this Article, and no person shall
operate any vehicle or other mode of transportation upon the same while
said road is temporarily closed.
§ 156-6. Parking of vehicles.
No person shall park any vehicle within the park except in those places
which have been designated as either permanent or temporary parking
areas as hereinabove provided.
§ 156-7. Injury to plants and buildings prohibited.
No person shall injure, deface, remove, cut or damage any of the trees,
plants, shrubs, turf, buildings, structures, fixtures or any other property in
the Borough of Kutztown located within the park.
§ 156-8. Removal of certain fixtures prohibited.
No person shall remove any bench, seat or table from the park.
§ 156-9. Conduct.
No person shall conduct himself or herself within the park so as to annoy
any other person using the park for recreational purposes.
§ 156-10. Disposal of waste and garbage.
No person shall dispose of any waste or garbage in the park except in
receptacles designated for such purposes. All persons using the park shall
dispose of all waste and garbage left by them in such designated
receptacles.
§ 156-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 156-11
156:284
§ 156-11. Fires.
No person shall build, set or maintain any fire within the park except
fires for cooking purposes within properly constructed fire places or metal
braziers or charcoal grills. All fires built and maintained as hereinbefore
provided shall, nevertheless, be constantly attended by an individual at
least sixteen (16) years of age. Any person building or maintaining such
a fire shall, before leaving the area thereof, dispose of said fire by first
thoroughly quenching the same with water and then placing the quenched
coals or ashes remaining therefrom in a container within the park
designated for such purpose. No person shall throw, place or scatter fire
coals or ashes upon the ground or upon or against any tree, shrub or plant
or upon or against any building or other improvement within the park.
§ 156-12. Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
No person shall bring, cause to be brought, keep, have, drink or consume
any spirituous liquor or any intoxicating beverage of any kind, including
beer, into, onto or within the park, either for his own use or for the use of
any other person.
§ 156-13. Operation of vehicles.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle, bicycle or any other mode of
transportation within the park in such a manner as to disregard the rights
or safety of others or in such a manner so as to endanger any person or
property.
§ 156-14. Use of vehicles restricted to roads and parking areas.
[Amended 7-7-1981 by Ord. No. 8-198188]
Any person operating a motor vehicle, bicycle, motorized bicycle or any
other similar vehicle within the park shall drive such vehicle only upon
the roads located therein or upon a designated parking area; provided,
however, that this provision shall not apply to persons actually engaged
in duly authorized construction, maintenance or repair work within the
park. Nor shall this provision apply to any authorized person operating an
emergency vehicle during the performance of his or her official duties.89
§ 156-15. Use of spring riding toys.
No person over eight (8) years of age shall stand, sit, ride, play or otherwise
be upon any spring riding toy within the park. No more than one (1) person
under eight (8) years of age shall, at the same time, stand, sit, ride, play or
otherwise be upon any spring riding toy within the park at any one (1) time.
No person shall permit any child or other person over eight (8) years of age
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I
89.Editor's Note: Original Section 15, which prohibited riding a bicycle within twenty (20)
feet of a play area or upon an athletic field and which section immediately followed this
section, was repealed 7-7-1981 by Ord. No. 8-1981.
§ 156-11 PARKS AND RECREATION § 156-15
156:285
who is in such person's custody or control to stand, sit, ride, play or be upon
any spring riding toy within the park.
§ 156-16. Riding of horses.
No person shall ride a horse, pony, donkey, mule or the like within the park
except in connection with a public game or exhibition, and in such case
only when permission has first been obtained from the Mayor. The Mayor
is hereby empowered to grant special permission whenever such game or
exhibition will not adversely affect the safety, health or general welfare
of persons using the park and will not materially damage the park or the
buildings or improvements thereof.
§ 156-17. Dog control. [Amended 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 2-1992]
No person shall permit any dog or other domestic animal under his or
her control to urinate and defecate within any play area of the park as
defined in § 156-32 of this chapter or upon any baseball or any other athletic
field within said park. No dog shall be permitted in said park unless it is
effectively restrained by a chain or leash not exceeding six (6) feet in length.
§ 156-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-1-1975 by Ord. No.
4-1975; 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon
summary conviction before any District Justice, or any court upon hearing
or appeal, pay a fine or penalty of not less than fifty dollars ($50.) nor
more than six hundred dollars ($600.) and costs of prosecution for each and
every offense or, in default thereof, undergo imprisonment in Berks County
Prison for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, provided that each day's
violation of any of the provisions of this Article shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 156-15 KUTZTOWN CODE § 156-18
156:286
ARTICLE II
Recreational Areas
[Adopted 8-1-1978 as Ord. No. 12-1978]
§ 156-19. Power to designate.
The Council of the Borough of Kutztown may, from time to time, by
resolution, designate as a recreational area (hereinafter referred to as
a "recreational area") any real property either owned or leased by the
Borough of Kutztown, whether located within or without the corporate
limits of the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 156-20. Hours of operation. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No.
12-1995]
Every recreational area shall be opened daily to the public between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. prevailing time; provided, however, that
if in the opinion of the Mayor of the Borough of Kutztown the closing of
said recreational area at a time earlier than 10:30 p.m. prevailing time is
necessary to protect the safety, health, morals or general welfare of the
citizens and residents of the Borough of Kutztown or of the persons then in
the recreational area, said Mayor is hereby empowered to order the closing
of said recreational area at a time earlier than 10:30 p.m. prevailing time.
In the event that said Mayor shall exercise the authority herein granted
to him, said Mayor shall cause the police of the Borough of Kutztown to
immediately go upon the premises of the recreational area and notify all
persons then in the recreational area as to the time the recreational area
shall be closed. Except as hereinabove provided in this section or in any
other section of this Article, at 10:30 p.m. prevailing time all activities in
all recreational areas shall cease, and all persons in any such recreational
areas shall leave as soon as possible thereafter; provided, however, that
in the event that any such recreational area is closed prior to 10:30 p.m.
prevailing time in accordance with the authorization herein granted to the
Mayor of the Borough of Kutztown, all activities in such recreational area
shall cease as soon as directed by the police of the Borough of Kutztown,
and all persons in such recreational areas shall leave as soon as possible
thereafter. No persons other than authorized employees or officials of the
Borough of Kutztown shall be in any recreational area at any time between
10:30 p.m. prevailing time or any other time the recreational area is closed
and 6:00 a.m. on the following morning.
§ 156-21. Group functions. [Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No.
4-1996]
No group shall hold or continue any function within any recreational area
after the hour of 10:30 p.m. prevailing time and before the hour of 6:00
a.m., except with the written permission of the Mayor of the Borough of
Kutztown. Said Mayor is hereby empowered to grant written permission to
any person or group desiring to hold such a function within any recreational
area subsequent to the hour of 10:30 p.m. prevailing time whenever, in the
§ 156-19 PARKS AND RECREATION § 156-21
156:287
opinion of the Mayor, the holding or continuing of such function will not
adversely affect the safety, health, morals or general welfare of the persons
attending said function or the safety, health, morals or general welfare of
the citizens and residents of the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 156-22. Designation of parking areas.
The Mayor of the Borough of Kutztown is hereby authorized and empowered
to designate parking areas within any recreational area. The Borough Police
are hereby authorized and empowered to designate temporary parking
areas within any recreational area, to temporarily close any road or roads
within any recreational area and to otherwise regulate and direct the
operation of vehicles and other modes of transportation within any
recreational area. Whenever any road within a recreational area has been
temporarily closed as hereinabove provided, such closed road shall not be
considered a road within the meaning of this Article, and no person shall
operate any vehicle or other mode of transportation upon the same while
said road is temporarily closed.
§ 156-23. Parking of vehicles.
No person shall park any vehicle within any recreational area except in
those places which have been designated as either permanent or temporary
parking areas as hereinabove provided.
§ 156-24. Injury to plants and buildings prohibited.
No person shall injure, deface, remove, cut or damage any of the trees,
plants, shrubs, turf, buildings, structures, fixtures or any other property of
the Borough of Kutztown located within any recreational area.
§ 156-25. Removal of certain fixtures prohibited.
No person shall remove any bench, seat or table from any recreational area.
§ 156-26. Conduct.
No person shall conduct himself or herself within any recreational area so
as to annoy any other person using such recreational area for recreational
purposes.
§ 156-27. Disposal of waste and garbage.
No person shall dispose of any waste or garbage in any recreational area
except in receptacles designated for such purposes. All persons using any
recreational area shall dispose of all waste and garbage left by them in such
designated receptacles.
§ 156-21 KUTZTOWN CODE § 156-28
156:288
§ 156-28. Fires.
No person shall build, set or maintain any fire within any recreational area
except fires for cooking purposes within properly constructed fireplaces
or metal braziers or charcoal grills. All fires built and maintained as
hereinabove provided shall, nevertheless, be constantly attended by an
individual at least sixteen (16) years of age. Any person building or
maintaining such a fire shall, before leaving the area thereof, dispose of said
fire by first thoroughly quenching the same with water and then placing
coals or ashes remaining therefrom in a container within the recreational
area designated for such purpose. No person shall throw, place or scatter
fire coals or ashes upon the ground or against any tree, shrub or plant or
upon or against any building or other improvement within any recreational
area.
§ 156-29. Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
No person shall bring, cause to be brought, keep, have, drink or consume
any spirituous liquors or any intoxicating beverage of any kind, including
beer, into, onto or within any recreational area, either for his own use or for
the use of any other person.
§ 156-30. Operation of vehicles.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle, bicycle or any other mode
of transportation within any recreational area in such a manner as to
disregard the rights or safety of others or in such a manner so as to
endanger any person or property.
§ 156-31. Use of vehicles restricted to roads and parking areas.
Any person operating a motor vehicle within any recreation area shall drive
such vehicle only upon the roads located therein or upon a designated
parking area; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to
persons actually engaged in duly authorized construction, maintenance or
repair work within any recreational area.
§ 156-32. Operation of bicycles.
No person shall ride or park a bicycle within twenty (20) feet of or within
any play area or upon any athletic field located within any recreational area.
For the purposes of this provision, a "play area" shall be defined to include
any area within any recreational area in which a sliding board, a monkey
gym, sandbox, seesaw, spring riding toy or the like has been or is hereafter
placed for children's play.
§ 156-33. Use of spring riding toys.
No person over eight (8) years of age shall stand, sit, ride, play or otherwise
be upon any spring riding toy within any recreational area. No more than
one (1) person under eight (8) years of age shall, at the same time, stand,
§ 156-28 PARKS AND RECREATION § 156-33
156:289
sit, ride, play or otherwise be upon any spring riding toy within any
recreational area at any one (1) time. No person shall permit any child or
any other person over eight (8) years of age who is in such person's custody
or control to stand, sit, ride, play or be upon any spring riding toy within
any recreational area.
§ 156-34. Riding of horses.
No person shall ride a horse, pony, donkey, mule or the like within any
recreational area except in connection with a public game or exhibition, and
in such case only when permission has first been obtained from the Mayor.
The Mayor is hereby empowered to grant special permission whenever such
game or exhibition will not adversely affect the safety, health or general
welfare of persons using the recreational area and will not materially
damage such recreational area or any buildings or improvements located
thereon.
§ 156-35. Dog control.
No person shall permit any dog or other domestic animal under his or her
control to urinate or defecate within any play area of any recreational area
or upon any athletic field located within any recreational area.
§ 156-36. Violations and penalties.90
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon
summary conviction before any District Justice, or any court upon hearing
or appeal, pay a fine or penalty of not less than fifty dollars ($50.) nor more
than six hundred dollars ($600.) and costs of prosecution for each and every
offense or, in default thereof, undergo imprisonment in the Berks County
Prison for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, provided that each day's
violation of any of the provisions of this Article shall constitute a separate
offense.
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 156-33 KUTZTOWN CODE § 156-36
156:290
ARTICLE III
Recreation and Parks Plan
[Adopted 5-9-1995 as Ord. No. 4-199591 ]
§ 156-37. Short title.
This Article shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "Borough of
Kutztown Recreation and Parks Plan Ordinance of 1995."
§ 156-38. Application.
This Article shall apply to the development of public recreation and parks
facilities to serve the needs of the citizens of the Borough of Kutztown,
Berks County, Pennsylvania (the "borough").
§ 156-39. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article shall be to provide standards for the
development of public recreation and parks facilities so as to promote the
public convenience and general welfare of the public.
§ 156-40. Provisions and regulations.
A. The Comprehensive Recreation and Parks Plan (herein the "Plan")
dated March 1995, as prepared by the borough and its engineers and
approved by the Berks County Planning Commission, is hereby adopted
as the Recreation Plan of the borough (within the meaning of Section
503(11)(iv) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247
of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988, as amended by Act 209 of
1990, as amended by Act 131 of 1992, and as amended hereafter), and
the Plan is made a part of this Article as if set forth herein in its entirety.
B. The development of public recreation and parks facilities, including
such facilities as are developed utilizing land dedicated as a
requirement of subdivision or land development final plan approval or
utilizing fees paid in lieu of such dedication, shall be in accordance with
the principles of the Plan.
C. The provisions and regulations for the dedication of land for
recreational purposes, as a requirement of subdivision or land
development final plan approval, shall be as provided for in § 195-32,
entitled "Recreation facilities," of Chapter 195, Subdivision and Land
Development, Ordinance No. 3-1991, as from time to time heretofore
and hereafter amended (the "Subdivision Ordinance"). (Terms used in
this Article without definition shall have the meaning ascribed thereto
in the Subdivision Ordinance). The provisions and regulations for the
payment of fees in lieu of such dedication of land shall be governed by
91.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed Ord. No. 4-1992, adopted 5-26-1992, which
comprised former Art. III, Standards for Development.
§ 156-37 PARKS AND RECREATION § 156-40
156:291
§ 156-41. Fees in lieu of dedication of land.
§ 195-32B of Chapter 195, Subdivision and Land Development, and by
this Article.
A. Fees to be paid in lieu of dedication of land shall bear a reasonable
relationship to the use of park and recreational facilities by future
inhabitants of the subdivision or land development in question and shall
be as provided for from time to time by resolution of Borough Council.92
B. Fees, upon receipt, shall be deposited in an interest-bearing account
which clearly identifies the specific recreation/park facilities for which
the fee was received.
C. Interest earned on such an account shall become funds of said account.
D. In the event that the borough has failed to utilize such fees and the
interest accrued thereon within the three-year period following
payment of such fees to the borough, then such fees, plus interest
accumulated thereon from the date of deposit, shall be refunded to the
party who paid such fees in lieu of dedication of land, following receipt
of a request by such party after the conclusion of such three-year
period.
E. Upon mutual agreement of the borough and the developer, the borough
may accept a combination of dedicated land and fees-in-lieu of land to
meet the requirements of this section for a subdivision or land
development.
F. Fees required under this section shall be paid prior to the recording of
the final plan, except as follows:
(1) If the required fee would be greater than five thousand dollars
($5,000.) and the developer and the borough mutually agree upon
terms in a binding development agreement providing for the
payment of all applicable recreation fees required by this Article in
installments, then such fee may be paid in installment payments
which must be paid in full as to each clearly defined phase of the
Subdivision or Land Development prior to the issuance of any
building permits within such clearly defined phase of the
Subdivision or Land Development; or, if the developer provides
such security as is deemed satisfactory by the Council of the
borough in its sole discretion for the payment of all recreation fees
required by this Article, then such fees are not required to be paid
prior to the recording of the final plan but may instead be paid
within the requirements of such development agreement.
(2) If the developer and the borough agree upon the payment of
recreational fees as provided for in Subsection F(1) hereinabove,
then all such fees shall not be considered to be "paid" for the
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 156-40 KUTZTOWN CODE § 156-41
156:292
purposes of the passage of any applicable time limitations for
utilization of such fees under the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, and the accrual of such time limitations shall not
commence to accrue, until all such fees are paid in full and actually
received by the borough, including all installment payments and
all recreation fees for all phases of the Subdivision or Land
Development.
§ 156-41 PARKS AND RECREATION § 156-41
156:293
Chapter 158
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
§ 156-41 KUTZTOWN CODE § 156-41
156:294
ARTICLE I
Disorderly Conduct
[Adopted 10-7-1969 by Ord. No. 13-1969]
§ 158-1. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm, corporation, company
or association, within the limits of the Borough of Kutztown, Berks County,
Pennsylvania:
A. To willfully make or cause to be made, or, being the owner of any
premises or having control thereof, to permit within or on said
premises, any loud, boisterous or unseemly noise or disturbances, or to
be guilty of vagrancy, or to engage in fighting or to incite others to fight,
assault or quarrel, or to engage in any other unlawful act tending to
imperil the personal security or safety of any person or persons within
the Borough of Kutztown or on borough-owned properties located
outside the physical boundaries of the Borough, or to endanger or
injure any property within the Borough of Kutztown or on Boroughowned
properties located outside the physical boundaries of the
Borough, to the annoyance of the public, or near to any alley, street,
bridge, public passageway or public place whereby the public peace is
broken or disturbed or the public is annoyed or offended. [Amended
10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000]
B. (Reserved)93
C. To loaf, loiter, lounge, stand or congregate on or otherwise occupy any
of the sidewalks, streets, crossings, street corners, bridges, highways
or alleys in front of or about any place of business or other public place
within the Borough of Kutztown in such a way as to obstruct the free
flow of vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic. [Amended 8-26-1980 by
Ord. No. 9-1980; 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006]
D. (Reserved)94
E. To willfully conduct or cause to be conducted, or, being the owner of any
premises or having control thereof, to knowingly permit within or on
said premises, any open burning, as defined by § 158-3 of this article,
upon any sidewalk, roadway, or property within the Borough of
Kutztown. [Amended 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006]
F. To throw, place, discard or be a party to throwing, placing or discarding
any garbage, rubbish, paper, refuse or litter of any kind on, upon or
adjacent to any road, street, alley, sidewalk, public place or lot or piece
93.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which prohibited the public use of indecent language,
the commission of lewdness, public indecency or exposure, public displays of intoxication
or drunkenness or disorderly assemblies, was repealed 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006.
94.Editor' Note: Former Subsection D, which prohibited loafing or loitering on private
property, as amended 9-5-1972 by Ord. No. 9-1972, was repealed 4-18-2006 by Ord. No.
8-2006.
§ 158-1 PARKS AND RECREATION § 158-1
156:295
of ground within the Borough of Kutztown or on Borough-owned
properties located outside the physical boundaries of the Borough.
[Amended 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000]
G. To knowingly and intentionally utilize or access any 911 emergency
communications system or wireless E-911 system to contact a public
safety answering point, as defined by the Pennsylvania Public Safety
Emergency Telephone Act,95 as amended, by dialing 9-1-1 without
having a legitimate purpose. [Amended 4-18-2006 by Ord. No.
8-2006]
H. (Reserved)96 [Amended 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000]
I. To nail, tack, hang or otherwise append any sign, notice or
advertisement of any kind whatsoever upon any tree, post, pole, electric
pole or pillar of any description, except on private property and then
only by permission of the owner thereof.
J. (Reserved)97
K. To cause any unnecessary and disturbing noise generated or created by
a motor vehicle or commercial vehicle, including but not limited to the
squealing of tires, backfiring, blowing of a horn, racing of an engine or
parking, as defined by § 158-3 of this article, of a commercial vehicle on
public or private property, to the annoyance of peaceable residents
nearby or within or near to an alley, street, bridge, public passageway,
private lot, or public place whereby the public peace is broken or
disturbed or the public is annoyed or offended. Where a party has direct
or indirect control over a private lot, the party shall be presumed to
have control over any vehicle so parked and shall be in violation of this
section whether the party actually parked the vehicle or was aware of
the parked vehicle. This prohibition shall not apply to vehicles parked
temporarily for any fairgrounds, picnics, campgrounds, media events or
other social events for entertainment or educational purposes.
[Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001]
L. To keep or suffer to remain on any premises any odorous, offensive or
unwholesome matter of any kind or any wood, corncobs or other matter
of substance or substances which attracts rats, mice or other rodents or
insects.
M. To keep, operate or be employed at any house, home, apartment or
other dwelling unit or establishment wherein liquor or malt or brewed
beverages are sold without an appropriate license to do so issued by the
95.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S,. § 7011 et seq.
96.Editor's Note: Former Subsection H, which prohibited the destruction or defacement of
public or private property, as amended 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000, was repealed
4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006.
97.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection J, which prohibited publicly insulting, harassing or
heckling a peace officer, was repealed 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006.
§ 158-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § 158-1
156:296
§ 158-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1976 by Ord. No.
17-1976; 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
Any person who shall violate § 158-1H of this article shall, upon summary
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $600 and the costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof,
shall undergo imprisonment in the Berks County Prison for a period not
exceeding 30 days. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article
other than § 158-1H shall, upon summary conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $600 and the costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment
in the Berks County Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 158-3. Definitions and interpretations. [Added 12-26-1995 by Ord.
No. 12-1995; amended 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000; 5-29-2001 by
Ord. No. 5-2001]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A motor vehicle designed or used to transport
passengers or property as set forth in the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code,
as amended, 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 1603.
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. [Added 10-24-2000 by Ord. No.
6-2000]
N. To be present in any house, home, apartment or other dwelling unit or
establishment wherein liquor or malt or brewed beverages are being
sold without an appropriate license issued by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to do so conspicuously displayed on the premises. [Added
10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000]
O. To knowingly permit any property in which any person or persons, firm,
corporation, company or association have an equitable or legal
ownership to be used as a house, home, apartment or other dwelling
unit or establishment where persons are engaged in the sale of liquor or
malt or brewed beverages without a license to do so issued by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. [Added 10-24-2000 by Ord. No.
6-2000]
P. No person shall deposit, or permit to be deposited, on publicly or
privately owned property, any human excrement, vomit, or other human
bodily waste unless such waste is deposited in a toilet, urinal, or other
receptacle designed, intended and made available for such use. [Added
4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006]
Q. Occupying and using the roof or roof overhang of a building when such
roof is not designed and permitted for such occupancy by the Borough
Building Code, except when performing repairs or maintenance of the
roof or in an emergency situation. [Added 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
2-2016]
§ 158-1 PARKS AND RECREATION § 158-3
156:297
DIRECT CONTROL — Either residency, occupancy or use of said real estate.
OPEN BURNING — The burning of any materials, including but not limited
to any wood, paper, hay, straw or other inflammable substance, wherein
products of combustion are emitted directly into the outdoor atmosphere
without passing through a stack, chimney or screen from an enclosed
chamber. For purposes of this definition, a chamber shall be regarded as
enclosed when, during the time combustion takes place, only apertures,
ducts, stacks, flues or chimneys necessary to provide combustion air and
to permit the escape of exhaust gases are open. During the time of
combustion, permissible enclosures, such as lawn stoves, shall be
maintained at a distance of no less than 10 feet from any structure and
the smoke and emissions from the enclosure shall not pose a safety hazard.
Additionally, during the time of combustion, such enclosures shall be
attended by a responsible person at all times. Exemptions are defined under
§ 168-9B of this Code.[Added 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006]
PARKING — The leaving of such commercial vehicle unattended or with the
driver sleeping with the motor and/or engine of said vehicle running for
a period of time in excess of 15 minutes on public or private property or
allowing such a vehicle with the motor and/or engine of said vehicle running
on private property for a period of time in excess of 15 minutes. Where a
party has direct control over such private property, he shall be presumed
to have control over any vehicle so parked and shall be in violation of this
article whether he actually parked the vehicle himself or was aware of the
parked vehicle.
PUBLIC — Affecting or likely to affect persons in a place to which the public
or a substantial group has access; among the places to be included are
highways, transport facilities, schools, apartment houses, places of business
or amusement, and any neighborhood or premises which are open to the
public.
§ 158-3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 158-3
156:298
ARTICLE II
Graffiti
[Adopted 8-19-2008 by Ord. No. 10-2008]
§ 158-4. Scope.
This article shall be known as the "Graffiti Code of the Borough of Kutztown"
and shall apply to all graffiti occurring within the jurisdictional limits of the
Borough of Kutztown.
§ 158-5. Definitions.
A. The following words, terms or phrases, when used in Article II of this
chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section.
AUTHORIZED PERSON — A police officer, community service officer,
or Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Kutztown.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kutztown.
BROAD-TIPPED INDELIBLE MARKER — Any felt-tipped marker or
similar implement which contains fluid which is not water soluble and
which has a flat or angled writing surface 1/2 inch or greater.
CONSENT — Voluntary agreement by a person.
GRAFFITI —
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT — Any implement capable of marking a surface
to create graffiti, including, but not limited to, aerosol or pressurized
paint containers, markers, gum labels, paint brushes or etching tools
capable of scarring glass, metal, concrete or wood.
GUM LABELS — Any materials, such as, but not limited to, decals,
stickers, posters or labels which contain a substance commonly known
as "adhesive" or "glue," which cannot be removed from the surface in
an intact condition and with minimal efforts.
Any inscription, work, symbol, figure, marking or design, including
but not limited to, tags, throw-ups and pieces, that are marked,
etched, scrawled, stained, drawn or painted and stuck on or
adhered to any surface on public or private property without the
express permission of the owner or owner's agent of such property,
including, but not limited to, any wall, underpass, overpass, trestle,
tree, sign, pole, playground apparatus, utility box, building,
structure, fixture or other improvements, whether permanent or
temporary, regardless of the content or nature of the material that
has been applied, and which is visible from any public property or
the public right-of-way, or from any private property other than the
property on which the graffiti exists.
(1)
Graffiti shall not be construed to apply to easily removable chalk
markings on the public sidewalks and streets used in connection
with traditional children's games.
(2)
§ 158-4 PARKS AND RECREATION § 158-5
156:299
§ 158-6. (Reserved)
§ 158-7. Prohibited acts; responsible parties; sale of implements
restricted.
MARKER — Any indelible or permanent marker or similar implement
with a point, brush, applicator or other writing surface which at its
broadest width is 3/6 of an inch or greater and contains ink that is not
water soluble.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
NOTICE — A letter delivered to the owner of the property or placed
securely on the front door or other highly visible area of a property
which is defaced with graffiti. Said letter or sticker shall contain a
statement that the graffiti must be removed within 10 days after the
letter has been posted on the property or received by the owner of the
property.
OWNER — Any and all persons with legal and/or equitable title to real
property in the Borough.
PAINT STICK or GRAFFITI STICK — Any device containing a solid form
of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being
applied to a surface by pressure and upon application, leaving a visible
mark and that is not water soluble.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PIECES — Forms of graffiti represented by detailed, multicolored
murals, ranging in size.
PROPERTY — Includes any real estate, including improvements
thereon; and tangible personal property, including but not limited to
newsboxes, newsstands, utility poles, public telephones, tree planters
and other items of street furniture; and vehicles located thereon.
TAGS — A form of graffiti represented by stylized signatures of a
writer's chosen name.
THROWUPS — A form of graffiti represented by large names or figures
written in a bubble style, often with an outline written in a different
color than the interior of the letters.
B. Words and phrases, when used in Article II, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Crime Code, 18 Pa.C.S.A., as
amended.
A. No person owning or occupying any property within the Borough of
Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania, shall permit any graffiti to
accumulate or otherwise remain on any property so as to be visible to
the public.
§ 158-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 158-7
156:300
B. Upon discovery of graffiti, any authorized person shall issue written
notice to the owner, occupant or other responsible agent of any
properties whereon graffiti is present in violation of the provisions of
this article, directing and requiring such person to remove such graffiti.
In the event that graffiti is not removed within 10 days from the date of
mailing of this first notice, a second notice to remove and request for
consent to allow the Borough to enter upon the property for the
purpose of graffiti removal at the owner's expense shall be issued.
Failure to remove graffiti within 10 days of mailing of the second notice
shall constitute a violation of this article.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any overt act resulting in
or attempting to result in an application of graffiti.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, maliciously or
wantonly expose or tend to expose another to risk of violence, contempt
or hatred on the basis of race, color, creed or religion by the use of what
is commonly known as "graffiti."
E. It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person
having custody and care of any minor child under the age of 18 years to
knowingly assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage said minor to
violate the provisions of this article, as herein defined, either by words,
overt act or by failing to act.
F. All persons directly or indirectly involved in acts of graffiti vandalism
may be found to be equally responsible and guilty of the act, in addition
to the individual who may personally deface the object or area, such as
other in the group who knowingly make available the tools, writing
material, ladders, lookouts, materials or assistance, or who knowingly
supplies funds to acquire such materials for such purposes.
G. No minor shall have in his or her possession any aerosol container of
spray paint or broad-tipped indelible marker while on any public
property, highway, street, alley, sidewalk or park, or while on any
private property, unless the owner or person in possession of the
property knows of the minor's possession of the aerosol container or
marker and has consented to the minor's possession while on his or her
property.
H. No person, partnership or corporation shall sell, cause to be sold,
furnish or convey to any person under the age of 18 years of age any
aerosol container of spray paint or broad-tipped indelible marker.
I. Every person, partnership or corporation who owns, conducts, operates
or manages a retail commercial establishment selling aerosol
containers of spray paints or broad-tipped indelible markers shall place
a sign in the direct view of such persons responsible for accepting
customer payment for aerosol containers of spray paint or broad-tipped
indelible markers substantially in the following form:
§ 158-7 PARKS AND RECREATION § 158-7
156:301
§ 158-8. Violations and penalties; removal of graffiti by Borough.
It is a violation of the law to sell aerosol containers of spray paint or
broad-tipped indelible markers to persons under 18 years of age. This
offense is punishable by a fine or imprisonment. Punishment may be
in the form of community service or cleanup at the discretion of the
Magisterial District Judge.
J. Every person, partnership or corporation who owns, conducts, operates
or manages a retail commercial establishment selling aerosol
containers of spray paints or broad-tipped indelible markers shall store
or cause such aerosol containers or marker pens to be stored either:
(1) In the direct line of sight from the cash register work area or any
other work area that is normally continuously occupied while the
store is open;
(2) Under continuous electronic or mechanical surveillance or control;
or
(3) In a place not accessible to the public in the regular course of
business without employee assistance, pending legal sale of such
markers or paint containers.
A. Any person who shall violate, fail, neglect or refuse to comply with
§ 158-7A or B or § 158-8 of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 and costs and, in default
of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues
shall be considered a separate offense.
B. Any person who shall violate § 158-7C through J of this article shall,
upon summary conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000 and the costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment in the Berks
County Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days.
C. If the owner, occupant or other responsible agent of the property fails to
remove graffiti or give consent for removal within 10 days after the
second notice of violation has been issued, the Borough may proceed to
remove the graffiti itself or by contract.
D. Except where the legal fees, administrative and filing costs exceed the
cost of removal, a bill for costs of removal shall be delivered to the
property owner, occupant or other responsible agent and, in the event
of nonpayment, the Borough may file a lien against the property in the
amount of such costs. Liability for costs of removal shall be in addition
to liability for any fine imposed.
§ 158-7 KUTZTOWN CODE § 158-8
156:302
Chapter 160
(RESERVED)
Chapter 161
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 29.
Police Department — See Ch. 38.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 43.
§ 161-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Personnel Policies" of
the Code of the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 161-2. Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority of the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania including but not limited to, §§ (20) and
§§ (74) of § 1202 of the Pennsylvania Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46202(20) and
§ 46202(74)].
§ 161-3. Purpose and intent.
A. The Borough Council (the "Council") of the Borough of Kutztown (the
"Borough") has determined that personnel policies explicitly stating the
requirements, procedures and behavior expected of employees are an
essential part of maintaining a good, clear, and professional employer/
employee relationship with Borough employees. In addition, such
policies must also govern the conduct of elected and appointed Borough
officials in their interactions with other Borough personnel. In the past,
the Council found that cumulatively adopting personnel policies on
given subjects as the official policy of the Borough, was the most
efficient and effective method of establishing the Borough's personnel
policies for Borough employees to follow in the course of their
employment. However, Council has determined that simply adopting
the personnel policy, without more, does not provide adequate
protection for Borough employees adversely affected by violations of
the same. Without enforceable penalties for violations, such personnel
policies leave Borough management and the Council unable to
appropriately respond to complaints and maintain compliance with the
Borough's personnel policies. The Council has also determined that
inadequacies in the Borough's ability to maintain a professional work
environment may result in poor employee morale, reduced productivity,
the loss of valuable Borough employees and/or legal action against the
§ 158-8 (RESERVED) § 161-3
160:303
§ 161-4. Application; administration.
§ 161-5. Adoption of policies.
The Borough Council may, by resolution, adopt policies prohibiting
improper conduct in the Borough workplace by Borough employees and
elected and appointed officials (the "Borough Personnel Policies"), from
time to time, as may be reasonably necessary for the good and efficient
administration and management of the government. Such policy or policies
adopted by resolution shall be cumulative and shall be enforced under
this chapter. In no event shall this chapter be deemed to authorize the
imposition of any Borough Personnel Policies in violation of any collective
bargaining agreement.
§ 161-6. Enforcement.
Borough, all of which represent potential economic loss to the Borough.
The Council desires to avoid such potential loss by maintaining a
healthy, productive and professional work environment.
B. It is the Council's intention to ensure such a work environment within
the Borough government by establishing a method to formally enact the
personnel policies of the Borough, creating an administrative
procedure to address violations of such personnel policies, and
establishing penalties for violation of the same.
A. Application of chapter. This chapter shall apply to all Borough
employees, all elected Borough officials, and all appointed Borough
officials, when acting in the course of their respective employment or
official duties on behalf of the Borough.
B. Administration. This chapter shall be administered by the Borough
Manager and the Personnel Committee of the Borough Council of the
Borough of Kutztown (the "Personnel Committee") as hereinafter
prescribed.
A. Nonuniformed Borough employees. All violations of the Borough
Personnel Policies, adopted pursuant to § 161-5 of this chapter,
allegedly committed by nonuniformed Borough employees shall be
reported to the Borough Manager. The Borough Manager shall
immediately investigate all such reported violations to determine the
veracity of such allegations. The Borough Manager shall provide
written notification of his findings to the nonuniformed Borough
employee and present the same to the Council at a hearing to impose a
penalty in accordance with § 161-7 of this chapter. If the Borough
Manager determines the violation is of such a serious nature as to
require the suspension of a nonuniformed Borough employee or
employees, he shall immediately suspend the employee with pay and
notify the Council of the same at the time of the hearing.
§ 161-3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 161-6
161:304
B. Uniformed employees. All violations of the Borough Personnel Policies,
adopted pursuant to § 161-5 of this chapter, allegedly committed by
uniformed Borough employees shall be reported to the Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall immediately investigate all such reported
violations to determine the veracity of such allegations in accordance
with the Kutztown Police Department Code of Discipline. If the Chief of
Police determines the violation is of such a serious nature as to require
the suspension of a uniformed Borough employee or employees, he
shall immediately recommend suspension of the employee or
employees to the Mayor and the Council.
C. Elected and appointed Borough officials. All violations of the Borough
Personnel Policies, adopted pursuant to § 161-5 of this chapter,
allegedly committed by elected and/or appointed Borough officials shall
be reported to the Borough Manager, except in the instance when the
alleged violation of the personnel polices is allegedly committed by the
Borough Manager, in which case the alleged conduct shall be reported
to the Borough Council President. Upon receiving a complaint of
alleged violations of the Borough's personnel policies by an appointed
or elected official, the Borough Manager or the Borough Council
President shall immediately forward said complaint to the Personnel
Committee who shall immediately direct the complaint to special
counsel, a member of the Bar of the State of Pennsylvania excluding the
Solicitor or any member of the Solicitor's law firm, appointed by
Council to investigate allegations that elected or appointed officials
have violated the personnel polices of the Borough of Kutztown. Special
counsel shall have the following duties: [Amended 6-15-2004 by Ord.
No. 12-2004]
(1) Initiate and accomplish a preliminary investigation at his/her sole
discretion, upon direction from the Personnel Committee.
(2) Notify both the complainant and the subject of the investigation of
the filing of the Complaint, the nature of the same, and the
initiation of a preliminary investigation.
(3) Complete the preliminary investigation, within 60 days of
assignment by the Personnel Committee.
(4) Prepare a findings report which determines whether or not there
are facts which may exist to support the complaint. If the
preliminary investigation fails to establish the facts which support
the complaint, special counsel shall dismiss the complaint and
notify both the complainant and the subject of the complaint of this
dismissal of the complaint. If, however, at the conclusion of the
preliminary investigation, the special counsel determines that
there may exist facts to support the complaint, the special counsel
shall deliver to the Borough Council its findings report.
(5) Upon receiving the findings report from special counsel, the
Borough Council shall conduct a hearing which complies with the
§ 161-6 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 161-6
161:305
§ 161-7. Violations and penalties.
Local Agency Law (2 Pa. C.S.A. § 551 et seq.). Special counsel
during the aforementioned hearing shall present evidence and
testimony in support of the investigated complaint.
D. Investigations and punishment. All investigations and punishment, if
any, of Borough employees and of elected or appointed Borough
officials conducted pursuant to this section shall be held and conducted
in accordance with the Local Agency Law (2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq) (if
applicable) and the Sunshine Law (65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 through 716) (if
applicable).
E. Control of the premises. The Borough Manager, Chief of Police and any
duly appointed Borough superintendent (or their designee then in
charge) shall, pursuant to this chapter, direct any person to
immediately leave a Borough building, facility or property (except when
such person is present there on account of a public meeting or public
hearing) if the Borough Manager, Chief of Police or superintendent
observes such person, engaging in a violation of the Borough of
Kutztown Conduct and Behavior Policy and/or the Borough of Kutztown
Sexual Harassment Policy.
A. Counseling and training. The Borough Council may, in appropriate
circumstances, require that the accused employee or official undergo
such harassment or other counseling or training as the Council believes
is appropriate in order to assure that future violations will not occur.
Successful completion of such counseling or training shall be deemed
an aggravating factor for consideration of the imposition of any
penalties under § 161-7B or C for successive violations hereunder.
B. Nonuniformed Borough employees. All penalties for violation of this
Chapter 161 shall be imposed by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Kutztown at a regular or special meeting. In determining the penalty to
be imposed, the Council shall consider the nature and severity of the
violation, the cost to the Borough of such violation and the penalty
recommended by the Borough Manager. The following possible
penalties or combination of penalties may be imposed:
(1) Informal reprimand. An informal reprimand shall be a verbal
warning informing the Borough employee that a policy violation
has occurred and that such employee shall not commit the same
infraction in the future.
(2) Formal reprimand. A formal reprimand shall be written warning
informing the Borough employee that a policy violation has
occurred and that such employee shall not commit the same
infraction in the future. A copy of the written warning shall be
placed in the employee's personnel folder.
(3) Loss of pay and suspension.
§ 161-6 KUTZTOWN CODE § 161-7
161:306
(4) Termination.
C. Uniformed employees. All penalties for violation of this Chapter 161
shall be imposed in accordance with the Kutztown Police Department
Code of Discipline and other applicable statutes.
D. Elected or appointed Borough officials. All penalties for violation of this
Chapter 161 shall be imposed by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Kutztown at a regular or special meeting. In determining the penalty to
be imposed, the Council shall consider the nature and severity of the
violation, the cost to the Borough of such violation and the penalty
recommended by the Personnel Committee. The following possible
penalties or combination of penalties may be imposed:
(1) Censure. "Censure" shall mean a motion, passed by a majority of
the Council in a public vote, formally condemning the action(s) of
the elected or appointed Borough official which have been
determined to be in violation of the Borough Personnel Policies.
(2) Access restrictions. Council may restrict an elected or appointed
Borough official's access to Borough employees or to locations on
Borough property in accordance with the following:
(a) Borough employee(s). If the Personnel Committee determines
that an elected or appointed Borough official is in violation of a
Borough Personnel Policy or Policies adopted pursuant to
§ 161-5 with regard to such person's conduct toward a
Borough employee or employees, the Council may require that
such elected or appointed Borough official discontinue all
direct communication with the affected Borough employee(s)
and direct that all future communications with such Borough
employee(s) be conducted through a designated member of the
Council or other person.
(b) Borough property. In addition to Subsection D(2)(a) above, the
Council may restrict an elected or appointed Borough official's
access to Borough property. Such access restriction shall be
limited to areas of Borough property where affected Borough
employee(s) work. In the event the restricted appointed or
elected Borough official must have access to areas of Borough
property where affected Borough employee(s) work during
normal business hours, the Council may require that the
restricted appointed or elected Borough official be escorted by
a designated member of Council or other person to ensure
compliance with all Borough Personnel Policies.
(c) Civil enforcement. In the event an elected or appointed
Borough official refuses to comply with Subsection D(2)(a) and
(b), above, the Borough Council shall have the right to seek
injunctive relief before any court of competent jurisdiction to
enforce compliance to the access restrictions created under
this Chapter 161.
§ 161-7 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 161-7
161:307
§ 161-8. Appeal of decision.
§ 161-9. Conflict of investigator.
§ 161-10. Conflicts; repealer.
(d) Criminal enforcement. In the event an elected or appointed
Borough official refuses to comply with Subsection D(2)(a) and
(b), above, the officers of the Kutztown Borough Police
Department shall take all action permitted by law to ensure
enforcement of the provisions of the Pennsylvania Crimes
Code, including but not limited to prosecution for criminal
trespass, harassment, disorderly conduct, and/or abuse of
office or any combination thereof, if applicable.
E. Practice and procedure. The Council's procedure in determining a
penalty for violation of this Chapter 161 shall be in accordance with the
Local Agency Law (2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq) (if applicable), the
Sunshine Law (65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 through 716) (if applicable), the
Kutztown Police Department Code of Discipline (if applicable), the
Borough of Kutztown Employee Handbook (if applicable), and the
Borough Code (if applicable).
A. Any nonuniformed Borough employee or elected or appointed Borough
official found to be in violation of a Borough Personnel Policy may
appeal such decision to the Council within 30 days of notification of
such decision. All appeals shall be in writing and signed by the
appellant. Thereafter, the Council shall, within 90 days, review its prior
decision, provide the employee or official in question with an
opportunity to present any additional information, and render a
decision. The Council shall make its decision at a public meeting and
inform the appellant of such decision in writing.
B. Uniformed employees. Any uniformed Borough employee found to be in
violation of a Borough Personnel Policy may appeal such decision
pursuant to Kutztown Police Department Code of Discipline, the
Collective Bargaining Agreement and all applicable Civil Service
provisions.
A. Borough Manager. In the event the Borough employee alleged to have
committed a violation of a Borough Personnel Policy is the Borough
Manager, the Personnel Committee shall conduct the investigation of
such allegation and recommend a penalty to the Council if such
allegation is determined to be true.
B. Personnel Committee. In the event the elected Borough official alleged
to have committed a violation of a Borough Personnel Policy is a
member of the Personnel Committee, such elected Borough official
shall not participate in the investigation of such allegation nor in the
penalty determination.
§ 161-7 KUTZTOWN CODE § 161-10
161:308
§ 161-11. Severability.
It is the intention of the Council that each separate provision of this chapter
shall be independent of all other provisions herein and it is further the
intention of the Council that if any of the provisions of this chapter be
declared to be invalid, all other provisions hereof shall remain in full force
and effect.
Chapter 163
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction Codes — See Ch. 75.
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 107.
Housing standards — See Ch. 135.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 218.
§ 163-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Borough of Kutztown
Plumbing Code."
§ 163-2. Reenactment of provisions.
The provisions contained in § 163-3 of this chapter were reenacted on April
20, 2004, pursuant to Act 45 of 1999, also known as the "Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code" which allowed for the reenactment of all
building code ordinances which equal or exceed the specific requirements
of the "Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code" and were in effect prior to
July 1, 1999.
§ 163-3. Amendments to Code.
A. Conflicts. Whenever there is a difference between the rules in this
chapter and those included elsewhere in the Code of the Borough of
Kutztown or in any of the Borough Personnel Policies, the more
stringent requirement shall apply, unless the application of such
requirement at such time would violate any civil service or collective
bargaining agreement, law, rule or decision, in which case the rules and
procedure permitted under such civil service or collective bargaining
agreement, law, rule or decision shall be applied.
B. Repealer. All existing ordinances or parts of ordinances and provisions
of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown which are contrary to this
chapter are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this chapter
full force and effect.
§ 161-10 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 163-3
161:309
A. Fee schedule. A fee schedule shall be determined and established from
time to time by the Borough Council. Upon enactment of this section
and until such time as the Borough Council enacts a new fee schedule,
the fee schedule in place at the time of this section's adoption shall be
enforced.
B. Violations and penalties. Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
trust or other entity who or which shall violate any provision of this
Code, as amended or supplemented; or fail to comply with any
requirements hereof; or whether as owner or lessee or otherwise, do or
perform any plumbing work or suffer any plumbing work to be done or
performed without complying with the provisions hereof shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a fine of at least $50 but not exceeding $1,000.
In default of payment of the fine, such person, the members of such
partnership, the trustees of such trust or the officers of such
corporation or any other entity shall be liable to imprisonment for not
more than 30 days. Each day that a violation is continued shall
constitute a separate offense.
C. Licensure.
(1) Master or residential plumber's license. No person shall be allowed
to carry on or engage in the business of plumbing, nor shall any
person or persons in any manner advertise or solicit the performing
or doing of plumbing work until such person shall have first
secured a master or residential plumber's license.
(2) License fees. Any person, partnership, firm, corporation, trust or
other entity having a master or residential plumber's license
granted by any municipality within the County of Berks or by any
city of the third class or larger in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania shall be licensed by the Borough of Kutztown, without
reexamination, upon payment of the fee established from time to
time by resolution of the Borough Council.
(3) Insurance coverage. An applicant for a master or residential
plumber's license or an appliance installer's license shall be
required to file concurrently with the application and fee aforesaid
one or more certificates of insurance evidencing one or more
policies of insurance covering commercial general liability by the
licensing applicant in the performance of services as a master or
residential plumber in the amount of $300,000 per occurrence with
an aggregate limit of $300,000. Such policy or policies shall
provide for notice to the Borough of Kutztown, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, of 30 days prior to cancellation.
(4) Journeyman. Journeymen are permitted to lay out, install and
repair plumbing work only when employed and under the
supervision of a plumber holding a master or residential plumber's
license. In the event that a plumber with a master or residential
license orders and/or permits a journeyman to perform work in
§ 163-3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 163-3
161:310
violation of this provision, said plumber as well as the journeyman
shall be deemed to be in violation of this Code.
(5) Apprentices. Apprentices are permitted to install plumbing work
only when accompanied by and under the observation of a plumber
holding either a journeyman's license or a master or residential
plumber's license. In the event that a plumber with a journeyman's
license or with a master or residential license orders and permits
an apprentice to perform work in violation of this provision, said
plumber as well as the apprentice shall be deemed to be in violation
of this Code.
(6) Appliance installers.
(a) Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, trust or other
entity constituting an appliance installer shall be licensed by
the Borough of Kutztown upon payment of the following fee:
appliance installer's license shall be determined by resolution
of Council.
(b) Appliance installers may be issued permits to make
connections to water and waste lines and to reconnect
electrical lines necessary for the installation of or repairs or
alterations to the following domestic appliances: clotheswashing
machines, clothes-drying machines, dishwashers,
water softeners, garbage disposals, ice machines,
refrigerators, refrigeration ice machinery, hot-water heaters,
water equipment and other similar types of domestic
appliances.
D. Licensing of plumbers.
(1) Plumbing systems, heating systems, equipment and apparatus may
be installed, altered or extended only under the supervision of a
master or residential plumber who is registered with the Borough;
provided, however, that the owner and occupier of a single-family
residence may perform such plumbing work in the owner's
residence as long as the owner shall first obtain a permit for such
plumbing work prior to the performance thereof, and, upon its
completion, said plumbing work shall be inspected as required by
this Plumbing Code.
(2) Application for a master or residential plumber's license to perform
plumbing work within the Borough can be accomplished by the
following methods:
(a) If the applicant holds a valid master or residential plumber's
license issued by any city of the third class or larger in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any municipality within the
County of Berks, such applicant may present said license,
together with a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council, and a certificate of insurance as required by
§ 163-3 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 163-3
161:311
this chapter to the Borough Code Office of the Borough, which
shall issue a master or residential plumber's license to such
applicant permitting such applicant to perform plumbing work
as permitted by such license within the Borough; provided,
however, that said license must be annually renewed during
the month of January of each year.
(b) Any applicant who does not hold a valid master plumber's
license issued by any city of the third class or larger in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall apply to the International
Code Council, Contractor Examination Services for an
examination and upon successful completion of such
examination and proof of a minimum of three years' experience
in the plumbing work as a journeyman shall be issued a license
upon payment of the required fee.
(c) If an applicant was previously licensed as a master or
residential plumber in the Borough but has let said license
expire, he shall be reinstated if the applicant is actively
employed as a plumber by a licensed master plumber who
shall, by letter, certify employment and experience and upon
payment of the required fee.
E. Any person not a master plumber who assists a master or residential
plumber in the performance of any plumbing work (other than a person
performing any plumbing work in his/her own residence if he/she is the
owner thereof, as hereinabove permitted) shall be the holder of a
journeyman plumber's license. Any applicant for a journeyman
plumber's license shall apply to the International Code Council,
Contractor Examination Services for an examination and upon
successful completion of such examination and upon proof of a
minimum of three years' experience in plumbing work or two years of
technical training shall be issued a license upon payment of the
required fee.
F. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection D(1) above, a person,
firm, company, partnership, corporation or other entity engaged in the
selling of plumbing appliances who or which has as a part of its
operation a department engaged in the repair of those appliances may
install such appliances within the Borough, provided that a permit for
any necessary plumbing work is first obtained prior to the performance
thereof and, upon its completion, said plumbing work shall be inspected
as hereinafter required by this chapter.
G. License issuance. Each license issued by the Borough shall expire on
December 31 of the year in which said license was issued, but said
license may be renewed upon payment of the appropriate fee as
hereinabove provided.
H. License revocation. The Code Enforcement Officer (Plumbing
Inspector) may revoke any license if it is subsequently determined that
§ 163-3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 163-3
161:312
said license was obtained through nondisclosure, misstatement or
misrepresentation of a fact or in the event that the holder thereof is
deemed to be in violation of any provision of this Code and a penalty
as provided for in this Code has been imposed upon the holder thereof;
provided, however, that before any license may be revoked, the licensee
shall receive a notice, in writing, enumerating the charges against the
licensee, and said licensee shall be entitled to a hearing before the Code
Appeals Board, in the manner provided for appeals in Chapter 12 of the
Code of the Borough of Kutztown.
I. Single-family dwellings. Notwithstanding anything herein to the
contrary, a permit may be issued to the unlicensed owner-occupant of a
single-family dwelling in the Borough of Kutztown used exclusively for
living purposes, provided that the applicant is the record owner of such
dwelling, that the same shall be occupied by such owner and that said
owner in his application states that he will personally perform all labor
in connection therewith; provided, however, that this provision shall not
apply to any modification or alteration to the sanitary sewer system or
any alteration in the building sewer system. All requirements of the
permit issued shall be met as regards limit of work and inspections.
J. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPLIANCE INSTALLER — An individual, firm, partnership,
corporation, trust or other entity engaged in the business of installing,
altering or repairing domestic clothes-washing machines, domestic
clothes-drying machines, dishwashers, water softeners, garbage
disposals, ice machines, refrigerators, refrigeration ice machinery,
domestic hot-water heaters, domestic water treatment equipment and
other similar types of appliances.
MASTER PLUMBER — A plumber who is permitted to engage in
plumbing work in any type of building use group.
PREMISES — Any property on which there is situated a dwelling unit,
commercial or industrial use, upon which a structure is erected and
occupied from time to time.
RESIDENTIAL PLUMBER — A plumber who may only engage in
plumbing work in one- or two-family dwellings and accessory buildings
or uses thereto.
K. Public systems available. A public water supply system and/or public
sewer system shall be deemed available to premises used for human
occupancy if such premises are within 150 feet, measured along a
street, alley or easement, of the public water supply or sewer system
and a connection conforming to the standards set forth in this Code and
the standards set forth in the Public Improvements Requirement
Manual of the Borough of Kutztown, as from time to time in effect, may
be made thereto.
§ 163-3 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 163-3
161:313
L. Freezing. Water service piping and sewers shall be installed below
recorded frost penetration but not less below grade than three feet six
inches for water piping and four feet nine inches for sewers unless
greater cover is required by other regulations. All plumbing piping in
exterior building walls shall be adequately protected against freezing
by insulation or heat, or both.
M. Backfilling. One foot (305 millimeters) of screening shall be placed in
the trench in two six-inch (one-hundred-fifty-two-millimeter) layers and
tamped in place. The backfill beside the pipe shall be compacted for
pipe support. Backfill shall be brought up evenly on both sides of the
pipe so that it retains alignment.
N. Water service pipe. Water service pipe shall be brass pipe, copper pipe,
copper tube, cast-iron water pipe, open-hearth iron pipe or ductile iron
pipe. Copper tube, when used underground, shall have a weight not less
than copper water tube Type K. All threaded ferrous pipe and fittings
shall be galvanized or cement-lined. When used underground in
corrosive soil or fill, the piping material and/or protective coating or
covering shall be approved by the Plumbing Inspector.
O. Water distribution pipe. The water distribution system shall be of any
material approved and allowed under the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code, as amended from time to time by the Legislature of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. [Amended 9-16-2009 by Ord.
No. 11-2009]
P. Any plastic pipe used for force mains shall be Schedule 80 PVC pipe and
shall be permitted only when placed in sand fill and approved by the
Plumbing Inspector.
Q. No discharge on adjacent properties. Stormwater drains, rainwater
conductors, roof drains and/or sump pumps shall not be discharged so
as to cause storm- and/or floodwater to flow upon or onto adjacent
properties.
R. Floor drain. No fixture or drain shall be constructed in any cellar or
basement floor whose level shall be below the elevation of the natural
ground outside the building, which shall permit open drainage into the
sewer at a point lower than 18 inches above said floor level. Further, no
open waste connection shall be permitted which is below the top of the
nearest downstream manhole, unless backflow protection is provided.
S. Supply pressures.
(1) When a street main pressure exceeds 75 pounds per square inch
(517.13 kPa), an approved pressure-reducing valve shall be
installed in the water pressure to 55 pounds per square inch
(379.23 kPa) or lower.
(2) Exception: Where the water service pipe supplies water directly to
a water pressure booster system, an elevated water gravity tank or
§ 163-3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 163-3
161:314
Chapter 166
PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 192. Cable television franchise — See Ch. A230.
§ 166-1. License required.
No person shall construct, operate or continue to operate a private
communications system which occupies any right-of-way within the borough
without having been issued a license or licenses by the borough, as provided
by this chapter.
§ 166-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
to pumps provided in connection with a hydropneumatic or
elevated gravity water supply tank system, pressure at any fixture
shall be limited to not more than 75 pounds per square inch (517.13
kPa) under no flow conditions.
(3) Water-pressure-reducing valves shall conform to ASSE 1003 listed
in Appendix A.
T. Location of shutoff valves. Shutoff valves shall be installed in the
following locations:
(1) On the fixture supply to each plumbing fixture in all occupancies
and other than in individual guest rooms that are provided with
unit shutoff valves in occupancies in Use Group R-1.
(2) On the water supply pipe to each sillcock.
(3) On the water supply pipe to each appliance or mechanical
equipment.
A. Regulate the erection, construction, reconstruction, installation,
operation, maintenance, dismantling, testing, repair and use of a
private communications system in, upon, along, across, above, over,
under or in any manner connected with any right-of-way within the
corporate limits of the borough, as now or in the future may exist;
B. Provide the borough with compensation for occupation and use of the
borough's rights-of-way for a private communications system;
C. Provide the borough with compensation for acquisition and
maintenance of the borough's rights-of-way when used for commercial
purposes; and
§ 163-3 PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS § 166-2
166:315
§ 166-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter and any license issued in accordance
herewith, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall
have the meanings given herein unless otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise or unless such
meaning would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — A nonbroadcast facility consisting
of a set of transmission paths with associated signal generation, reception
and control equipment, under common ownership and control, which
distributes or is designed to distribute to subscribers the signals of one
or more television broadcast stations and is franchised by the borough in
accordance with Chapter A230 of this Code.
COUNCIL — The Council of the borough.
CUSTOMER — A person who, for a charge or payment of a fee, receives,
sends or uses any signal or service provided, collected or distributed by a
private communications system licensed by the borough.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission or its legally appointed or
constituted successor.
LICENSE — The privilege granted by the borough by which the borough
authorizes a person to erect, construct, reconstruct, operate, dismantle,
test, use and maintain a private communications system that occupies any
right-of-way, within the borough. Any license issued in accordance herewith
shall be a nonexclusive license.
LICENSEE — The person, including a corporation, company, association,
partnership, trust or other entity or its permitted legal successor in interest
or permitted assignee, who is issued a license or licenses in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter for the erection, construction, reconstruction,
operation, maintenance, dismantling, testing, repair and use of a private
communications system in the borough.
LOCAL ACCESS TRANSPORT AREA (LATA) — That geographic area and
communications system in which the borough is located and in which
Bell Atlantic (or its successors and assigns) or any other entity which
is authorized by certificate of public convenience or otherwise by the
Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to provide local exchange access telecommunications
services.
MANAGER — The duly appointed Borough Manager of the borough, or such
Manager's designee.
PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — Any communications equipment
or facilities, not part of the LATA or part of a cable communications system
D. Provide the borough with compensation for the cost of relation imposed
by this chapter on a private communications system.
§ 166-2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 166-3
166:316
franchised by the borough, that in any manner is connected with any rightof-
way within the corporate limits of the borough, as now or in the future
may exist.
RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY — Any area or areas established for
vehicular, pedestrian or other public access and use, or the entire width
between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any
part thereof is open for public purposes. Right-of-way includes, but is not
limited to, street, highway, avenue, road, alley, right-of-way, easement, lane,
boulevard, concourse, bridge, tunnel, parks, parkways, sidewalks,
waterways, docks, overheads, wharves and piers, and the surface,
subsurface and air space thereof.
TOTAL LOCAL GROSS REVENUES — All cash, credits or property of any
kind or nature whatsoever, or other consideration of any nature whatsoever,
in any form, arising from or attributable to the sale or exchange of private
communications services by the licensee within the borough or in any
way derived from the operation of its private communications system in
the borough, including, but not limited to, any interconnection between
its system in the borough and any system whatsoever. "Total local gross
revenues" shall include only revenues derived from transmissions that
bypass the LATA. This sum shall be the basis for computing the fee imposed
pursuant to § 166-11B of this chapter. Such sum shall not include any
bad debts, deposits, promotional or vendor discounts or credits, nor sales,
service, occupation or other excise tax to the extent that such taxes are
charged separately from normal service charges and are remitted by the
licensee directly to the taxing authority.
§ 166-4. Service of notice.
All notices required to be given to the borough under any provision of this
chapter shall be deemed served when delivered by hand or certified United
States First Class Mail, in writing, to the Manager or to the Manager's
designee, during normal business hours.
§ 166-5. No liability or warranty to be construed.
This chapter shall not be construed to create or hold the borough
responsible or liable for any damage to persons or property by reason
of any inspection or reinspection authorized herein or failure to inspect
or reinspect, nor shall the issuance of any license nor the approval or
disapproval of any license and/or installation authorized herein constitute
any representation, guaranty or warranty of any kind by, nor create any
liability upon, the borough or any official, agent or employee thereof.
§ 166-6. License to be nonexclusive; renewal.
A. Any annual license issued by the borough in accordance herewith shall
be a nonexclusive license for the use of such rights-of-way within the
borough as specified in the license, for the erection, construction,
§ 166-3 PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS § 166-6
166:317
§ 166-7. Applicability of license.
§ 166-8. Technical standards.
All technical standards governing construction, reconstruction, installation,
operation, testing, use, maintenance and dismantling of a private
communications system provided for herein shall be in accordance with
all applicable FCC and other federal, state and local laws and regulations,
including but not limited to Chapter 107, Electrical Standards, of the Code
of the borough.
§ 166-9. Powers and duties of Manager.
The Manager shall have the following powers and duties:
reconstruction, operation, maintenance, dismantling, testing and use of
a private communications system.
B. Any license issued by the borough is renewable annually upon
establishment by the licensee, to the satisfaction of the borough, that
the licensee is in compliance with this chapter, all applicable federal,
state and local ordinances and regulations and that the space occupied
is not needed for a public purpose.
A. Any license issued for a private communications system in accordance
herewith shall apply only to the location or locations stated on the
license or licenses.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a representation, promise
or guaranty by the borough that any license, permit or other
authorization required under any borough law for the construction or
installation of a private communications system shall be issued.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to create an irrevocable license.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to create an interest in real estate in
any licensee.
A. Receive and review applications for licenses for any private
communications system;
B. Review and examine all reports and filings submitted by the licensee to
the borough pursuant to this chapter;
C. Submit regulations regarding the construction, reconstruction,
operation, maintenance, dismantling, testing or use of any private
communications system established by license in accordance herewith
to the Council for approval; and
D. Administer the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
license issuance or denial, renewal or revocation, fee collection and
audits and other administrative matters and report to the Council
regarding same.
§ 166-6 KUTZTOWN CODE § 166-10
166:318
§ 166-10. Bonds.
§ 166-11. Compensation and license fees.
It shall be a term and condition of any license issued in accordance herewith
that as a part of the consideration supporting the issuance of such license
and the borough's permission thereby to occupy and use any right-of-way
of the borough, that the licensee shall pay each year to the borough the
following compensation and license fees:
§ 166-12. Payment and audit of compensation and license fees.
A. All persons submitting a request for a license to construct a private
communications system in accordance herewith shall file with their
request bonds solely for the protection of the borough with a surety
company or trust company or companies as surety or sureties in an
amount determined by the Manager to protect the borough from any
and all damages or costs suffered or incurred by the borough as a result
thereof, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees and costs of any
action or proceeding, and including the full amount of compensation,
indemnification, cost of removal or abandonment of any property or
other costs which may be in default, up to the full principal amount of
such bond; and the condition shall be a continuing obligation during the
entire term of any license issued in accordance herewith and thereafter
until the licensee shall have satisfied in full any and all obligations to
the borough which arise out of or pertain to the license for a private
communications system.
B. None of the provisions of this section nor any bond accepted by the
borough pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the borough
thereunder, shall be construed to excuse the faithful performance by or
limit the liability of the licensee under this chapter or any license issued
in accordance herewith or for damages, either to the full amount of
such bond or otherwise.
A. Any private communications system which serves no customers other
than itself shall pay compensation and license fees in the amount of $1
per linear foot for each diameter inch or less of underground conduit or
wire or each .250 diameter inch or less of aerial wire per annum. In no
event shall the fee be less than $250 per annum.
B. Any private communication system that serves customers within the
borough shall pay 5% of the annual total local gross revenues.
A. The annual compensation and license fee provided for in § 166-11A
shall be payable annually on or before February 1 of each calendar year.
B. The annual compensation and license fee provided for in § 166-11B
shall be assessed quarterly for the preceding quarter, as of March 31,
June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each year.
§ 166-10 PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS § 166-12
166:319
§ 166-13. Indemnity and insurance.
(1) Each quarterly payment shall be payable and reportable no less
than 30 days after the relevant assessment date.
(2) Each payment shall be accompanied by a report from the licensee,
in a form approved by the Manager, showing the basis for the
computation and such other relevant data as may be required by
the Manager.
(3) Each of such reports shall contain a notarized verification by the
chief financial officer of the licensee, and such reports shall be
verified annually, within 90 days of the close of business of the last
day of the calendar year by a certified public accountant acceptable
to the borough and at the expense of the licensee.
(4) Failure to comply strictly with this section shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter and shall subject the licensee to all
penalties and remedies, both legal and equitable which are
available to the borough.
C. The acceptance of any payment required hereunder by the borough
shall not be construed as an acknowledgment that the amount paid is
the correct amount due, nor shall such acceptance of payment be
construed as a release of any claim which the borough may have for
additional sums due and payable.
(1) All fee payments shall be subject to audit by the borough and
assessment or refund if the payment is found to be in error.
(2) In the event that such audit results in an assessment by and an
additional payment to the borough, such additional payment shall
be subject to interest at the rate of 1% per month or the maximum
allowed by Pennsylvania law, whichever is lower, calculated from
the date on which such additional payment was originally due and
payable to the date of actual payment.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the liability of the
licensee for all applicable federal, state and local taxes.
A. The borough shall not at any time be liable for any injury or damage
occurring to any person or property, including, but not limited to, loss of
income or revenue and any other incidental or consequential damages,
from any cause whatsoever, including damages from the borough's
negligent omissions, if any, arising from the use, operation or condition
of the licensee's private communications system.
B. The licensee shall indemnify, save and hold harmless and defend the
borough from all liens; charges; claims, including, but not limited to,
libel, slander, invasion of privacy and unauthorized use of any
trademark, trade name or service mark; demands; suits; actions; fines;
penalties; losses; costs, including, but not limited to, reasonable legal
§ 166-12 KUTZTOWN CODE § 166-13
166:320
§ 166-14. Police powers; construal of provisions.
§ 166-15. Use of streets and pole attachments.
fees and court costs; judgments; injuries; liabilities or damages, in
law or equity, of any and every kind and nature whatsoever, including
damages caused by or arising out of any act of negligent omission of
the borough, its officers, servants, agents, employees or contractors, or
otherwise, arising out of or in any way connected with the installation,
operation, maintenance or condition of the licensee's private
communications system.
C. The Manager, in consultation with the Borough Solicitor, shall set the
type and coverage of insurance required. In setting the amount, the
Manager shall take into consideration the size and location of the
private communications system, the financial resources of the licensee,
the risk involved to the borough and to the general public and such
other factors as those officers of the borough shall deem to be
reasonable in light of all of the circumstances.
A. Nothing in this chapter or in any license issued in accordance herewith
shall be construed as an abrogation by the borough of any of its police
powers.
B. Nothing in this chapter or in any license issued in accordance herewith
shall be construed to create a license coupled with an interest in the
licensee, and all licenses granted hereunder shall be revocable by the
borough.
A. Before commencing construction of its private communications system
in, above, over, under, across, through or in any way connected with the
rights-of-way of the borough, the licensee shall first obtain all required
written approvals from the Code Enforcement Office and all other
appropriate officials of the borough.
B. Upon obtaining such written approval, the licensee shall give the
Manager written notice within a reasonable time of proposed
construction, but in no event shall such notice be given less than 10
days before such commencement.
C. Any person who submits a request for a license in accordance herewith
shall include therein proposed agreements for the use of existing utility
poles and conduits, if applicable, with the owner(s) (including the
borough) of such facilities to be used or affected by the construction of
the proposed private communications system, which agreements shall
become effective on the date of execution of the license issued in
accordance herewith in the event that such person is issued a license.
D. It shall be unlawful for the licensee or any other person to open or
otherwise disturb the surface of any street or other right-of-way for any
purpose whatsoever without obtaining approval to do so after
§ 166-13 PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS § 166-15
166:321
proceeding in the manner prescribed in Subsections A and B hereof.
Violation of this section shall subject the licensee to all penalties and
remedies prescribed herein and to all other remedies, legal or
equitable, which are available to the borough.
E. The licensee shall restore any street or other right-of-way it has
disturbed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 192 of the Code
of the borough and shall, at its own cost and expense, restore and
replace any other property disturbed, damaged or in any way injured by
or on account of its activities to as good as the condition such property
was in immediately prior to the disturbance, damage or injury or pay
the fair market value of such property to its owner.
F. The licensee shall, at its own cost and expense, protect, support,
temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same right-of-way or remove
from such right-of-way any of its property when required to do so by the
borough because of right-of-way excavation, construction, repair,
regrading or grading, traffic conditions, installation of sewers, drains,
water pipes, borough-owned power or signal lines, vacation or
relocation of any right-of-way or any other type of structure or
improvement of a public agency or any other type of improvement
necessary for the public health, safety or welfare.
G. Nothing in this chapter or any license issued in accordance herewith
shall be construed as authorizing the licensee to erect and maintain
new poles in areas serviced by existing poles. The licensee shall obtain
written approval from the Manager before erecting any new poles or
underground conduits where none exist.
H. The licensee shall maintain all wires, conduits, cables and other real
and personal property and facilities in good condition, order and repair.
I. The licensee shall keep accurate, complete and current maps and
records of its system and facilities which occupy the rights-of-way
within the borough and shall furnish as soon as they are available two
complete copies of such maps and records to the Manager.
J. The licensee shall comply with all rules and regulations issued by the
borough governing the construction and installation of private
communications systems. In addition:
(1) All aerial cables and wires shall be installed parallel with existing
telephone and electric utility wires; and
(2) Multiple aerial configurations shall be in parallel arrangement and
bundled, in accordance with engineering and safety
considerations; and
(3) All underground installations shall be in the appropriate size and
type conduit or other enclosures approved by the Manager; and
§ 166-15 KUTZTOWN CODE § 166-15
166:322
§ 166-16. Transfers and assignments.
Chapter 168
PUBLIC HEALTH; NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 192.
(4) All installations shall be underground in those areas of the borough
where both telephone and electric utilities' facilities are
underground at the time of the installation of the licensee's private
communications system. In areas where both telephone and
electric utilities' facilities are above ground at the time of the
installation of the licensee's private communications system, the
licensee may install its system above ground on existing utility
poles, only upon the condition that at such time as those facilities
are placed underground by the telephone and electric utility
companies, the licensee shall likewise place its facilities
underground at its sole cost and expense.
(5) The licensee, upon reasonable notice by the borough, shall
temporarily or permanently remove, adjust, raise or lower its
facilities within the right-of-way when the borough determines that
such action is needed for public use of the right-of-way, including,
but not limited to, the passage of nonstandard vehicles or when the
borough determines that such facilities are the cause of
electromagnetic or other interference with other facilities and
equipment located within the right-of-way.
(6) The licensee shall obtain the written permission of the owner,
including the borough, of any tree or other vegetation before it
trims or prunes the same.
A. The licensee shall not transfer or assign its interest in any license
issued in accordance herewith without the prior written authorization
of the Council. For purposes of this section, a merger, consolidation,
sale of stock or transfer of ownership interests in the licensee, or a
lease or sublease, shall be deemed a transfer or assignment.
B. Nothing in any approval by the Council authorizing any transfer or
assignment of any license issued in accordance herewith shall be
construed to waive or release any rights of the borough in and to the
rights-of-way of the borough or as a release of any of the borough's
police powers.
§ 166-15 PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS § 168-1
166:323
§ 168-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "Public Health/
Nuisance Ordinance."
§ 168-2. Rules and regulations.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce the provisions
of this chapter and may make rules and regulations necessary for its
administration. Such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with this
chapter and shall be submitted to the Council of the Borough of Kutztown
for approval by resolution. If the rules and regulations so submitted to
Council are approved by Council, the same shall be filed in the office of the
Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Kutztown and in the office of
the Secretary of the Borough of Kutztown as an addenda to this chapter.
§ 168-3. Definitions; word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENT — A person representing and acting on behalf of an owner.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Kutztown, Berks
County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The corporate official appointed by the
Borough Council as the Borough Manager or such official's properly
designated representative.[Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No.
12-1995]
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The person designated as such
by the Council of the Borough of Kutztown, and shall include a duly
authorized representative.
NOTICE — The notice of any violation of this chapter which is provided
for in § 168-13 of this chapter.
OCCUPANT — Any person other than the owner who resides upon a
property and has control of the same.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association,
partnership, trust or other entity.
Shall have legal or equitable title to any property, with or without
actual possession thereof; or
(1)
Shall have charge, care or control of any property as owner or
agent of the owner or as executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner.
(2)
§ 168-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § 168-3
166:324
§ 168-4. Hedges, brush, grass and weeds.
§ 168-5. Trees.
PROPERTY — Any lot or part thereof or any land or part thereof located
within the Borough of Kutztown, whether public or private.
SIDEWALK — The area within the street right-of-way between the curb
or edge of paving and the right-of-way line of the street.
STREET — A public or private right-of-way intended for use as a means
of vehicular and pedestrian circulation which provides a means of
access to abutting property. The word "street" includes thoroughfare,
avenue, boulevard, court, drive, expressway, highway, service street or
alley, lane and road or similar terms.
B. Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the
masculine gender include the feminine and the neuter; and the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural the singular. When terms,
phrases or words are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily
accepted meanings or such as the context may imply.
A. No person owning or occupying any property shall permit any grass or
weeds or any vegetation whatsoever, not edible or planted for some
useful or ornamental purpose, to grow or remain upon such property so
as to exceed a height of six (6) inches or to throw off any unpleasant or
noxious odor or to conceal any filthy deposit or to create or produce
pollen.
B. No person owning or occupying any property shall permit any hedges
or brush to grow or remain upon any property which obstructs any
street, sidewalk, fire hydrant or traffic control device.
C. Any property utilized for agricultural purposes or property which
consists of wooded areas shall be maintained in compliance with
Subsection A and B of this section and § 168-6C and § 168-5 of this
chapter within the street right-of-way, but in no case shall such
maintenance be less than ten (10) feet from the edge of the street
paving.
D. Any hedges, brush, grass, weeds or other vegetation growing upon any
property in violation of any of the provisions of Subsection A, B or C of
this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the
health, safety, cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants of the
borough.
E. The owner of any property, whether or not vacant, and/or the occupant
of any property, in cases of property occupied by any person other than
the owner thereof, shall remove, trim or cut all hedges, brush, grass,
weeds or other vegetation growing or remaining upon such property in
violation of the provisions of Subsection A, B or C of this section.
§ 168-3 PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS § 168-5
166:325
§ 168-6. Street obstructions.
§ 168-7. Posting of signs. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No.
12-1995; 6-18-2019 by Ord. No. 1-2019]
A. All trees within the borough shall be kept trimmed by the owner or
occupant of the property on or in front of which they are located so that
the minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall not be
less than fourteen (14) feet above the cartway of any street and not less
than eight (8) feet above the sidewalk area of any street.
B. Any tree upon a property which is dead or substantially diseased shall
be removed by the owner of the property on or in front of which the
same is located.
A. No person shall place and maintain upon any of the streets or sidewalks
of the borough, unless such person shall have prior approval of the
Borough Council, any goods, wares or merchandise for display, storage
or sale; provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter shall not
affect the provisions of any other ordinance regulating the placing of
building materials and the procuring of a permit therefor.
B. No person shall permit any door of any structure to project into any
street or sidewalk so as to create an obstruction to traffic, whether
vehicular or pedestrian.
C. No person shall erect or permit any structure or sign or place any plant
or permit any plant at a street intersection so as to impede vision
between a height of two and one-half (21/2) feet and ten (10) feet above
the center-line grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by
the street center line of each such intersecting streets and a line joining
the street center line at a distance of seventy-five (75) feet from the
point of intersection, except that in the case of a service street, said line
shall be drawn at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet along the service
street from the point of intersection.
A. No person shall append or affix or cause to be appended or affixed by
nailing, tacking, hanging or otherwise appending any sign, notice or
advertisement of any kind whatsoever upon any tree, post, pole, electric
pole or pillar of any description within a street.
B. No person shall deliver or distribute newspapers or advertising matter
to any premises unless it is handed to the recipient, placed on the
driveway, porch, stoop or entranceway of the building or firmly affixed
to a building so as to prevent the newspaper or advertising matter from
being blown about, becoming scattered or in any way causing litter. It
shall be unlawful to distribute these materials as described above if the
owner or occupant has informed the person delivering or causing
delivery that he/she does not wish to receive it.
§ 168-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 168-7
166:326
§ 168-8. Littering.
§ 168-9. Burning.
C. Borough Council or a duly authorized representative may authorize the
placement of temporary direction signs to facilitate traffic during
special events.
D. Requests for temporary placement of signs as noted in Subsection C of
this section must be submitted to the Borough Manager or Code
Enforcement Officer no less than 24 hours prior to the time proposed
for the placement of the signs.
E. Such signs as permitted by Subsection C of this section shall be
removed by the owner of the signs or person placing such signs within
24 hours after the end of such special event.
F. Signs posted in violation of this chapter or signs permitted by
Subsection C of this section which have not been removed as required
by Subsection E of this section shall be removed by the Borough.
A. No person shall place or cause to be placed or permit any glass, metal,
refuse and/or debris, including but not limited to grass clippings, stone
from driveways and like matter, upon any street within the borough.
B. No person shall keep or suffer to remain on any property any odorous,
offensive or unwholesome matter of any kind or any garbage, rubbish,
paper, refuse, litter, wood or other matter or substance or substances
which attract rats, mice or other rodents or insects or create odorous
conditions.
C. No person shall throw, place, discard or be a party to the throwing,
placing or discarding of any odorous, offensive or unwholesome matter
of any kind or any garbage, rubbish, paper, refuse, wood or litter of any
kind on, upon or adjacent to any street, sidewalk or property within the
borough.
A. No person shall:
(1) Ignite or feed an open fire for the destruction of refuse, the conduct
of a salvage operation or any other purpose on any property;
(2) Cause, suffer, allow or permit the maintenance of any open fire for
the destruction of refuse, the conduct of a salvage operation or any
other purpose on any property under his control; or
(3) Make any bonfire or bonfires or set fire to any wood shavings,
paper, hay, straw or any other inflammable substance on any street
or sidewalk or public or private property unless approval for such
bonfire or bonfires is granted by Borough Council upon
recommendation of the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Fire
Chief of the Kutztown Fire Company No. 1.
§ 168-7 PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS § 168-9
166:327
§ 168-10. Unlicensed vehicles.
No person shall permit or cause any vehicles, boats or trailers of any kind or
type without current license plates and registration to be parked or stored
on any property other than in a completely enclosed building, unless the
vehicles are for sale at a permitted sales agency dealing in vehicles, boats
or trailers.
§ 168-11. Vehicle parking.
§ 168-12. Working hours.
B. The following are exceptions to the aforesaid provisions of Subsection A
of this section:
(1) Open fires may be set as provided for in Subsection B(2) of this
section in the performance of an official duty of any public officer if
the fire is necessary for:
(a) The prevention of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by
other means.
(b) The protection of public health.
(2) Open fires may be set with the approval of the Code Enforcement
Officer and the Fire Chief of the Kutztown Fire Company No. 1,
provided that:
(a) There is no practical or available alternate method for the
disposal of the material to be burned; and
(b) No hazardous or other objectionable condition will be created
by such burning.
A. All off-street parking areas and access drives shall either be paved or
stone as required by applicable ordinances of the borough. No person
shall permit the parking of vehicles on any other surface.
B. Stone driveways and parking areas shall be maintained by the occupant
and/or owner so as to prevent ponding of water or the migration of any
loose stone onto any street.
A. No person shall perform any work or cause any work to be performed
which creates a nuisance at night, on Sundays or legal holidays except
upon written authorization of the Code Enforcement Officer. When any
person desires to work at night, on Sundays or legal holidays, said
person shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer at least two (2) days in
advance requesting written permission. "Night" shall be defined as onehalf
(1/2) hour before sunset and one-half (1/2) hour after sunrise.
B. Emergency work by public utilities or as ordered by the borough shall
be excluded from the regulations of Subsection A of this section.
§ 168-9 KUTZTOWN CODE § 168-13
166:328
§ 168-13. Notice of violations and enforcement.
A. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer believes, or has cause to
believe, that there has occurred and/or is continuing any violation of the
provisions of this chapter or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant
to this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer shall give notice of such
violation to each person responsible therefor, and such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing and state the place and location of the violation.
(2) State the nature, condition and manner of the violation.
(3) State the determination of the Code Enforcement Officer with
respect to the violation.
(4) State the name of each person deemed responsible by the Code
Enforcement Officer for such violation, together with the name of
the owner of the property upon which the violation occurred and/or
is located.
(5) State the date of the notice and the period of time, if any, allowed
for compliance with this chapter, as such period of time is specified
in Subsection C of this section.
(6) Be served upon the owner of the property involved and all other
persons, if any, named in the notice pursuant to Subsection A(4) of
this section, and service of such notice shall be made upon the
owner and each such other person, if any, either personally or by
certified first class mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid,
sent to the last known address of such owner and each such other
person.
B. The requirements for service of notice as contained in this chapter shall
apply only as to notification of the first occurrence of any violation. The
issuance of a notice thereafter regarding any repeated occurrence of
the same violation shall not be required prior to imposition of penalties
as provided for in this chapter.
C. The period of time within which a person determined to be responsible,
pursuant to Subsection A(4) of this section, for any violation shall
comply with the specific provisions of this chapter, following the
issuance of a notice, shall be as follows:
(1) As to violations of § 168-4 of this chapter, within five (5) days
following the date of issuance of the notice;
(2) As to violations of § 168-10 of this chapter, within ten (10) days
following the date of issuance of the notice;
(3) In all other cases, within the period of time determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer and set forth in the notice; and
§ 168-13 PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS § 168-13
166:329
§ 168-14. Violations and penalties; recovery of costs; civil actions;
appeals.
(4) Notwithstanding the time periods set forth in Subsection C(1), (2)
and (3) set forth hereinabove, the notice of any violation may
require immediate compliance with this chapter when it is
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer that the violation in
question presents an immediate and present danger or nuisance to
the health, safety and welfare of the public, and, in such case,
notice of the violation may be verbal (which verbal notice shall
thereafter be confirmed with a written notice) and shall be served
personally upon the person, if available, who has caused, is
responsible for or in control of said violation, and such notice may
require the immediate correction and discontinuance of the
violation and compliance with this chapter.
D. Notwithstanding any such notice requirements of this § 168-13, when it
is determined by an officer of the Kutztown Police Department that an
immediate present danger exists to the health, safety and welfare of the
public, said officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter being
violated without need for the issuance of any notice of any violation.
A. Any person who violates or neglects, fails or refuses to comply with the
provisions of this chapter or any notice, order, rule or regulation made
in connection with this chapter shall be guilty of a summary offense
and, upon conviction thereof, shall pay a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.) and, in
default of the payment thereof, undergo imprisonment in the Berks
County Prison for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days.
B. Notwithstanding the imposition of any penalty hereinabove prescribed,
upon the neglect, failure or refusal of any person to comply with the
requirements of this chapter, following the expiration of the period of
time, if any, set forth in any notice of violation of this chapter, the
borough may, but shall not be required to, perform, or cause the
performance of, work or other actions necessary to remove, correct,
remedy, alter or otherwise abate the conditions which constitute the
violation of this chapter. Any person who is found to have violated any
provisions of this chapter shall, in addition to the penalties provided for
herein, bear all costs incurred by the borough in the event that the
borough has elected to perform, or cause to be performed, any such
remedial action. Any such costs may be collected by the borough from
any such person in the manner provided by law.
C. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to preclude the
borough from instituting an appropriate civil action or proceeding,
whether at law and/or in equity, to prevent the performance of work or
acts declared to be unlawful under the provisions of this chapter or to
restrain, correct or abate a violation of this chapter or to seek injunctive
or other equitable relief to remedy or prevent any violation under this
§ 168-13 KUTZTOWN CODE § 168-14
166:330
Chapter 170
PUBLIC RECORDS
chapter or to recover the cost of any remedial action which the borough
elects to undertake to correct any violation of this chapter.
D. Any aggrieved person may appeal the decision of the Code Enforcement
Officer to the Borough of Kutztown Code Appeals Board in accordance
with the requirements contained in Chapter 12 of the Code of the
Borough of Kutztown. [Added 7-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-1999]
§ 168-14 PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS § 168-14
166:331

ARTICLE I
Right-To-Know Policy
[Adopted 12-16-2008 by Ord. No. 16-2008]
§ 170-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEALS OFFICER — The individual designated by the Pennsylvania Office
of Open Records to hear appeals from the denial of public records request
made to the Borough.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kutztown, Pennsylvania.
CONFIDENTIAL PROPRIETARY INFORMATION — Commercial or financial
information received by an agency which is privileged or confidential and
the disclosure of which would cause substantial harm to the competitive
position of the person that submitted the information.
FINANCIAL RECORDS —
HOMELAND SECURITY — Governmental actions designed to prevent,
detect, respond to and recover from acts of terrorism, major disasters and
other emergencies, whether or natural or man-made. The term includes
activities relating to the following:
Any account, voucher or contract dealing with a receipt or
disbursement of funds by the Borough or the Borough's acquisition, use
or disposal of services, supplies, materials, equipment or property.
A.
The salary or other payments or expenses paid to an officer or employee
of the Borough, including the name and title of the officer or employee.
B.
A financial audit report performed on behalf of the Borough, however,
this term does not include the work papers underlying the audit.
C.
Emergency preparedness and response, including preparedness and
response activities by volunteer medical, police, emergency
management, hazardous materials and fire personnel;
A.
B. Intelligence activities;
C. Critical infrastructure protection;
D. Border security;
E. Ground, aviation and maritime transportation security;
F. Biodefense;
G. Detection of nuclear and radiological materials; and
H. Research on next-generation securities technologies.
§ 170-1 PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS § 170-1
166:333
OFFICE OF OPEN RECORDS — The office established within the
Department of Community and Economic Development for the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which is charged with the implementation
and enforcement of the Right-To-Know Law.98
PERSONAL FINANCIAL INFORMATION — An individual's personal credit,
charge or debit card information; bank account information; bank, credit
or financial statements; account or PIN numbers and other information
relating to an individual's personal finances.
PRIVILEGE — Information protected by the attorney work product doctrine,
the attorney-client privilege, the doctor-patient privilege, the speech and
debate privilege or other privilege recognized by a court interpreting the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PUBLIC RECORD — A record, including a financial record of the Borough
that is not exempt under § 170-6 of this article or is not exempt from being
disclosed under any other federal or state law or regulation or judicial order
or decree or is not protected by a privilege.
RECORD — Information, regardless of physical form or characteristics,
that documents a transaction or activity of an agency and that is created,
received or retained pursuant to law or in connection with a transaction,
business or activity of the Borough. The term includes a document, paper,
letter, map, book, tape, photograph, film or sound recording, information
stored or maintained electronically and a data-processed or imageprocessed
document.
REQUESTOR — A person that is a legal resident of the United States and
requests a record pursuant to this article or the Pennsylvania Right-To-
Know Law.
RESPONSE — Access to a Pennsylvania record or the Borough's written
notice to a requestor granting, denying or partially granting and partially
denying access to a record.
RIGHT-TO-KNOW OFFICER — The person designated by the Borough to
receive public records requests submitted to the Borough and otherwise
comply with the Pennsylvania Right-To-Know Law99 on behalf of the
Borough.
SOCIAL SERVICES — Cash assistance and other welfare benefits, medical,
mental and other health-care services, drug and alcohol treatment, adoption
services, vocational services and training, occupational training, education
services, counseling services, workers' compensation services and
unemployment compensation services, foster care services, services for the
elderly, services for individuals with disabilities and services for victims of
crimes and domestic assault.
98.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
99.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
§ 170-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § 170-1
166:334
TERRORIST ACT — A violent or life-threatening act that violates the
criminal laws of the United States or any state that appears to be intended
to:
TRADE SECRET —
§ 170-2. Appointment of Right-To-Know Officer. [Amended
7-21-2009 by Ord. No. 4-2009]
The Council shall appoint the Right-To-Know Officer for the Borough of
Kutztown by resolution.
§ 170-3. Duties of Right-To-Know Officer.
A. Intimidate or coerce a civilian population.
B. Influence the policy of a government.
Affect the conduct of a government by mass destruction, assassination
or kidnapping.
C.
Information, including the formula, drawing, pattern, compilation,
including a customer list, program, device, method, technique or
process that:
Derives independent economic value, actual or potential, but not
being generally known to and not being readily ascertainable by
proper means by other persons who can obtain economic value
from its disclosure or use; and
(1)
Is the subject of efforts that are reasonable under the
circumstances to maintain its secrecy.
(2)
A.
The term includes data processing software obtained by an agency
under a licensing agreement prohibiting disclosure.
B.
A. The Right-To-Know Officer shall receive requests submitted to the
Borough.
B. The Right-To-Know Officer shall direct requests to the appropriate
persons within the Borough or to the appropriate person from amongst
the Borough 's contractors, legal advisors and other such related
personnel.
C. The Right-To-Know Officer shall track the Borough 's progress in
responding to requests, including the following:
(1) Put the date of receipt on a written request received by the
Borough.
(2) Compute the day on which the five-day period for responding to the
request will expire and make a notation of that date on the written
request.
§ 170-1 PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS § 170-3
166:335
§ 170-4. Request for public records.
§ 170-5. Response to request.
(3) Maintain an electronic or paper copy of a written request, including
all documents submitted with the request until the request has
been fulfilled. If the request is denied, the written request shall be
maintained for 30 days or, if an appeal is filed, until a final
determination is issued under Section 1101(b) of the Pennsylvania
Right-To-Know Law.100
A. A requestor desiring to obtain or view public records in the possession
or believed to be in the possession of the Borough shall make a request
to the Borough on the right-to-know request form in the format
attached hereto as Exhibit A101 or as provided by the Office of Open
Records.
B. All requests for public records shall be made to the Right-To-Know
Officer for the Borough.
C. All requests should identify or describe the public records being sought
with sufficient specificity to enable the Borough to ascertain which
public records are being requested and shall include the name and
address to which the Borough should address its response.
D. A written request need not include any explanation of the requestor's
reason for requesting a public record or its intended use of the public
record, unless otherwise required by law.
A. The Borough has five business days from receipt of a written request to
either grant or deny the request.
B. In response to a request for a public record, the Borough shall not be
required to create a record which does not currently exist or to compile,
maintain, format or organize a record in a manner in which the Borough
does not currently compile, maintain, format or organize the record.
C. Failure to act within the five-day time period shall equate to a deemed
denial of the request.
D. Extension of time.
(1) An agency may take up to an additional 30 calendar days after the
five business days to respond to a request for public records if the
Right-To-Know Officer sends written notice to the requestor within
the five business days that the agency needs additional time to
process the request as noted herein.
(2) Situations necessitating extension of time.
100. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
101. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 170-3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 170-5
166:336
§ 170-6. Exempt documents.
(a) Redaction of nonpublic information is required.
(b) The records must be retrieved from a remote location.
(c) Timely response cannot be accomplished within the time
required due to bona fide and specified staffing limitations.
(d) Legal review is necessary.
(e) The requestor has not complied with the Borough's policies
regarding access.
(f) The requestor refuses to pay applicable fees.
(g) The extent and nature of the request precludes a response
within the time period.
(3) In the event the Borough has not responded to a request for which
it has received an extension of time within the thirty-day time
period, a deemed denial of the request shall take place on the 31st
day.
(4) Extension of time beyond the thirty-day time period. A requestor
may agree to a period in excess of 30 days for the processing of the
request, but is not required to do so. If such an agreement is
reached between the requestor and the Borough, the request shall
be deemed denied the day following the date agreed upon for
production if the response has not been provided by that date.
E. Denial of a request. A denial of a request for a public record shall set
forth:
(1) A description of the record requested.
(2) The specific reasons for denial, including citation of legal authority,
if applicable.
(3) The printed name, title, business address and telephone number
and signature of the Right-To-Know Officer who issued the denial.
(4) The date of the denial.
(5) The procedure to appeal the denial.
A. The burden of proving that a record of the Borough is exempt from
public access shall be on the Borough and shall be proven by a
preponderance of the evidence.
B. However, documents meeting any one of the following criteria are
exempt from production to requestors pursuant to the Right-To-Know
Law:
(1) A record, the disclosure of which:
§ 170-5 PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS § 170-6
166:337
(a) Would result in the loss of federal or state funds by the
Borough.
(b) Would be reasonably likely to result in a substantial and
demonstrable risk of physical harm to or the personal security
of an individual.
(2) A record maintained by the Borough in connection with the
military, homeland security, national defense, law enforcement or
other public safety activity that, if disclosed, would be reasonably
likely to jeopardize or threaten public safety or preparedness or
public protection activity or a record that is designated classified
by an appropriate federal or state military authority.
(3) A record, the disclosure of which creates a reasonable likelihood of
endangering the safety or the physical security of a building, public
utility, resource, infrastructure, facility or information storage
system, which may include:
(a) Documents or data relating to computer hardware, source
files, software and system networks that could jeopardize
computer security by exposing a vulnerability in preventing,
protecting against, mitigating or responding to a terrorist act;
(b) Lists of infrastructure, resources and significant special
events, including those defined by the Federal Government in
the National Infrastructure Protections, which are deemed
critical due to their nature and which result from risk analysis;
threat assessments; consequences assessments; antiterrorism
protective measures and plans; counterterrorism measures
and plans; and security and response needs assessments; and
(c) Building plans or infrastructure records that expose or create
vulnerability through disclosure of the location, configuration
or security of critical systems, including public utility systems,
structural elements, technology, communication, electrical,
fire suppression, ventilation, water, wastewater, sewage and
gas systems.
(4) A record regarding computer hardware, software and networks,
including administrative or technical records, which, if disclosed,
would be reasonably likely to jeopardize computer security.
(5) A record of an individual's medical, psychiatric or psychological
history or disability status, including an evaluation, consultation,
prescription, diagnosis or treatment; results of tests, including
drug tests; enrollment in a health care program or program
designed for participation by persons with disabilities, including
vocation rehabilitation, workers' compensation and unemployment
compensation; or related information that would disclose
individually identifiable health information.
§ 170-6 KUTZTOWN CODE § 170-6
166:338
(6) The following personal identification information:
(a) A record containing all or part of a person's Social Security
number, driver's license number, personal financial
information, home, cellular or personal telephone numbers,
personal e-mail addresses, employee number or other
confidential personal identification number.
(b) A spouse's name, marital status or beneficiary or dependent
information.
(c) The home address of a law enforcement officer or judge.
(d) Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the release of the
name, position, salary, actual compensation or other payments
or expenses, employment contract, employment-related
contract or agreement and length of service of a public official
or a Borough employee.
(e) The Borough may redact the name or other identifying
information relating to an individual performing an undercover
or covert law enforcement activity from a record.
(7) The following records relating to a Borough employee:
(a) A letter of reference or recommendation pertaining to the
character or qualifications of an identifiable individual, unless
it was prepared in relation to the appointment of an individual
to fill a vacancy in an elected office or an appointed office
requiring Senate confirmation.
(b) A performance rating or review.
(c) The result of a civil service or similar test administered by the
Borough shall not be disclosed if restricted by a collective
bargaining agreement. Only test scores of individuals who
obtained a passing score on a test administered by the
Borough may be disclosed.
(d) The employment application of an individual who is not hired
by the Borough.
(e) Workplace support services program information.
(f) Written criticisms of an employee.
(g) Grievance material, including documents related to
discrimination or sexual harassment.
(h) Information regarding discipline, demotion or discharge
contained in a personnel file. This subsection shall not apply to
the final action of the Borough that results in demotion or
discharge.
§ 170-6 PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS § 170-6
166:339
(i) An academic transcript.
(8) A record pertaining to strategy or negotiations relating to labor
relations or collective bargaining and related arbitration
proceedings. This subsection shall not apply to a final or executed
contract or agreement between the parties in a collective
bargaining procedure.
(a) In the case of the arbitration of a dispute or grievance under a
collective bargaining agreement, an exhibit entered into
evidence at an arbitration proceeding, a transcript of the
arbitration or the opinion. This subsection shall not apply to
the final award or order of the arbitrator in a dispute or
grievance procedure.
(9) The draft of a bill, resolution, regulation, statement of policy,
management directive, ordinance or amendment thereto prepared
by or for the Borough.
(10) A record that reflects:
(a) The internal, predecisional deliberations of an agency, its
members, employees or officials or predecisional deliberations
between agency members, employees or officials and
members, employees or officials of another agency, including
predecisional deliberations relating to a budget
recommendation, legislative proposal, legislative amendment,
contemplated or proposed policy or course of action or any
research, memos or other documents used in the predecisional
deliberations.
(b) The strategy to be used to develop or achieve the successful
adoption of a budget, legislative proposal or regulation.
[1] This subsection shall not apply to a written or Internet
application or other document that has been submitted to
request commonwealth funds.
[2] This subsection shall not apply to the results of public
opinion surveys, polls, focus groups, marketing research
or similar effort designed to measure public opinion.
(11) A record that constitutes or reveals a trade secret or confidential
proprietary information.
(12) Notes and working papers prepared by or for a public official or
Borough employee used solely for that official's or employee's own
personal use, including telephone message slips, routing slips and
other materials that do not have an official purpose.
(13) Records that would disclose the identify of an individual who
lawfully makes a donation to an agency unless the donation is
intended for or restricted to providing remuneration or personal
§ 170-6 KUTZTOWN CODE § 170-6
166:340
tangible benefit to a named public official or employee of the
Borough, including lists of potential donors compiled by the
Borough to pursue donations, donor profile information or personal
identifying information relating to a donor.
(14) Academic transcripts.
(15) Examinations, examination questions, scoring keys or answers to
examinations. This subsection shall include licensing and other
examinations relating to the qualifications of an individual and to
examinations given in primary and secondary schools and
institutions of higher education.
(16) Criminal investigations.
(a) A record of the Borough relating to or resulting in a criminal
investigation, including:
[1] Complaints of potential criminal conduct other than a
private criminal complaint.
[2] Investigative materials, notes, correspondence, videos and
reports.
[3] A record that includes the identity of a confidential source
or the identity of a suspect who has not been charged with
an offense to whom confidentiality has been promised.
[4] A record that includes information made confidential by
law or court order.
[5] Victim information, including any information that would
jeopardize the safety of the victim.
[6] A record that, if disclosed, would do any of the following:
[a] Reveal the institution, progress or result of a criminal
investigation, except the filing of criminal charges.
[b] Deprive a person of the right to a fair trial or an
impartial adjudication.
[c] Impair the ability to locate a defendant or
codefendant.
[d] Hinder the Borough or a law enforcement agency's
ability to secure an arrest, prosecution or conviction.
[e] Endanger the life or physical safety of an individual.
(b) This subsection shall not apply to information contained in a
police blotter as defined in 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 9102 (relating to
definitions) and utilized or maintained by the Pennsylvania
State Police, local, campus, transit or port authority police
§ 170-6 PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS § 170-6
166:341
department or other law enforcement agency or in a traffic
report except as provided under 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3754(b)
(relating to accident prevention investigations).
(17) A record of the Borough relating to a noncriminal investigation,
including:
(a) Complaints submitted to the Borough.
(b) Investigative materials, notes, correspondence and reports.
(c) A record that includes the identity of a confidential source,
including individuals subject to the act of December 12, 1986
(P.L. 1559, No. 169), known as the "Whistleblower Law."102
(d) A record that includes information made confidential by law.
(e) Work papers underlying an audit.
(f) A record that, if disclosed, would do any of the following:
[1] Reveal the institution, progress or result of a Borough
investigation, except the imposition of a fine or civil
penalty, the suspension, modification or revocation of a
license, permit, registration, certificate or similar
authorization issued by the Borough or an executed
settlement agreement unless the agreement is determined
to be confidential by a court.
[2] Deprive a person of the right to an impartial adjudication.
[3] Constitute an unwarranted invasion of privacy.
[4] Hinder the Borough's ability to secure an administrative or
civil sanction.
[5] Endanger the life or physical safety of an individual.
(18) Records or parts of records, except time response logs, pertaining
to audio recordings, telephone or radio transmissions received by
emergency dispatch personnel, including 911 recordings. This
subsection shall not apply to a 911 recording, or a transcript of a
911 recording, if the Borough or a court determines that the public
interest in disclosure outweighs the interest in nondisclosure.
(19) DNA and RNA records.
(20) An autopsy record of a coroner or medical examiner and any
audiotape of a postmortem examination or autopsy, or a copy,
reproduction or facsimile of an autopsy report, a photograph,
negative or print, including a photograph or videotape of the body
or any portion of the body of a deceased person at the scene of
102. Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 1421 et seq.
§ 170-6 KUTZTOWN CODE § 170-6
166:342
death or in the course of a postmortem examination or autopsy
taken or made by or caused to be taken or made by the coroner
or medical examiner. This exception shall not limit the reporting of
the name of the deceased individual and the cause and manner of
death.
(21) Draft minutes of any meeting of the Borough until the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Borough; minutes of an
executive session and any record of discussions held in executive
session.
(22) Real estate records.
(a) The contents of real estate appraisals, engineering or
feasibility estimates, environmental reviews, audits or
evaluations made for or by the Borough relative to the
following:
[1] The leasing, acquiring or disposing of real property or an
interest in real property.
[2] The purchase of public supplies or equipment included in
the real estate transaction.
[3] Construction projects.
(b) This subsection shall not apply once the decision is made to
proceed with the lease, acquisition or disposal of real property
or an interest in real property or the purchase of public supply
or construction project.
(23) Library and archive circulation and order records of an identifiable
individual or group of individuals.
(24) Library archive and museum materials, or valuable or rare book
collections or documents contributed by gift, grant, bequest or
devise, to the extent of any limitations imposed by the donor as a
condition of the contribution.
(25) A record identifying the location of an archeological site or an
endangered or threatened plant or animal species if not already
known to the general public.
(26) A proposal pertaining to Borough procurement or disposal of
supplies, services or construction prior to the award of the contract
or prior to the opening and rejection of all bids; financial
information of a bidder or offeror requested in an invitation for bid
or request for proposals to demonstrate the bidder's or offeror's
economic capability; or the identity of members, notes and other
records of agency proposal evaluation committees established
under 62 Pa.C.S.A. § 513 (relating to competitive sealed proposals).
§ 170-6 PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS § 170-6
166:343
§ 170-7. Fees.
(27) A record or information relating to a communication between the
Borough and its insurance carrier, administrative service
organization or risk management office. This subsection shall not
apply to a contract with an insurance carrier, administrative
service organization or risk management office or to financial
records relating to the provision of insurance.
(28) A record or information:
(a) Identifying an individual who applies for or receives social
services; or
(b) Relating to the following:
[1] The type of social services received by an individual;
[2] An individual's application to receive social services,
including a record or information related to an agency
decision to grant, deny, reduce or restrict benefits,
including a quasi-judicial decision of the agency and the
identity of a caregiver or others who provide services to
the individual; or
[3] Eligibility to receive social services, including the
individual's income, assets, physical or mental health, age,
disability, family circumstances or record of abuse.
(29) Correspondence between a person and a member of the General
Assembly and records accompanying the correspondence which
would identify a person that requests assistance or constituent
services. This subsection shall not apply to correspondence
between a member of the General Assembly and a principal or
lobbyist under 65 Pa.C.S.A. Ch.13A (relating to lobbying
disclosure).
(30) A record identifying the name, home address or date of birth of a
child 17 years of age or younger.
(31) The Borough shall not disclose the identity of an individual
performing an undercover or covert law enforcement activity.
A. Postage. The Borough may charge the actual cost of postage incurred
as a result of mailing the response to the requester.
B. Duplication. the Borough may charge a fee for duplication by
photocopying, printing from electronic media or microfilm, copying
onto electronic media, transmission by facsimile or other electronic
means and other means of duplication fees as established by the Office
of Open Records.
§ 170-6 KUTZTOWN CODE § 170-7
166:344
§ 170-8. Appeal procedure.
C. The Borough shall charge a fee of $1 per page for certification of a
document, if certification of the document is requested by the
requestor, and said fee shall be amended from time to time by
resolution of the Borough.
D. Conversion of paper. For a record that is only maintained electronically
or in other nonpaper media, duplication fees shall be limited to the
lesser of the fee for duplication on paper or the fee for duplication in the
original media, unless the requestor specifically requests for the record
to be duplicated in the more expensive medium.
E. Prepayment. If the estimate of the fees to be charged to a requestor in
connection with a request exceeds the amount of $100, the Borough
may require prepayment of the fees prior to granting a request for said
information.
A. If a written request for access to a record is denied or deemed denied,
the requestor may file an appeal with the Office of Open Records to the
Appeals Officer designated by the Office of Open Records for the taking
of same within 15 business days of the mailing date of the Borough's
denial or within 15 days of a deemed denial.
B. Any appeals to the Office of Open Records or the appeals officer
designated by the Office of Open Records to hear appeals from
determinations of the Borough shall state the grounds upon which the
requestor asserts that the public is a public record, legislative record or
financial record and shall address any grounds stated by the Borough
for delaying or denying the request.
C. All appeals to the Office of Open records should be made to:
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Office of Open Records
Commonwealth Keystone Building
400 North Street, Plaza Level
Harrisburg, PA 17120-0225.
§ 170-7 PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS § 170-8
166:345
Chapter 172
RECYCLING PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public health; nuisances — See Ch. 168. Solid waste — See Ch. 185.
§ 172-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Kutztown recycling
program" of the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 172-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases used throughout this chapter shall have
the following meanings:
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling, and Waste Reduction
Act of 1988, 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
ALUMINUM CANS — All empty aluminum beer or soda cans.
BIMETAL CANS — Empty food or beverage cans consisting of steel and
aluminum.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown,
Berks County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The Manager of the Borough of Kutztown, Berks
County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH RECYCLING CONTAINERS — The containers provided by the
Borough for collection and storage of designated recyclable materials.
BOROUGH YARD WASTE DUMPSTER — The containers located at the
Borough yard waste depot designated as such for the deposit of leaf waste
and grass clippings.
COLLECTOR — The entity or entities authorized by the Borough Council
to collect recyclable materials from residences, commercial establishments,
and municipal establishments within the Borough.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored by public or private
agencies or individuals that include, but are not limited to, fairs, bazaars,
socials, picnics, shows, and organized sporting events attended by 100 or
more individuals per day.
CORRUGATED PAPER/CARDBOARD — Structural paper material with an
inner core shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
§ 170-8 KUTZTOWN CODE § 172-2
172:346
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials specified by
the Borough Manager, or his designated agent, to be source separated and
placed for collection by a collector.
FERROUS CONTAINERS — Empty steel or tin-coated food or beverage
containers.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Empty bottles and jars made of clear, green, or
brown glass. Expressly excluded are drinking glasses, plate glass,
automotive glass, light bulbs, blue glass, porcelain, ceramic, and glass
plates and dishes.
GRASS CLIPPINGS — The material and debris that is cut in the process of
lawn care and maintenance.
HIGH GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper, and computer
paper used in residential, commercial, institutional, and municipal
establishments.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people, including, but not limited to, hospitals, schools, nursing
homes, and day-care centers.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES — Include, but are not limited to, automotive,
truck, and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings,
and similar material, but specifically excluding grass clippings. For
purposes of this chapter, "leaf waste" shall also mean "yard waste."
MIXED PAPER — Mail, folders, clean unwaxed food packaging and
telephone books.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES — Any properties having three or
more dwelling units per structure.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Public facilities operated by the
Borough and other governmental and quasi-governmental authorities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, waste or other material,
including solid, liquid, semi-solid or containing gaseous material, resulting
from operation of residential, commercial, municipal, or industrial
establishments and from community activities and any sludge not meeting
the definition of residual or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste
Management Act from a municipal, commercial, or institutional water
supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control
facility. The term does not include designated recyclable materials.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type referred to as newsprint and distributed
at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and opinions, containing
advertisements and other matters of public interest. Expressly excluded are
newspapers which have been soiled.
PERSON(S) — Owners, lessees, and occupants of residences and
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments.
§ 172-2 RECYCLING PROGRAM § 172-2
172:347
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Plastic beverage containers constructed of PET
or HDPE material. For the purposes of this chapter, "plastic containers"
shall only refer to soda, water, milk, and detergent containers constructed
from PET or HDPE material. Containers used to hold and store motor oil
and bleach are specifically excluded from the term "plastic containers."
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials capable of being separated,
collected, processed, recovered, or reused as part of a recycling program.
RECYCLING — The separation, collection, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, yard waste, and other materials which would otherwise
be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the mechanized separation
and treatment of municipal waste (other than through combustion) and
creation and recovery of reusable materials.
RESIDENCES — Any occupied single- or multifamily dwellings for which the
Borough provides municipal waste collection service.
SOURCE SEPARATE — The process of separating designated recyclable
materials at the point of origin by color and/or composition and storing the
same in separate containers for the purpose of being placed for collection.
SUSTAINED EDUCATION PROGRAM — The ongoing effort, of at least two
annual publications, of the Borough of Kutztown to inform the general
public concerning the requirements of this Chapter 172.
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed.
YARD WASTE — Both leaf waste and grass clippings.
§ 172-3. Establishment of program; administration.
A. The Borough Council hereby establishes a recycling program for the
mandatory separation and collection of designated recyclable materials
and the separation, collection, and disposal of yard waste from all
residences and all commercial, municipal, and institutional
establishments located in the Borough.
B. The Borough Manager, or his designated agent, shall supervise and
manage the recycling program within the Borough and shall, from time
to time, set forth rules and regulations in addition to those set forth
herein for the collection of designated recyclable materials and yard
waste. The Borough Manager, or his designated agent, shall also
establish a sustained education program to educate Borough residents
about the need for and methods of the Kutztown recycling program.
C. All designated recyclable materials accumulated in the Borough shall
be collected, conveyed and deposited at a Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection approved recycling center by a Borough
collector or by a collector engaged by the Borough. Collection of
designated recyclable materials within the Borough shall be made at
least one time each month.
§ 172-2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 172-3
172:348
§ 172-4. Residential and commercial separation and collection.
D. All yard waste accumulated in the Borough shall be recycled in
accordance with the guidelines created hereunder.
E. The Borough Manager, or his designated agent, shall establish a list of
designated recyclable materials to be distributed to persons within the
Borough as well as a collection schedule for residential collection
within the Borough and make the same available to all residents of the
Borough at the beginning of each calendar year. A collection schedule
for commercial collection of designated recyclable materials shall also
be established and made available to commercial establishments within
the Borough.
F. The Borough shall not remove any lead acid batteries or other items
placed for collection which constitute a hazardous material, medical
waste or infectious waste as those terms are defined by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. The Borough
reserves the right to inspect all items placed for collection and to reject
any items not specifically listed by the Borough as designated
recyclable materials.
A. All persons residing and maintaining property within the Borough shall
source separate all designated recyclable materials from all other
municipal waste produced at their homes, apartments, other residential
establishments, and commercial or industrial establishments, store
such materials for collection, and place same for collection in
accordance with the guidelines established hereunder.
B. Separation. All designated recyclable materials shall be source
separated by the persons accumulating the same as follows:
(1) All aluminum cans shall be drained and placed in a separate
Borough recycling container.
(2) All glass containers shall be source separated by color and placed
in separate Borough recycling containers.
(3) All newspaper and high-grade office paper shall be tied in bundles
or placed in paper bags.
(4) All mixed paper shall be tied in bundles or placed in paper bags.
(5) All corrugated paper / cardboard shall be flattened and tied in
bundles or placed in a separate corrugated paper / cardboard box.
(6) All plastic containers shall be drained and placed in a separate
Borough recycling container.
(7) Recyclable materials placed in Borough recycling containers, tied
in bundles, or placed in paper bags shall not exceed 50 pounds in
weight.
§ 172-3 RECYCLING PROGRAM § 172-4
172:349
§ 172-5. Private recycling.
No part or parts of this Chapter 172 shall prohibit any person(s) from source
separating, collecting and recycling any recyclable materials, recycling
the same and collecting any revenues generated therefrom. However, any
person(s) within the Borough engaging in their own private recycling
program must comply with the following:
§ 172-6. Yard waste.
§ 172-7. Enforcement.
C. Collection. All designated recyclable materials to be collected by the
Borough shall be placed for collection at the regular point of collection
for municipal waste as defined in § 185-3 of Chapter 185 of the Code of
the Borough of Kutztown, entitled "Solid Waste," no sooner than 12
hours prior to the scheduled date and time of collection.
A. Such person(s) must recycle, at a minimum, all designated recyclable
materials, yard waste and grass clippings;
B. All such recyclable material must be deposited at a recycling center
approved as such by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection; and
C. Such person(s) must annually provide written documentation of the
type of material(s) recycled and the total number of tons of each
recycled to the Borough.
A. Persons generating and accumulating yard waste and grass clippings
within the Borough shall:
(1) Collect, transport and deposit the same in the Borough yard waste
dumpster located at the Borough yard waste recycling depot at any
time throughout the year; or
(2) Collect, store and place leaf waste only for collection on the date
and time designated by the Borough Superintendent for Borough
collection of leaf waste; or
(3) Collect and compost all yard waste in accordance with guidelines
established by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
B. Only yard waste generated and accumulated within the Borough shall
be deposited in the Borough yard waste dumpster. Commercial
landscapers and/or lawn care providers shall not deposit yard waste in
the Borough yard waste dumpster. Tree limbs, large shrubbery and
large bushes shall not be deposited in the Borough yard waste
dumpster unless cut into lengths not to exceed six feet.
§ 172-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 172-7
172:350
§ 172-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person that fails to take corrective action upon a notice of violation
shall, upon conviction for such violation, pay a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $600, and in default of such payment shall be imprisoned in the
Berks County Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 172-9. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a notice of violation or by any rules or regulations
adopted pursuant to this Chapter 172 may appeal the same to the Borough
of Kutztown Code Appeals Board pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 12
of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown.
Chapter 177
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appeals Board — See Ch. 12.
Construction code — See Ch. 75.
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Plumbing — See Ch. 163.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
195.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 218.
Wellhead protection — See Ch. 220.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 177-1. Administration.
The management, regulations and operation of the sewer system of the
Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania, and all things pertaining
thereto and arising in correction therewith shall be vested in the Sewer
Department as previously established by Borough Council.
A. Persons shall not place any designated recyclable materials or yard
waste for collection with regular municipal waste.
B. No person shall place designated recyclable materials for residential
collection more than 12 hours in advance of the date and time for the
scheduled residential collection. Leaf waste may be placed 48 hours in
advance.
C. Any person determined to be in violation of this Chapter 172 shall be
given a notice of violation, in accordance with § 168-13 of Chapter 168
of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown, entitled "Public Health;
Nuisances."
§ 172-7 RECYCLING PROGRAM § 177-2
172:351
§ 177-2. Definitions.
Unless the context of this chapter clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of the terms and abbreviations used in this chapter shall be as follows:
APPROVED — A device or method that has been accepted by the Sewer
Department as suitable for the proposed use.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania, acting
through its Borough Council or duly designated employee or representative
as designated by Borough Council.
BUILDING DRAIN — The lowest piping of a drainage system which receives
the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes within the user's
premises and connects to the building sewer.
BUILDING SEWER — The part of a drainage system which extends from the
building drain to the sewer connection and includes the building trap.
BUILDING TRAP — A fitting or fitting assembly installed in the building
sewer.
CLEANOUT — An accessible opening protected by a removable device so as
to permit access to the drainage system for removal of obstructions.
CONNECTION FEE — Fees payable by an applicant for connection to the
Borough sewer system, prior to such connection being provided by the
Borough.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Normal wastes from water closets, lavatories,
showers, laundries and kitchens; but excluding process water, groundwater,
and discharge from sump pumps, waste water or industrial wastes.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — All the piping within a premises which conveys
sewage or waste to the sanitary sewer system of the Borough at the sewer
connection.
HOUSE CONNECTION — The place of connection at the building sewer end
and sewer lateral.
LEAD FREE — Solders and flux containing not more than 0.2% lead and
pipes and fittings containing not more than 0.8% lead.
POLLUTION — Any discharge other than domestic sewage.
PRETREATMENT FACILITIES — Those facilities which are necessary to
treat sewage or waste water so as to meet the requirements of § 177-9 of
this chapter.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS REQUIREMENTS MANUAL or PIRM — The set
of standards and specifications governing the type and installation of sewer
system components and facilities as adopted and amended from time to
time by Borough Council.
SCHEDULE OF RATES AND CHARGES — The sewer rates, charges or fees
adopted and amended or revised from time to time by resolution of Borough
Council.
§ 177-2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 177-2
172:352
SEWER DEPARTMENT — The operating department organized and
supervised by the Borough Council to manage and operate the sewer
system.
SEWER CONNECTION — The point of connection between the sewer
lateral and sewer system.
SEWER LATERAL — That part of the sewer system which extends to the
user's premises and receives discharge at the house connection from the
building sewer. The sewer lateral does not include the building trap.
SEWER SYSTEM — The existing waste treatment, pumping stations, force
mains, truck lines, collection lines, manholes, sewer laterals and cleanouts
and other facilities and properties, together with the appurtenant facilities
and properties which the Borough now owns or hereafter may acquire
from time to time, including all property, real, personal and mixed, rights,
powers, licenses, easements, rights-of-way, privileges, licenses, franchises
and other property or interest in property of whatsoever nature used or
useful in connection with such facilities and together with all additions,
extensions, alterations and improvements thereof or thereto which may be
made or acquired from time to time by the Borough.
SYSTEM HAZARD — A condition posing an actual or potential threat of
damage to the physical properties of the sewer system, the user's system or
an endangerment to the public's safety, health and welfare.
TAPPING FEE — Fees payable by an applicant so as to be allowed to connect
to and discharge into the Borough sewer system as provided for by Act No.
203 of 1990 of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
TENANT — A person who leases or rents premises from a user.
USER — A person in control of any user's premises who, prior to, upon
or after the effective date hereof, has contracted or shall contract for
connection to a user's unit and/or a person who, upon or after the effective
date hereof, is being provided or will be provided with service for a user's
unit. It shall mean and include, as applicable, each of the following: a
residential or nonresidential (business, commercial, industrial or
institution) establishment.
USER'S UNIT or USER'S PREMISES —
A building under one roof and occupied by one family or nonresidential
establishment; or
A.
A combination of buildings in one enclosure or group and occupied by
one family or business; or
B.
One side of a double building or house having a solid vertical partition
wall; or
C.
Each room or group of rooms in a building occupied or intended for
occupancy as a separate business or separate living quarters by a
family and/or other group of persons living together or by a person
living alone; or
D.
§ 177-2 RECYCLING PROGRAM § 177-2
172:353
USER'S DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Any drainage system located on a user's
premises in any manner connected to the sewer system. A user's plumbing
system is considered to be a user's sewer system.
§ 177-3. Service applications.
§ 177-4. Subdivision and land development applications.
Connection permits shall not be issued to properties requiring subdivision
and/or land development approval by the Borough and DEP planning
module approval until such approvals are granted and an agreement has
been executed and recorded between the user and the Borough. The
agreement shall contain, but not be limited to, the following conditions:
§ 177-5. Industrial applications.
E. Any trailer or mobile home occupied by one family or business; or
Any public building devoted entirely to public use, such as a
schoolhouse, house of worship or firehouse; or
F.
Each apartment, condominium, office or suite of offices in a building or
house having several such apartments, condominiums, offices or suites
of offices and using in common one or more hallways and one or more
means of entrances.
G.
A. Applications for new sewer service or repair of existing sewer service
shall be made by the user of the premises to be served. Such application
shall bind the applicant and all subsequent users to which sewer service
is to be furnished. The connection to the sewer system represents a
contract between the user and the Borough.
B. Except in the case of emergencies, 10 days' written notice to the Sewer
Department shall be given by a user desiring service or repair of
service.
C. Applications for service or repair of service shall be submitted to the
Borough Code Enforcement office in such form as is prescribed from
time to time.
A. Rights-of-way;
B. Escrow for the cost of the improvements;
C. Provisions providing for the user to pay all engineering and legal cost
incurred by the Borough;
D. Provisions requiring testing and televising of all lines prior to the
Borough accepting dedication of said lines;
E. Provisions for the user to submit to the Borough an "as-built" drawing
showing the location of manholes, mains, lateral connections and house
connections and depths of same.
§ 177-2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 177-5
172:354
§ 177-6. Special conditions.
§ 177-7. Sewer connection.
A. Connection permits shall not be issued to industrial users until the
following conditions are met and information submitted:
(1) Nature and concentration of any pollutants which may be
discharged;
(2) Pretreatment methods;
(3) Average daily discharge;
(4) Completion of a wellhead protection permit application as required
by Chapter 220 of this Code;
(5) List of each product and amount of product on premises;
(6) Emergency preparedness plan.
B. The industrial user shall, upon an unpermitted discharge, immediately
notify the Borough.
A. Garages and service stations. Garages, service stations or similar uses
used for the cleaning and repair of vehicles and which provide floor
drains for the collection of drainage or residue shall be provided with
an interceptor to collect, but not be limited to, oil, gasoline, grease and
similar fluids, as well as sand, grit and other solids.
B. Restaurants and food-handling facilities. All food-handling
establishments shall install and maintain a grease trap and interceptor,
as set forth in Chapter 163 of this Code.
C. Surface water, groundwater and stormwater runoff. All sources of
surface water, groundwater and stormwater, including, but not limited
to, floor drains, sump pumps, condensate drains, gutters, roof drains,
trench drains or under drains shall not be directed to or connected to
the sanitary sewer system and shall be discharged in to the Borough
stormwater system and/or grade or other approved detention/
infiltration system in accordance with other applicable laws and
ordinances. Drainage to grade shall not be directed on to adjoining
properties. [Amended 5-16-2018 by Ord. No. 4-2018]
D. Cesspools, septic tanks and holding tanks. No cesspools, septic tanks or
holding tanks shall be used or maintained upon any property which is
connected to the sewer system or which is required to be connected to
the sewer system. No cesspool, septic tank or holding tank shall be
connected to the sewer system.
A. All sewer connections hereinafter installed and/or replaced shall be
made at the Borough sewer lateral and shall be installed as specified in
the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
§ 177-5 RECYCLING PROGRAM § 177-7
172:355
B. The Sewer Department shall install the sewer lateral from the sewer
main to the property line. All cleanouts shall be placed a minimum of 10
feet upstream from the downstream property line unless conditions
dictate an alternative location. Such locations shall be determined by
the Sewer Department. For this installation, a connection fee, and when
applicable a tapping fee, shall be charged to the user as adopted from
time to time by resolution of Borough Council.
C. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, each improved
property shall be connected separately and independently with a sewer
through a building sewer. Grouping of more than one improved
property on one building sewer shall not be permitted, except under
special circumstances and for good sanitary reasons or other good
cause shown, but then only after special permission of the Borough, in
writing, shall have been secured and only subject to such rules,
regulations and conditions as may be prescribed by the Borough.
D. All costs and expenses of acquisition, construction, operation and
maintenance of a building sewer and of the lateral serving any
improved property shall be borne by the owner of the improved
property served thereby, unless otherwise provided by the Borough. All
costs and expenses of connection of a building sewer to a lateral, and
connection of a lateral to a sewer, including such costs and expenses of
acquiring, installing, operating and maintaining a grinder pump or
similar apparatus approved by the Borough, shall be borne by the
owner of the improved property so connected, unless otherwise
provided by the Borough. The owner shall be held responsible for
ownership, maintaining, and repairing the property building sewer to
the edge of curb, edge of cartway, or edge of Borough sanitary sewer
right-of-way, should a sanitary sewer right-of-way exist on the property.
Each such owner shall indemnify and shall save harmless this Borough
from all loss or damage that may be occasioned, directly or indirectly,
as a result of construction, connection, operation or use of a building
sewer or of a lateral. [Amended 6-18-2019 by Ord. No. 1-2019]
E. No person other than a master plumber shall connect any premises with
the Borough's sewer system at the Borough sewer connection and prior
to doing same, shall obtain a plumbing permit from the Borough Code
Office.
F. Any work done in making a connection to the sewer system shall be
inspected by the Sewer Department and/or Borough Code Office prior
to covering same. Closures made in violation of this section shall be
uncovered for inspection.
G. In case of leaks upon the premises of a user remaining unrepaired after
notice to the user, which notice shall contain the time in which such
repair shall be made, the Sewer Department shall effect such repair
with all costs for said repair to be paid for by the user.
§ 177-7 KUTZTOWN CODE § 177-7
172:356
§ 177-8. Service discontinuance.
H. Sewer connections. Notice to connect to the Borough sewer system
shall be via United States certified mail to the owner of the property.
A. The Sewer Department reserves the right to disconnect the sewer
lateral or order suspension of the user's sewer system of any user for
any of the following reasons:
(1) For repairs.
(2) For unavoidable interruption in the Borough's sewer system.
(3) After any disapproval of the user's equipment or installation by
virtue of its being defective or unsafe without prompt action being
taken to remedy the same.
(4) When a connection is incompatible with orders, the Code of the
Borough of Kutztown or laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
or department thereof.
(5) For nonpayment of any bill, including service charge, payable to
the Borough under the provisions of the Code of the Borough of
Kutztown establishing or otherwise related to the discharge of
sewage into the sewer system.
(6) For violation of or noncompliance with the terms and conditions,
regulations and rules set forth in this chapter any other regulation
of the Borough pertaining to the discharge of sewage into the
sewer system.
(7) For the discharge of any substance other than domestic sewage
into the sewer system which creates or may create a system
hazard.
(8) Whenever such action is necessary in the opinion of the Sewer
Department to protect the Borough from fraud or abuse.
B. The Sewer Department shall notify a user in writing by certified United
States first-class mail, postage prepaid, when discontinuance is due to
nonpayment of bills, or other violations described herein.
C. The Borough shall not be liable for any damage, loss or injury sustained
by the user or the user's tenant by reason of any failure to receive
sewage on account of storms, accident or for any other cause
whatsoever.
D. Should any user's sewer system serviced by the Borough sewer system
be operated in violation of any provisions of this chapter or any state
and federal regulations, it shall be the duty of the Sewer Department to
completely disconnect all service connections serving such user's sewer
system or to assure itself that there is a physical separation of piping
until this chapter is properly complied with. Any cost of such
§ 177-7 RECYCLING PROGRAM § 177-8
172:357
§ 177-9. Pollutant limitations.
disconnection and the estimated cost of reconnection shall be paid by
the user before service is restored.
A. The Borough shall require any user who discharges any substance
other than domestic sewage into the sewer system to provide
pretreatment facilities for such pollution.
B. The requirement for pretreatment facilities shall be determined by the
following criterion:
(1) To meet the parameters and specific pollutant limitations
necessitated by actions of regulatory agencies with respect to
permits issued to the Borough for the operation of the sewer
system.
(2) To meet regulations so as to comply with and be acceptable to
applicable state agencies and any other regulating agency in
regards to discharge and treatment of sewage.
(3) To prevent a system hazard.
C. The cost of any and all required pretreatment facilities shall be paid for
by the user.
D. The design and operation of pretreatment facilities shall conform and
be approved by the Borough, applicable state agencies and any other
regulatory agency which has jurisdiction.
E. The Borough may require the collection and analysis of samples of
waste to confirm compliance with these requirements. Such collection
and analysis shall be performed by a licensed laboratory at the user's
cost.
F. The Borough may require the user to install a sampling point in the
building drain to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the waste discharge. The cost of such sampling point shall be at the
user's cost.
G. Pollution of the sewer system shall be any or any combination of the
discharges listed below:
(1) Having a temperature higher than 150° F.; or
(2) Containing more than 100 milligrams per liter by weight of fat, oil
or greases; or
(3) Containing any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other
inflammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or
(4) Containing any unground garbage; or
§ 177-8 KUTZTOWN CODE § 177-9
172:358
(5) Containing any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or other
solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction or other
interference with the proper operation of the Borough's sewer
system; or
(6) Having a pH of not lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0, or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment or personnel of the Borough's sewer system;
or
(7) Containing any toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity
to injure or interfere with any sewage collection and/or treatment
process and/or sludge treatment or disposal, constituting a hazard
to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters
of the Borough's waste treatment plant; or
(8) Containing total solids in such character and quantity that unusual
attention or expertise is required to handle such materials at the
Borough's waste treatment plant or that prevents the Borough from
disposing of the sludge or other solids in its usual manner; or
(9) Containing a noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of
creating a public nuisance; containing any sanitary sewage not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment
processes employed, or exceeding the parameters listed in this
section, unless otherwise permitted, authorized or approved by the
Borough and/or the applicable agencies of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(10) Containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes.
(11) A daily average of more than 300 milligrams per liter of total
suspended solids, 300 milligrams per liter of BOD 5, 3,500
milligrams per liter of dissolved solids, or 3,850 milligrams per liter
of total solids.
(12) 50 milligrams per liter of ammonia as N.
(13) 25 milligrams per liter for phosphorus, total as P.
(14) 0.8 milligram per liter as zinc, total (from 1.8).
(15) 2 milligrams per liter for chromium, total.
(16) 0.09 milligram per liter for chromium, hexavalent.
(17) 2.0 milligrams per liter for nickel, total.
(18) 0.65 milligram per liter for copper.
(19) 1.0 milligram per liter for cadmium.
(20) 150 units on the cobalt-platinum scale for color.
§ 177-9 RECYCLING PROGRAM § 177-9
172:359
§ 177-10. Access.
§ 177-11. Separate services.
§ 177-12. Enforcement.
(21) 50 milligrams per liter for iron.
(22) 2.0 milligrams per liter for lead.
(23) 0.1 milligram per liter for mercury.
(24) 0.1 milligram per liter for selenium.
(25) 25 milligrams per liter for oil and grease.
A. The properly authorized agent(s) of the Sewer Department and/or
Borough Code Office shall, at all reasonable hours, have free and
unrestricted access to any user's premises for the purpose of inspecting
the user's sewer system and for examining or repairing any property of
the Borough. Reasonable hours shall be deemed to be between 6:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m., prevailing time.
B. The Borough shall have the right to enter the premises of any
nonresidential user at any time during operations to determine whether
the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall
allow the department employees ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination
and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
A. All structures served by the sewer system shall have a separate sewer
lateral and drainage system installed for such structure, whether or not
such structure is separately assessed for tax purposes and whether or
not two or more such structures are erected upon adjoining land of the
same user.
B. In multi-use buildings, under ownership of one person or user, a single
sewer lateral and drainage system may be used to discharge sewage
from more than one user unit. The size of the connection shall be
approved by the Sewer Department.
C. In condominium buildings, where individual user units are owned by
different users, a separated service lateral and drainage system shall be
required unless approved otherwise by the Borough.
A. Whenever the Code Officer believes or has cause to believe that there
has occurred and/or is continuing any violation of the provisions of this
chapter or any rules, regulations, or resolutions adopted pursuant to
this chapter, the Code Officer shall give notice of such violation to each
person responsible therefor, and such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing and state the place and location of the violation;
§ 177-9 KUTZTOWN CODE § 177-12
172:360
(2) State the nature, condition and manner of the violation;
(3) State the determination of the Code Officer with respect to the
violation;
(4) State the name of each person deemed responsible by the Code
Officer for such violation, together with the name of the owner of
the property upon which the violation occurred and/or is located;
(5) State the date of the notice and the period of time, if any, allowed
for compliance with this chapter, as such period of time is specified
in Subsection C of this section;
(6) Be served upon the owner of the property involved and all other
persons, if any, named in the notice pursuant to Subsection A(4) of
this section, and service of such notice shall be made upon the
owner and each such other person, if any, either personally or by
certified first-class mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid,
sent to the last known address of such owner and such other
person.
B. The requirements for service of notice as contained in this chapter shall
apply only as to notification of the first occurrence of any violation. The
issuance of a notice thereafter regarding any repeated occurrence of
the same violation shall not be required prior to the imposition of
penalties as provided for in this chapter.
C. The period of time within which a person determined to be responsible,
pursuant to Subsection A(4) of this section, for any violation shall
comply with the specific provisions of this chapter, following the
issuance of a notice, shall be the period of time determined by the Code
Officer, taking into consideration the nature of the violation and the
degree of danger to public health and safety posed by such violation.
The notice of any violation may require immediate compliance with this
chapter (any such notice requiring immediate compliance hereinafter
referred to as an "emergency order") when it is determined by the Code
Officer that the violation in question presents an immediate and present
danger or nuisance to the health, safety and welfare of the public, and,
in such cases, notice of the violation constituting such emergency order
may be verbal (which verbal notice shall thereafter be confirmed with a
written notice) and shall be served personally upon the person, if
available, who has caused or is responsible for or in control of said
violation, and such notice constituting such emergency order may
require the immediate correction and discontinuance of the violation
and compliance with this chapter.
D. Notwithstanding any such notice requirements of this section which it
is determined by an officer of the Kutztown Police Department that an
immediate, present danger exists to the health, safety and welfare of
the public, said officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter being
violated by verbal notice constituting an emergency order, without the
need for the issuance of any written notice of any violation.
§ 177-12 RECYCLING PROGRAM § 177-13
172:361
§ 177-13. Sewage charges.
§ 177-14. Billings.
A. A sewer service charge for the discharge of sewage is hereby imposed,
as adopted from time to time by resolution of Borough Council.
B. The sewer rates for the discharge of sewage per users shall be as
adopted from time to time by resolution of Borough Council.
C. The sewage discharge shall be determined by the water meter or water
meters installed by the Borough for the user's premises, and all bills
shall be calculated upon the basis of registration of such water meter or
water meters. If a water meter ceases to register or is found defective,
the quantity of sewage discharged shall be determined by taking the
average water consumption for the four meter reading periods
immediately preceding the date when the water meter was found to be
defective, which amount shall be assumed to be the average amount of
sewage discharged by the user during the billing period in which the
water meter was found to be defective. Exceptions will be made to this
rule only where the facts clearly show that the stated method does not
give a reasonable accurate volume of discharge for the period.
D. The Borough Council shall have the right to change sewer service
charges and/or sewer rates from time to time by resolution.
A. All bills for sewage discharge shall be rendered before the first day of
January, April, July and October of each year on water meter readings
made in the respective immediately preceding months, and such bills
shall include the service charge for the immediately preceding calendar
quarter. All such bills shall be due and payable on or before the first day
of the following February, May, August and November. All bills
remaining unpaid for one calendar month after the due date shall be
subject to a penalty as adopted from time to time by resolution of
Borough Council, which penalty plus interest shall be computed on the
unpaid balance.
B. In case any bill rendered under § 177-10A shall remain unpaid for a
period of 30 days, the water service to the user shall be shut off, so as to
eliminate discharge into the sewer system, by the Water Department
after compliance with the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission then in effect, and service shall not be
renewed until arrears and penalties are paid together with any
expenses incurred by the Water and/or Sewer Department in shutting
off and restoring water and/or sewer service.
C. In cases involving rental user units, the procedures to be followed to
effect discontinuance shall be as set forth in the Pennsylvania Utility
Service Tenants Rights Act, Act No. 299 of 1978, as amended and
supplemented.103
§ 177-13 KUTZTOWN CODE § 177-15
172:362
§ 177-15. User deposit.
§ 177-16. Appeals.
§ 177-17. Violations and penalties.
A. Any user premises to be served with the sewer system henceforth
applying for service may be required to deposit with the Borough an
amount equal to the estimated gross bill of such user for any single
billing period, plus one month (maximum period not to exceed four
months).
B. A deposit from a user shall be returned when the user shall have paid
undisputed bills for service over a period of 12 consecutive months, and
any such user, having secured the return of a deposit, shall not be
required to make a new deposit unless the service has been
discontinued or the user's credit standing impaired through failure to
comply with the Borough's tariff provisions.
C. The payment of any undisputed bill, within the meaning of the Public
Utility Law, shall be payment of the bill with or without disconnection or
penalty, within 30 days following the period for which the bill was
rendered or payment within 30 days following presentation of the bill,
or the payment of any contested bill, payment of which was withheld
beyond the period herein mentioned and the dispute is terminated
substantially in favor of the user and payment by the user within 10
days thereafter.
D. No interest shall be payable by the Borough on any deposits.
A. Any person aggrieved by a determination or order issued by the Code
Officer or by any rule or regulation may appeal said notice,
determination, order, rule or regulation to the Code Appeals Board, as
provided for in Chapter 12 of this Code.
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter which violation
causes a system hazard or causes contamination or pollution which
creates a hazardous condition to the sewer system or general public,
upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a penalty of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000 for each violation.
B. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, other than a violation
as listed in § 177-12A of this chapter, upon conviction thereof shall be
subject to a penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $600 for each
violation.
C. Every violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense, and
each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
103. Editor's Note: See 68 P.S. § 399.1 et seq.
§ 177-15 RECYCLING PROGRAM § 177-17
172:363
Chapter 185
SOLID WASTE
§ 185-1. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the following
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ACCOUNT — An electric service customer account, or where such customer
does not purchase electric service, then it shall be the water service
customer account of a utility customer of the Borough of Kutztown.
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or similar
materials used for heating and cooking purposes. It shall not include
cinders produced in steam-generating plants.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kutztown, County of Berks, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Kutztown, County of
Berks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The Borough Manager of the Borough of
Kutztown or the Borough Manager's duly authorized representative.
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes.
DWELLING — A building containing one or more dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof having living, sleeping,
cooking and sanitary facilities which are independent from other like
facilities.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of goods. It shall not include free
liquids. It shall not include food-processing wastes from canneries, packing
plants or similar industries, nor large quantities of condemned food
products.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS/WASTE — Material or waste which presents a
hazard to persons and/or the environment, which are considered hazardous
as defined under Sections 260.2 and 271.1 of Title 25, Environmental
Resources, of the Pennsylvania Code, as amended from time to time, and/
or are considered to be hazardous by definition of the statutes and/or
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or federal
government as amended from time to time.
D. The penalties as prescribed above shall be imposed and collected in the
manner provided for by the Borough Code in the case of violations of
Borough Ordinances.
§ 177-17 KUTZTOWN CODE § 185-1
185:364
HOME MEDICAL WASTE — Hypodermic needles (sharps), dressings,
wearing apparel, bedding or other materials from homes or other places
where highly infectious or contagious diseases prevail.
INFECTIOUS WASTE — Material or waste as defined under Section 271.1 of
Title 25, Environmental Resources, of the Pennsylvania Code, as amended
from time to time.
INSTITUTIONAL FACILITIES — Those facilities that house or serve groups
of people.
LARGE ITEMS — Those items of waste which are not included in refuse,
yard waste, hazardous materials/waste, home medical waste, residual
waste, rubbish or infectious waste, and are from time to time further
defined by resolution of Borough Council.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any dwelling having three or more dwelling
units.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Garbage, industrial lunchroom or office waste and
other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
material resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional establishments and from community activities; and sludge not
meeting the definition of "residual waste" or "hazardous materials/waste"
under this section from a municipal, commercial or institutional water
supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control
facility.
MUNICIPAL WASTE-LIKE RESIDUAL WASTE — Materials or waste as
defined from time to time by resolution of Borough Council.
PERSON — A natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
trust, nonprofit organization, or other entity.
PREMISES — Any lot, or part thereof, or any land, or part thereof, or any
building or part thereof, located within the Borough of Kutztown, whether
public or private.
RECYCLABLES — Such materials as are, from time to time, defined by
resolution of Borough Council as not to be collected as refuse.
REFUSE — Municipal waste, municipal waste-like residual waste and ashes,
as herein defined.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Material or waste as defined under Section 271.1 of
Title 25, Environmental Resources, of the Pennsylvania Code, as amended
from time to time, and as may be defined from time to time by resolution of
Borough Council.
RUBBISH — All waste materials not defined as "refuse" or "large items,"
including but not limited to materials from building construction or
demolition and any other waste product as defined in Section 271.1 of Title
25, Environmental Resources, of the Pennsylvania Code, as amended from
time to time.
§ 185-1 SOLID WASTE § 185-1
185:365
YARD WASTE — Grass, leaves, garden residue, shrubbery, tree trimmings
and similar organic matter.
§ 185-2. Administration; responsibilities for collection and disposal
of waste.
A. Collection and disposal by Borough or independent contractor.
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 11-2001]
(1) The collection and disposal services provided by the Borough for
refuse and large items shall be available for all properties in the
Borough which are occupied, in any manner and in whole or in
part, and all such properties are hereby required to be served by,
and shall be liable for the fees and costs for, such collection and
disposal services availability and/or use. All refuse and large items,
except as provided for by resolution of Borough Council, excluding
yard waste, accumulated in the Borough shall be collected,
conveyed and disposed of by the Borough or by an independent
contractor engaged by the Borough; except that in the case of yard
waste, the person, but not including commercial lawn care
providers, producing the yard waste shall transport and dispose of
same pursuant to regulations adopted from time to time in
accordance with § 185-2C of this chapter. No person other than the
duly authorized employees of the Borough or of an independent
contractor engaged by the Borough shall collect refuse or large
items, other than yard waste, within the Borough; nor shall any
person other than the duly authorized employees of the Borough or
of an independent contractor engaged by the Borough haul any
refuse or large items other than yard waste from any person or
premises within the Borough or from any point within the Borough
to any place or location outside the Borough limits. The fees and
charges for the availability and use of such services shall be in
accordance with § 185-7 of this chapter.
(2) All rubbish shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by an
independent contractor other than the Borough. Such independent
contractor shall be engaged by the person generating such waste.
B. No refuse, large items, yard waste or other rubbish not generated
within the Borough shall be transported into the Borough for the
purpose of collection and/or disposal by the Borough. [Amended
4-8-1997 by Ord. No. 7-1997]
C. The Borough Manager shall administer the provisions of this chapter
and may make rules and regulations necessary for its administration.
Such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with this chapter and
shall be submitted to the Council of the Borough of Kutztown for
approval. If the rules and regulations so submitted to the Council are
approved by the Council, by resolution, the same shall be filed in the
Office of the Secretary of the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 185-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § 185-2
185:366
§ 185-3. Precollection practices.
D. The Borough will not collect or remove from any premises any rubbish,
including but not limited to hazardous materials/waste, home medical
waste, residual waste, yard waste or infectious waste as defined and/or
listed as hazardous material/waste, home medical waste, residual
waste, infectious waste, yard waste or similar materials by the statutes
or regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or the federal
government.
E. Municipal waste-like residual waste will be collected by the Borough,
upon compliance with the requirements for the collection of municipal
waste-like residual waste as established from time to time by resolution
of Borough Council.
F. The Borough will not collect or remove from any premises any
recyclables pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
G. The Borough reserves the right to inspect all materials placed upon any
premises within the Borough for collection by the Borough and further
reserves the right to require any person placing materials for collection
which may constitute hazardous materials/waste, home medical waste,
residual waste or infectious waste to have said materials tested, at no
cost to the Borough, by an entity approved and certified by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or the federal government to
determine whether the material in question constitutes hazardous
materials/waste, home medical waste, residual waste or infectious
waste.
A. Separation. Refuse and large items shall be source-separated; ashes
shall be placed and maintained in separate containers.
B. Preparation.
(1) All garbage before being placed for collection shall be drained of all
free liquids and placed in a suitable container.
(2) Ashes shall be placed in a separate container.
(3) All cans, bottles or other containers, except such as are defined as
recyclables, shall be thoroughly rinsed and drained.
(4) Home medical waste shall not be placed for collection by the
Borough.
(5) Rubbish shall be separated from all refuse, and it shall be the
responsibility of the generator of same to arrange for independent
collection and disposal of rubbish by other than the Borough. The
Borough will not collect rubbish and reserves the right to refuse
any refuse which may contain rubbish. With respect to residual
waste, the Borough Manager may permit persons to dispose of
refuse in conjunction with their disposal of residual waste by
§ 185-2 SOLID WASTE § 185-3
185:367
regulations adopted from time to time in accordance with § 185-2C
of this chapter.
(6) Infectious waste shall be separated from all refuse and it shall be
the responsibility of the generator of same to arrange for
independent collection and disposal of infectious waste by other
than the Borough. The Borough will not collect infectious waste
and reserves the right to refuse any refuse which may contain
infectious waste.
(7) Neither materials nor containers shall exceed 50 pounds in weight
nor six feet in length, excluding large items.
C. Containers for collection.
(1) Refuse containers shall be made of metal or other durable material
having similar qualities, must be watertight and must be provided
with a tight-fitting cover, or may be a durable plastic bag which is
securely closed or fastened to prevent spillage; however, plastic
bags shall not be placed at the collection point more than 12 hours
prior to the scheduled time of collection. Paper bags, boxes and
similar containers which are not water resistant shall not be used
unless same are placed within a container as described above.
(a) No person shall use for the reception of refuse any container
having a capacity of more than 20 gallons; provided, however,
that for industrial, commercial or multifamily establishments
or facilities, the use of dumpsters may be permitted where the
use of such dumpsters would promote the public health of the
community and facilitate the removal of the refuse by Borough
employees or by an independent contractor of the Borough by
regulations adopted from time to time in accordance with
§ 185-2C of this chapter.
(b) All refuse containers shall be kept as sanitary as possible in
view of the use to which they are put and shall be thoroughly
cleansed from time to time by the owner or user of the
container after the refuse is removed.
(2) Ash containers shall be of metal and have a capacity of not more
than 20 gallons.
(3) Refuse containers shall be as provided for in § 185-3C of this
chapter which can be easily handled by one person, and each
container, when filled, shall have a weight not in excess of 50
pounds.
(4) All refuse containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee
or occupant of the premises where the refuse is generated.
(5) All refuse containers shall be maintained in good condition. Any
container that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter or
§ 185-3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 185-3
185:368
that may have ragged or sharp edges or any other defect liable to
hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof shall be
promptly replaced. Failure to comply may result in refusal to collect
or the removal of the defective container as refuse.
(6) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any limitation
in the size of refuse containers otherwise provided for in this
chapter shall not apply to containers commonly referred to as
"dumpsters" designed for the removal and/or emptying by a
mechanism on a truck.
D. Storing of refuse between collections.
(1) No person shall place or store any refuse in or upon any street,
alley or other public place or upon any private property, whether
owned by such person or not, within the Borough except that such
refuse shall be placed within a container meeting the requirements
of § 185-3C. Plastic bags, paper bags, boxes and other similar
containers shall not be used for the storage of refuse. No person
shall throw or deposit or allow any refuse in any street, alley,
stream or other body of water.
(2) Any accumulation of refuse on any premises other than for
collection is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
Failure to remove any existing accumulation of refuse within 30
days after the effective date of this chapter shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter.
E. Points of collection.
(1) Refuse and large items shall be placed for collection at ground level
on the premises at the rear or side alley or the street curbline or at
such other location, other than within the cartway of a street or an
alley, that is approved as the point of collection by regulations as
may be adopted from time to time in accordance with § 185-2C of
this chapter. Borough employees will not enter upon private
property for the purpose of the collection of refuse or large items.
(2) Items intended for collection but placed or remaining at the
collection site after a scheduled collection shall be removed from
the collection site prior to 10:00 p.m. on the date of the said
collection. Items intended for a scheduled collection shall not be
placed at the collection site for collection more than 12 hours prior
to said collection.
(3) Refuse and large items placed for collection and dumpsters shall be
accessible for collection during adverse weather conditions.
Accessibility for collection shall be the responsibility of the owner
and/or occupant of the premises who generated and placed for
collection the refuse and/or large items. In the case where refuse,
dumpsters or large items are not accessible at the regular time of
collection and a return to the premises is required for the purpose
§ 185-3 SOLID WASTE § 185-3
185:369
§ 185-4. Collection practices.
of collecting same, an additional charge shall be made to the
owner or occupant of such premises in accordance with § A231-2 of
Chapter A231, Fees.
A. Frequency of collection.
(1) Refuse will be collected twice each week unless directed otherwise
by the Borough Manager due to emergency conditions.
(2) Hotels, restaurants and other such businesses and institutions,
when necessary to protect public health, may enter into an
agreement with the Borough for a greater frequency of collection.
(3) Yard waste shall not be collected by the Borough. The person
generating yard waste shall dispose of same by regulations as may
be adopted from time to time in accordance with § 185-2C of this
chapter.
(4) Large items will only be collected upon prior request to the
Borough.
B. Limitation on quantity.
(1) It is the intent of this chapter that the reasonable quantity of refuse
of each dwelling unit for the collection period will be collected for
the standard charge as hereafter provided for in § A231-1.13, Ch.
185, Solid Waste, of Chapter A231, Fees. A reasonable quantity of
refuse for each dwelling unit per collection shall not exceed three
containers of not more than 20 gallons each of the type set forth in
§ 185-3C. The Borough Manager may refuse to collect amounts of
refuse in excess of the quantity noted above in this section or may
impose an additional charge for such additional quantity of refuse.
Such additional charge shall be an amount as from time to time is
determined by resolution of Borough Council.
(2) When an industrial, commercial or multifamily dwelling places a
number of containers for collection in excess of the number noted
in § 185-4B(1) of this chapter, the premises may be required to
utilize a dumpster of a certain size, when and as required by
regulations adopted from time to time in accordance with § 185-2C
of this chapter. [Amended 6-20-2006 by Ord. No. 12-2006]
(a) Upon notice to the property owner, the Borough reserves the
right to either place a dumpster or require its placement when
it is determined that the placement of said dumpster is
necessary to adequately contain the amount of refuse
generated by the property.
(b) The Borough will place an appropriately sized dumpster at the
property at which time the owner of the property will assume
§ 185-3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 185-4
185:370
§ 185-5. Notice of violations and enforcement.
responsibility for dumpster rental and refuse collection fees as
outlined in § A231-1.13, Ch. 185, Solid Waste, of Chapter A231
of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown.
(c) Location; concrete pad.
[1] The owner of the property will be responsible for providing
a suitable location on the property for the dumpster and
for installing a concrete pad and a mechanism to secure
the dumpster in place between refuse collections. The
concrete pad will meet the same construction
specifications required for a public sidewalk as outlined in
§ 192-22D(7) of Chapter 192 entitled "Streets and
Sidewalks," of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown.
Recommended pad sizes are below:
[a] Four-yard-or-smaller dumpster: six-foot-by-sixfootconcrete
pad.
[b] Six-yard dumpster: eight-foot-by-eight-foot concrete
pad.
[2] An inspection of the installation shall be performed by
Borough Community Development and Public Safety
Department and/or Borough Public Works.
(d) The owner of the property may choose to provide the dumpster
without a directive by the Borough as allowed under §185-3C,
entitled "Containers for collection," of the Code of the Borough
of Kutztown. The owner of the property will notify the Borough
of the intent to place a dumpster and will adhere to installation
requirements as outlined in Subsection B(2)(c) above. The
owner will pay refuse collection fees to the Borough as outlined
in § A231-1.13, Ch. 185, Solid Waste, of Chapter A231 of the
Code of the Borough of Kutztown.
(3) It is the intent of this chapter that large restaurants, hotels,
apartment houses, and other businesses and institutions shall have
their reasonable quantity of refuse for the collection period
collected at a fair charge based upon the average weight or
volume. Additional charges for such amounts shall be imposed as
provided for in § A231-1.13, Ch. 185, Solid Waste, of Chapter A231,
Fees.
A. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer believes or has cause to
believe that there has occurred and/or is continuing any violation of the
provisions of this chapter or any rules, regulations, or resolutions
adopted pursuant to this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
give notice of such violation to each person responsible therefor, and
such notice shall:
§ 185-4 SOLID WASTE § 185-5
185:371
(1) Be in writing and state the place and location of the violation.
(2) State the nature, condition and manner of the violation.
(3) State the determination of the Code Enforcement Officer with
respect to the violation.
(4) State the name of each person deemed responsible by the Code
Enforcement Officer for such violation, together with the name of
the owner of the property upon which the violation occurred and/or
is located.
(5) State the date of the notice and the period of time, if any, allowed
for compliance with this chapter, as such period of time is specified
in Subsection C of this section.
(6) Be served upon the owner of the property involved and all other
persons, if any, named in the notice pursuant to Subsection A(4) of
this section, and service of such notice shall be made upon the
owner and each such other person, if any, either personally or by
certified first-class mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid,
sent to the last known address of such owner and each such other
person.
B. The requirements for service of notice as contained in this chapter shall
apply only as to notification of the first occurrence of any violation. The
issuance of a notice thereafter regarding any repeated occurrence of
the same violation shall not be required prior to imposition of penalties
as provided for in this chapter.
C. The period of time within which a person determined to be responsible,
pursuant to Subsection A(4) of this section, for any violation shall
comply with the specific provisions of this chapter, following the
issuance of a notice, shall be the period of time determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer, taking into consideration the nature of the
violation and the degree of danger to public health and safety posed by
such violation. The notice of any violation may require immediate
compliance with this chapter (any such notice requiring immediate
compliance hereinafter referred to as an "emergency order") when it is
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer that the violation in
question presents an immediate and present danger or nuisance to the
health, safety and welfare of the public, and, in such case, notice of the
violation constituting such emergency order may be verbal (which
verbal notice shall thereafter be confirmed with a written notice) and
shall be served personally upon the person, if available, who has
caused, is responsible for or in control of said violation, and such notice
constituting such emergency order may require the immediate
correction and discontinuance of the violation and compliance with this
chapter.
D. Notwithstanding any such notice requirements of this § 185-5, when it
is determined by an officer of the Kutztown Police Department that an
§ 185-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 185-5
185:372
§ 185-6. Appeals. [Amended 7-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-1999]
§ 185-7. Fees; penalty for delinquent accounts.
§ 185-8. Violations and penalties.
immediate, present danger exists to the health, safety and welfare of
the public, said officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter being
violated by verbal notice constituting an emergency order, without need
for the issuance of any written notice of any violation.
A. Any person aggrieved by a notice of violation, determination or order
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer, or by any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant to § 185-2C may appeal said notice, determination,
order, rule or regulation to the Borough of Kutztown Code Appeals
Board (Code Appeals Board) pursuant to the provisions set forth in
Chapter 12 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown.
B. Any person to whom an emergency order to issued, pursuant to
§ 185-5C and 185-5D of this chapter, may file an appeal to the Code
Appeals Board pursuant to the provisions contained in Chapter 12 of
the Code of the Borough of Kutztown. However, such appeal shall not
excuse the need for immediate compliance with such emergency order,
nor shall such appeal serve as a supersedeas to the immediate
effectiveness of the emergency order.
A. The fees for the availability and use of the Borough's collection and
disposal services for refuse and large items shall be as provided for in
§ A231-1.13, Ch. 185, Solid Waste, of Chapter A231, Fees. Each account
shall be charged the appropriate monthly fees, pursuant to § A231-1.13,
Ch. 185, Solid Waste, of Chapter A231, Fees, for each and every month,
notwithstanding the quantity or frequency of usage of the refuse
collection services. In accordance with the authority contained in
§ 185-2C of this chapter, the Borough may prescribe means for charging
the appropriate monthly fees, other than charging each account for the
availability and/or use collection and disposal fees, including, but not
limited to, those instances involving a property having multiple
dwellings or multiple uses. [Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No.
11-2001]
B. Refuse and large item collection customer accounts of the Borough
shall be considered delinquent if the fees are not paid by the twentieth
(20th) day of the month following the month in which the collection
service is rendered.
C. A penalty in an amount equal to 10% shall be added to delinquent
accounts.
A. Any person, whether as premises owner or occupant, principal agent or
employee, violating or assisting in the violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter or of any resolution made by the Borough Council or any
§ 185-5 SOLID WASTE § 185-8
185:373
§ 185-9. Severability.
It is the intention of Borough Council that each separate provision of this
chapter shall be independent of all other provisions herein, and it is further
the intention of Borough Council that if any of the provisions of this chapter
be declared to be invalid, all of the other provisions hereof shall remain
valid and in force.
Chapter 189
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Floodplain regulations — See Ch. 123.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
195.
Wellhead protection — See Ch. 220.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
regulation made by the Borough Manager under the provisions hereof
shall, in each case upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than
$50 nor more than $1,000 and, in default of the payment of such
fine and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the Berks County
Prison for a period of not more than 30 days. After the expiration of the
compliance period set forth in any notice of violation, each notice, each
day that any person shall neglect to comply with the provisions of this
chapter or any resolution or regulation promulgated pursuant to this
chapter, shall be deemed a separate offense, and separate proceedings
may be instituted and separate penalties imposed for each day that
such offense shall continue.
B. Notwithstanding the imposition of any penalty hereinabove prescribed,
upon the neglect, failure or refusal of any person to comply with the
requirements of this chapter, following the expiration of the period of
time, if any, set forth in any notice of violation of this chapter, the
Borough may, but shall not be required to perform or cause the
performance of work or other actions necessary to remove, correct,
remedy, alter or otherwise abate the conditions which constitute the
violation of this chapter. Any person who is found to have violated any
provisions of this chapter shall, in addition to the penalties provided for
herein, bear all costs incurred by the Borough in the event that the
Borough has elected to perform or cause to be performed any such
remedial action. Any such costs may be collected by the Borough from
any such person in the manner provided by law.
§ 185-8 KUTZTOWN CODE § 185-9
185:374
ARTICLE I
Sacony Creek Watershed
[Adopted 6-17-2008 by Ord. No. 6-2008104]
§ 189-1. Statement of findings.
The Council of the Borough of Kutztown finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood reduction efforts in
upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater
recharge and threatens public health and safety.
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can
also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns, accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion
of streambeds and streambanks thereby elevating sedimentation),
destroying aquatic habitat and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals
and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss
of recharge.
C. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
minimization of impacts of development, redevelopment and activities
causing accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health, safety,
welfare and the protection of the people of the Borough of Kutztown
and all the people of the commonwealth, their resources and the
environment.
D. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed poses a threat to surface
water and groundwater quality.
E. Stormwater can be an important water resource by providing
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
F. Through project design, impacts from stormwater runoff can be
minimized to maintain the natural hydrologic regime, and sustain high
water quality, groundwater recharge, stream baseflow and aquatic
ecosystems. The most cost effective and environmentally advantageous
way to manage stormwater runoff is through nonstructural project
design, minimizing impervious surfaces and sprawl, avoiding sensitive
104. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Sacony Creek Watershed,
adopted 3-10-1998 by Ord. No. 4-1998.
§ 189-1 SOLID WASTE § 189-1
185:375
§ 189-2. Purpose; NPDES requirements.
areas (i.e., stream buffers, floodplains, steep slopes), and designing to
topography and soils to maintain the natural hydrologic regime.
G. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
H. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
I. Non-stormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth by the
municipality.
A. The purpose of this article is to promote health, safety and welfare
within the Sacony Creek Watershed by minimizing the damages
described in § 189-1A of this article through provisions designed to:
(1) Promote alternative project designs and layout that minimizes
impacts to surface and ground water.
(2) Promote nonstructural BMPs.
(3) Minimize increases in stormwater volume.
(4) Minimize impervious surfaces.
(5) Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation
problems at their source by regulating activities that cause these
problems.
(6) Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems.
(7) Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, which
requires a minimum of structures and relies on natural processes.
(8) Focus on infiltration of stormwater to maintain groundwater
recharge, to prevent degradation of surface and ground water
quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
(9) Strive to maintain existing base flows and quality of streams and
watercourses in the Borough of Kutztown and the commonwealth.
(10) Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.4a to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality to support
those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water quality
in special protection streams.
§ 189-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-2
185:376
§ 189-3. Statutory authority.
(11) Address the quality and quantity of stormwater discharges from
the development site.
(12) Provide a mechanism to identify controls necessary to meet the
NPDES permit requirements.
(13) Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program
to address non-stormwater discharges into the municipality's
separate storm sewer system.
(14) Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
(15) Prevent scour and erosion of streambanks and streambeds.
(16) Provide proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater
management facilities that are constructed in the Borough.
(17) Provide performance standards and design criteria for watershedwide
stormwater management and planning.
B. NPDES requirements. Federal regulations approved October 1999
require operators of small municipal separate storm sewer systems
(MS4s) to obtain NPDES Phase II permits from DEP by March 2003.
(NPDES II is an acronym for the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System Phase II Stormwater Permitting Regulations.) This
program affects all municipalities in urbanized areas of the state. This
definition applies to all Schuylkill River watershed municipalities
identified in Table III-1 of the Schuylkill River Stormwater Management
Plan Volume II as NPDES Phase II municipalities. Therefore, these
identified municipalities will be subject to the NPDES Phase II
requirements mandated by the Federal Clean Water Act as
administered by the DEP. For more information on NPDES II
requirements, contact the DEP Regional Office.
A. Primary authority. The Borough is empowered to regulate land use
activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of October 4,
1978, 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., P.L. 864 (Act 167), as amended and
supplemented, being the Stormwater Management Act, and by various
ordinances and the Code of the Borough, including the Subdivision and
Land Development Regulations, the Floodplain Regulations, the
Sanitary Sewers Ordinance, the Storm Sewer Ordinance and the
Wellhead Protection Regulations, as amended and supplemented from
time to time.105
B. Secondary authority. The municipality also is empowered to regulate
land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Subdivision and Land Development; Ch. 123, Floodplain
Regulations; Ch. 177, Sewers; Ch. 218,Water and Sewers; and Ch. 220, Wellhead
Protection.
§ 189-2 SOLID WASTE § 189-3
185:377
§ 189-4. Applicability.
All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff,
including land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to
regulation by this article.
§ 189-5. Repealer.
Any ordinance or chapter of the Borough inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
§ 189-6. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this article be declared invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any
of the remaining provisions of this article.
§ 189-7. Compliance with other requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this article do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance.
§ 189-8. Word usage; definitions.
31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.
A. For the purposes of this article, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes
the singular; words of masculine gender include the feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include the masculine
gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation or any other
similar entity.
(4) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
(5) The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended,
designed, maintained or arranged to be used or occupied."
§ 189-3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-8
185:378
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of man's activity and the natural
processes at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural
process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — The work of producing crops and
raising livestock, including tillage, plowing, discing, harrowing,
pasturing and installation of conservation measures. For purposes of
regulation by this article, construction of new buildings or impervious
area is not considered an "agricultural activity."
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result
of the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another;
also the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be
more or less impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application
for approval to engage in any regulated activities as defined in this
article.
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS — Those maintained by the contractor as he
constructs the project and upon which he documents the actual
locations of the building components and changes to the original
contract documents. These, or a copy of same, are turned over to the
Engineer at the completion of the project.
BANKFULL — The channel at the top-of-bank or point where water
begins to overflow onto a floodplain.
BASE FLOW — The portion of stream discharge derived from
groundwater; the sustained discharge that does not result from direct
runoff or from water diversions, reservoir releases, piped discharges,
or other human activities.
BIORETENTION — A stormwater retention area which utilizes woody
and herbaceous plants and soils to remove pollutants before infiltration
occurs.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Methods, measures or
practices to prevent or reduce surface runoff and/or water pollution,
including but not limited to, structural and nonstructural stormwater
management practices and operation and maintenance procedures. See
also “nonstructured best management practice (BMP).”
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
BUFFER — The area of land immediately adjacent to any stream,
measured perpendicular to and horizontally from the top-of-bank on
both sides of a stream.
CARBONATE BEDROCK (AREAS) — Rock consisting chiefly of
carbonate minerals, such as limestone and dolomite; specifically a
sedimentary rock composed of more than 50% by weight of carbonate
§ 189-8 SOLID WASTE § 189-8
185:379
minerals that underlies soil or other unconsolidated, superficial
material.
CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an
open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural
and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and
pipes flowing partly full.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening and headward
cutting of small channels and waterways due to erosion caused by
moderate to large floods.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Berks County Conservation District.
CULVERT — A structure, with appurtenant works, which carries a
stream under or through an embankment or fill.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad
or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or
semifluid.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP).
DESIGNATED WATERSHED (ACT 167) — A watershed which is listed
under the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection's
"Index of Designated Watersheds (Stormwater Management)" pursuant
to the Storm Water Management Act, P.L. 864, No. 167, October 4,
1978, and published in the Pennsylvania Bulletin on May 31, 1980 and
August 9, 1980, as amended on November 19, 1991, April 21, 1992,
June 21, 1994, April 16, 1996, April 15, 1997 and December 16, 1997.106
DESIGNEE — The agent of the Berks County Planning Department,
Berks County Conservation District and/or Kutztown Borough Planning
Commission and/or agent of the Borough involved with the
administration, review or enforcement of any provisions of this article
by contract or memorandum of understanding.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL (QUALIFIED) — Any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to
perform the work required by the article.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design
and evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to collect
and retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and
releasing it at a predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to
106. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 189-8 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-8
185:380
drain completely shortly after any given rainfall event and are dry until
the next rainfall event.
DETENTION DISTRICT — Those subareas in which some type of
detention is required to meet the plan requirements and the goals of
Act 167.107
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation or other
entity or any responsible person therein or agent thereof that
undertakes any regulated earth disturbance activity at a project site in
the Borough.
DEVELOPMENT — See "earth disturbance activity." The term includes
redevelopment.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land where any earth
disturbance activities in the Borough are planned, conducted or
maintained.
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE DISCHARGE — Drainage discharge not
confined to a single point location or channel, such as sheet flow or
shallow concentrated flow.
DISCHARGE — To release water from a project, site, aquifer, drainage
basin or other point of interest (verb); the rate and volume of flow of
water such as in a stream, generally expressed in cubic feet per second
(volume per unit of time) (noun). See also "peak discharge."
DISCHARGE POINT — The point where stormwater flows
into.[Amended 8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 5-2010]
DISTURBED AREAS — Unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
DITCH — An artificial waterway for irrigation or stormwater
conveyance.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of
the lot, tract or parcels of land being developed located such that all
overland or pipe flow from the site would be directed towards it.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management
facility designed to transmit stormwater runoff and shall include
streams, channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Borough after the
drainage plan has been approved. Said permit is issued prior to or with
the final Borough approval.
DRAINAGE PLAN — The documentation of the stormwater
management system, if any, to be used for a given development site, the
contents of which are established in § 189-11 et seq.
107. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 189-8 SOLID WASTE § 189-8
185:381
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of land, including, but not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land
development, agricultural plowing or tilling, timber harvesting
activities, road maintenance activities, mineral extraction, and the
moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth
materials.
EMERGENCY SPILLWAY — A conveyance area that is used to pass peak
discharge greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
stormwater facility.
ENCROACHMENT — A structure or activity that changes, expands
or diminishes the course, current or cross section of a watercourse,
floodway or body of water.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including
channels, is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan for
a project site which identifies BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion
and sedimentation.
EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality which
satisfy Pennsylvania Code Title 25 Environmental Protection, Chapter
93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to anti-degradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior
to the proposed construction. If the initial condition of the site is
undeveloped land, the land use shall be considered as "meadow" unless
the natural land cover is proven to generate lower curve numbers or
Rational "C" value, such as forested lands.
FLOOD — A general, but temporary, condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams,
rivers and other waters of this commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from
any natural source or delineated as a special flood hazard area on
the applicable National Flood Insurance Program Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA). Also included are areas that comprise Group 13 Soils, as
listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers
(as amended or replaced from time to time by DEP).[Amended
8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 5-2010108]
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions
of the adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry
and discharge the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise
specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and
flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA
108. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the definition of "flood hazard boundary"
which immediately followed this definition.
§ 189-8 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-8
185:382
maps or studies have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year
frequency floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that
the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the
bank of the stream.
FLUVIAL GEOMORPHOLOGY — The study of landforms associated
with river channels and the processes that form them.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forest land. These include
timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans,
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
highwater and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin or diversion ridge.
The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GRADE —
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed waterway, usually
broad and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to
conduct surface water from cropland.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the earth's surface, often between
saturated soil and rock that supplies wells and springs.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies without degrading groundwater quality.
HEC-HMS — The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic
Engineering Center (HEC) - Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS).
HIGH-QUALITY WATERS — Surface waters having quality which
exceeds levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and
wildlife and recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pennsylvania
Code Title 25 Environmental Protection, Chapter 93 Water Quality
Standards, § 93.4b(a).
HOTSPOTS — Areas where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of
those typically found in stormwater.
HYDROGRAPH — A graph of discharge versus time for a selected point
in the drainage system.
HYDROLOGIC REGIME (NATURAL) — The hydrologic cycle or balance
that sustains quality and quantity of stormwater, base flow, storage, and
groundwater supplies under natural conditions.
A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground, specified in
percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
(1)
To finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment or bottom of
excavation.
(2)
§ 189-8 SOLID WASTE § 189-8
185:383
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — A classification of soils by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service, formerly the Soil Conservation
Service, into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A
soils, which are very permeable and produce lithe runoff, to D soils,
which are not very permeable and produce much more runoff.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the percolation
of water into the ground. "Impervious surface" includes, but is not
limited to, any roof, parking or driveway areas, and any new streets and
sidewalks. Any surface areas designed to be gravel or crushed stone
shall be assumed to be impervious surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILL — Development that occurs on smaller parcels that remain
undeveloped but are within or in very close proximity to urban areas.
The development relies on existing infrastructure and does not require
an extension of water, sewer or other public utilities.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolates
downward to recharge groundwater.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff
into the ground (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench).
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the
diversion end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure through
which water may flow.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving grading, tilling, digging
or filling of ground or stripping of vegetation or any other activity that
causes an alteration to the natural condition of the land.
LIMITING ZONE — A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or
underlying strata which includes one of the following:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving a group of two or more
buildings or the division or allocation of land or space between or
among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means
of or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups, or other features.
(1)
(2) Any subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.109
(3)
109. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 189-8 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-8
185:384
LOT — A part of a subdivision or a parcel of land used as a building
site or intended to be used for building purposes, whether immediate
or future, which would not be further subdivided.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in the Sacony Creek hydrologic
model.
MANNING EQUATION (IN MANNING FORMULA) — A method for
calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g.,
cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape,
roughness, depth of flow and slope. Open channels may include closed
conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for
a municipality, planning agency or joint planning commission.
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
NATURAL HYDROLOGIC REGIME — See "hydrologic regime."
NATURAL RECHARGE AREA — Undisturbed surface area or
depression where stormwater collects, and a portion of which infiltrates
and replenishes the underground and groundwater.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a watery
body from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from
discernible, confined or discrete conveyances.
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGES — Water flowing in stormwater
collection facilities, such as pipes or swales, which is not the result of a
rainfall event or snowmelt.
NONSTRUCTURAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMPS) —
Methods of controlling stormwater runoff quantity and quality, such
as innovative site planning, impervious area and grading reduction,
protection of natural depression areas, temporary ponding on site and
other techniques.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water
Act, which is delegated to DEP in Pennsylvania.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously SCS).
A seasonal high water table, whether perched or regional,
determined by direct observation of the water table or indicated by
soil mottling.
(1)
A rock with open joints, fractures or solution channels, or masses
of loose rock fragments, including gravel, with insufficient fine soil
to fill the voids between the fragments.
(2)
A rock formation, other stratum or soil condition, which is so slowly
permeable that it effectively limits downward passage of effluent.
(3)
§ 189-8 SOLID WASTE § 189-8
185:385
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows
with an open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to,
natural and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals
and pipes flowing partly full.
OUTFALL — "Point source" as described in 40 CFR § 122.2 at the point
where the municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface
waters of the commonwealth.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater
or artificial drain.
PARENT TRACT — The parcel of land from which a land development or
subdivision originates, determined from the date of municipal adoption
of this article.
PARKING LOT STORAGE — Involves the use of impervious parking
areas as temporary impoundments with controlled release rates during
rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (CALIBRATED) — The computer-based
hydrologic modeling technique adapted to the Sacony Creek watershed
for the Act 167 Plan. The model has been calibrated to reflect actual
recorded flow values by adjoining key model input parameters.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLAN — The stormwater management and erosion and sediment
pollution control plans and narratives.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough
of Kutztown.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
POST CONSTRUCTION — Period after construction where disturbed
areas are stabilized, stormwater controls are in place and functioning
and all proposed improvements in the approved land development plan
are completed.
PREDEVELOPMENT — Undeveloped/natural condition.
PRETREATMENT — Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to
provide storage or filtering to trap coarse materials and other
pollutants before they enter the system, but not necessarily meet the
water quality volume requirements of § 189-10F.
PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD (PMF) — The flood that may be
expected from the most severe combination of critical meteorologic
and hydrologic conditions that are reasonably possible in any area.
§ 189-8 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-8
185:386
The PMF is derived from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP)
as determined on the basis of data obtained from the National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated earth
disturbance activities in the municipality are planned, conducted or
maintained.
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate
peak flow.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of groundwater through the
infiltration of rainfall, other surface waters, or land application of water
or treated wastewater.
RECORD DRAWINGS — Original documents revised to suit the as-built
conditions and subsequently provided by the applicant/developer to the
Borough.[Amended 8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 5-2010]
REDEVELOPMENT — The demolition, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, or improvement exceeding 2,000 square feet of land
disturbance performed on sites where existing land use is commercial,
industrial, institutional, or multifamily residential. Maintenance
activities such as top-layer grinding and repaving are not considered
to be redevelopment. Interior remodeling projects and tenant
improvements are also not considered to be redevelopment. Utility
trenches in streets are not considered redevelopment unless more than
50% of the street width is removed and repaved.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions that involve
the alteration or development of land in a manner that may affect
stormwater runoff.[Amended 8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 5-2010]
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapters 92,
Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.110
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of predevelopment peak rate of
runoff from a site or subarea to which the post-development peak rate
of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment in which stormwater is stored
and not released during the storm event. Retention basins do not have
an outlet other than recharge and must infiltrate stored water in no
more than four days.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For
example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected
to recur on the average of once every 25 years.
110. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 189-8 SOLID WASTE § 189-8
185:387
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is
used to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design
storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road cross section, such as grading and repairing existing
unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches and other similar activities.
ROOF DRAINS — A drainage conduit or pipe that collects water runoff
from a roof and leads it away from the structure.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating
controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SALDO — Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.111
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water or air.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin
located and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt or other material
transported by water during construction.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth
occurring from the failure to design, construct, implement or maintain
control measures and control facilities in accordance with the
requirements of this article.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled
with loose stone or similar coarse material into which surface water is
directed for infiltration into the underground water.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHALLOW CONCENTRATED FLOW — Stormwater runoff flowing in
shallow, defined ruts prior to entering a defined channel or waterway.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff which flows over the ground surface as a thin,
even layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SOIL-COVER-COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called "curve number (CN)."
SOIL GROUP, HYDROLOGIC — A classification of soils by the Natural
Resource Conservation Service into four runoff potential groups. The
groups range from A soils, which are very permeable and produce little
111. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 189-8 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-8
185:388
runoff, to D soils, which are not very permeable and produce much
more runoff.[Amended 8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 5-2010]
SOURCE WATER PROTECTION AREAS (SWPA) — The zone through
which contaminants, if present, are likely to migrate and reach a
drinking water well or surface water intake.
SPECIAL GEOLOGIC FEATURES — Carbonate bedrock features,
including but not limited to closed depressions, existing sinkholes,
fracture traces, lineaments, joints, faults, caves and pinnacles, which
may exist and must be identified on a site when stormwater
management BMPs are being considered.
SPECIAL PROTECTION SUBWATERSHEDS — Watersheds for which
the receiving waters are exceptional value (EV) or high quality (HQ)
waters.
SPILLWAY — A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin which
is used to pass peak discharge greater than the maximum design storm
controlled by the pond.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim and restore water quality
under Pa. Code Title 25 and the Clean Streams Law.112
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure
based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow
equals the change in storage), with outflow defined as a function of
storage volume and depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm event
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See
"return period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation
reaching the ground surface.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or
man-made, that, due to its condition, design or construction, conveys,
stores or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater
management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and
retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes and infiltration
structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing
stormwater runoff in the Sacony Creek Watershed adopted by Berks
County, as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167),
and known as the "Sacony Creek Watershed Action 167 Stormwater
Management Plan."
112. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 189-8 SOLID WASTE § 189-8
185:389
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by
the developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff
will be managed at the particular site of interest according to this
article.
STREAM — A natural watercourse.
STREAM BUFFER — The land area adjacent to each side of a stream,
essential to maintaining water quality. (See "buffer.")
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses a
regulated water of this commonwealth.
SUBAREA — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for which
stormwater management criteria have been established in the
stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or
building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision
by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than
10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any
residential dwellings, shall be exempt.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or
channels of conveyance of surface, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
SWALE — A low lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface
water runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (TC) — The time for surface runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a
point of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total
of overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
TOP-OF-BANK — Highest point of elevation in a stream channel cross
section at which a rising water level just begins to flow out of the
channel and over the floodplain.
VERNAL POND — Seasonal depressional wetlands that are covered by
shallow water for variable periods from winter to spring, but may be
completely dry for most of the summer and fall.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
§ 189-8 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-8
185:390
§ 189-9. Abbreviations.
As used in this article, the following abbreviations shall have the meanings
indicated:
BMPs — Best management practice(s).
DRBC — Delaware River Basin Commission. [Added 8-17-2010 by Ord.
No. 5-2010]
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously SCS).
PA DEP — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PENNDOT — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PMF — Probable maximum flood.
§ 189-10. General requirements; Stormwater Management
Districts; stormwater management facilities; water quality;
calculation methods; erosion.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed
water, wetlands, ponds, springs and all other bodies or channels of
conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
WELLHEAD —
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA — The surface and subsurface area
surrounding a water supply well, well field, spring or infiltration gallery
supplying a public water system, through which contaminants are
reasonably likely to move toward and reach the water source.
WET BASIN — Pond for urban runoff management that is designed to
detain urban runoff and always contains water.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, ferns and similar areas.
(1) A structure built over a well.
(2) The source of water for a well.
A. General requirements.
(1) All applicants proposing regulated activities in the Sacony Creek
Watershed which do not fall under the exemption criteria shown in,
§ 189-8 SOLID WASTE § 189-10
185:391
§ 189-11B shall submit a drainage plan consistent with the Sacony
Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan to the Borough
for review. These criteria shall apply to the total proposed
development even if development is to take place in stages.
Impervious cover shall include, but not be limited to, any roof,
parking or driveway areas and any new streets and sidewalks.
Any areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be
assumed to be impervious for the purposes of comparison to the
waiver criteria.
(2) The applicant is required to evaluate practicable alternatives to the
surface discharge of stormwater, the creation of impervious
surfaces and the degradation of waters of the commonwealth, and
must maintain as much as possible the natural hydrologic regime.
(3) The drainage plan must be designed consistent with the
sequencing provisions of § 189-10D to ensure maintenance of the
natural hydrologic regime and to promote groundwater recharge
and protect groundwater and surface water quality and quantity.
The drainage plan designer must proceed sequentially in
accordance with this section of this article.
(4) The existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto
adjacent property shall not be altered without permission of the
adjacent property owner(s) and shall be subject to any applicable
discharge criteria specified in this article.
(5) Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to
any applicable discharge criteria in the general direction of
existing discharge, whether proposed to be concentrated or
maintained as diffused drainage areas, except as otherwise
provided by this article. If diffused flow is proposed to be
concentrated and discharged onto adjacent property, the developer
must document that adequate downstream conveyance facilities
exist to safely transport the concentrated discharge or otherwise
prove that no erosion, sedimentation, flooding or other harm will
result from the concentrated discharge.
(6) Where a development site is traversed by watercourses, drainage
easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such
watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation,
the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may
adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the
easement. Maintenance, including mowing of vegetation within the
easement, shall be required.
(7) Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this article
that would be located in or adjacent to waters of the
commonwealth or wetlands shall be subject to approval by the PA
DEP through the joint permit application process or, where deemed
appropriate by the PA DEP, the general permit process. When there
§ 189-10 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-10
185:392
is a question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the
responsibility of the developer or his agent to show that the land
in question cannot be classified as wetlands, otherwise approval to
work in the area must be obtained from the PA DEP.
(8) Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this article
that would be located on state highway rights-of-way shall be
subject to approval by PENNDOT.
(9) Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff
through seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., are encouraged,
where soil conditions permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the
need for detention facilities.
(10) All stormwater runoff shall be treated for water quality.
(11) Roof drains must not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm
sewers or roadside ditches to promote overload flow and
infiltration/percolation of stormwater where advantageous to do so.
When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or
storm sewers, then it shall be permitted, on a case-by-case basis, by
the Borough.
(12) Transference of runoff to or from an EV/HQ watershed is
prohibited unless otherwise authorized by DEP or DRBC.
[Amended 8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 5-2010]
B. Permit requirements by other government entities. Permits must
comply with any and all applicable local, county, state and federal
regulations.
C. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth disturbance
activities.
(1) No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality
shall commence until the municipality receives an approval from
the Conservation District of an erosion and sediment control plan
for construction activities.
(2) DEP has regulations that require an erosion and sediment control
plan for any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or
more, under 25 Pa. Code § 102.4(b).
(3) In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, a DEP NPDES
construction activities permit is required for regulated earth
disturbance activities.
(4) Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth
disturbance activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or
County Conservation District must be provided to the municipality.
The issuance of an NPDES construction permit [or permit coverage
under the statewide general permit (PAG-22)] satisfies the
requirements, § 189-10C(1).
§ 189-10 SOLID WASTE § 189-10
185:393
(5) A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the
project site at all times.
(6) Additional erosion and sediment control design standards and
criteria that are recommended to be applied where infiltration
BMPs are proposed shall include the following:
(a) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase
to maintain maximum infiltration capacity.
(b) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff
until the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration
BMP has achieved final stabilization.
D. Nonstructural project design (sequencing to minimize stormwater
impacts).
(1) For projects disturbing one acre or more, the design of all
regulated activities shall include evaluation of practicable
alternatives to the surface discharge of stormwater, the creation of
impervious surfaces, and the degradation of waters of the
commonwealth, and must maintain as much as possible the natural
hydrologic regime of the site.
(a) An alternative is practicable if it is available and capable of
being done after taking into consideration cost, existing
technology and logistics in light of overall project purposes and
other municipal requirements.
(b) All practicable alternatives to the discharge of stormwater are
presumed to have less adverse impact on quantity and quality
of waters of the commonwealth unless otherwise
demonstrated.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that he/she designed the regulated
activities that disturb one acre or more included consideration of
the following issues:
(a) Prepare an existing resource and site analysis map (ERSAM)
showing environmentally sensitive areas, including, but not
limited to, steep slopes, ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands,
hydric soils, vernal pools, floodplains, stream buffer zones,
Hydrologic Soil Groups A and B (areas conducive to
infiltration), special geologic features, any existing recharge
areas and any other requirements outlined in the municipal
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.113
113. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 189-10 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-10
185:394
(b) Establish appropriate buffers for each of the delineated
environmentally sensitive areas per the municipal zoning
ordinance.114 [See § 189-10F(4) for stream buffers and
§ 189-10J(9) for special geologic feature buffers.]
(c) Prepare a draft project layout avoiding sensitive areas
identified in § 189-10D(2)(a).
(d) Identify site specific existing conditions, drainage areas,
discharge points, recharge areas and hydrologic Soil Groups A
and B.
(e) Evaluate nonstructural stormwater management alternatives.
[1] Minimize earth disturbance.
[2] Minimize impervious surfaces.
[3] Break up large impervious surfaces.
(f) Satisfy groundwater infiltration objective (§ 189-10E) and
provide for stormwater pretreatment prior to infiltration.
Pretreatment may not be necessary for rooftop runoff which
enters the infiltration facility directly from a roof leader.
(g) Satisfy water quality (§ 189-10F) and streambank erosion
protection objective (§ 189-10G).
(h) Determine what management district the site falls into
(Appendix D115) and conduct an existing conditions runoff
analysis.
(i) Prepare final project design to maintain existing conditions
drainage areas and discharge points, to minimize earth
disturbance and impervious surfaces and, to the maximum
extent possible, to ensure the remaining site development has
no surface or point discharge.
(j) Conduct a post-development runoff analysis based on the final
design and to meet the release rate and in turn the overbank
flow and extreme event requirements (§ 189-10H).
(k) Manage any remaining runoff through treatment prior to
discharge, as part of detention, bioretention, direct discharge
or other structural control.
E. Groundwater recharge (infiltration/recharge/bioretention).
(1) Maximizing the groundwater recharge capacity of the area being
developed is required. Design of the infiltration stormwater
management facilities shall give consideration to providing
114. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
115. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 189-10 SOLID WASTE § 189-10
185:395
groundwater recharge to compensate for the reduction in the
percolation that occurs when the ground surface is disturbed or
impervious surface is created. It is recommended that roof runoff
be directed to infiltration BMPs which can be over-designed to
compensate for the infiltration losses due to parking areas. These
measures are required to be consistent with § 189-2, and take
advantage of utilizing any existing recharge areas.
(2) Infiltration may not be feasible on every site due to site-specific
limitations, such as soil type. If it cannot be physically
accomplished, due to seasonal high water table, soil permeability
rate, soil depth or setback distances from special geologic features,
then the design professional shall be responsible to show that this
cannot be physically accomplished. If it can be physically
accomplished, then the volume of runoff to be infiltrated shall be
determined from § 189-10E(3)(c) depending on demonstrated site
conditions and shall be the greater of the two volumes.
(3) Infiltration BMPs shall meet the following minimum requirements:
(a) Infiltration requirements. Regulated activities will be required
to infiltrate, where site conditions permit, a portion of the
runoff created by the development as part of an overall
stormwater management plan designed for the site. The
volume of runoff to be infiltrated shall be determined from
§ 189-10E(3)(c)[1] or [2], depending upon demonstrated site
conditions.
(b) Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed
areas shall be selected based on suitability of soils and site
conditions and shall be constructed on soils that have the
following characteristics:
[1] A minimum depth of 36 inches between the bottom of the
BMP and the limiting zone.
[2] An infiltration and/or percolation rate sufficient to accept
the additional stormwater load and drain completely as
determined by field tests conducted by the applicant's
design professional.
[3] The infiltration facility shall be capable of completely
infiltrating the retention (infiltration) volume within four
days (96 hours).
[4] Pretreatment shall be provided prior to infiltration.
(c) The size of the infiltration facility shall be based upon the
following volume criteria:
[1] NRCS curve number equation:
§ 189-10 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-10
185:396
[a] The NRCS runoff equation shall be utilized to
calculate infiltration requirements (I) in inches.
Equation 1
I (Infiltration requirement in inches) = (200 / CN) – 2
Where
CN = SCS (NRCS) curve number of existing
conditions contributing to the infiltration
facility.
[b] This equation is displayed graphically in, and the
infiltration requirement can be determined from
Figure 1.
Figure 1. Infiltration Requirement Based Upon
NRCS Curve Number
[c] The retention (Infiltration) volume (Rev) required
would therefore be computed as:
Equation 2
Rev (Cubic Feet) = I * impervious area (square feet)
/ (12 inches/ft)
Where
I = infiltration requirement (in inches)
[2] Annual recharge: water budget approach. It has been
determined that infiltrating 0.42 inch of runoff from the
impervious areas will aid in maintaining the hydrologic
regime of the watershed. If the goals of § 189-10E(3)(b)[1]
cannot be achieved, then 0.42 inch of rainfall shall be
infiltrated from all impervious areas, up to an existing site
conditions curve number of 83. Above a curve number of
83, Equation 1 or the curve in Figure 1 should be used to
determine the infiltration requirement. The retention
(infiltration) volume (Rev) required would therefore be
computed as:
Rev (Cubic Feet) = (0.42 or I, whichever is less) *
impervious area (sq.ft.) / (12 in/ft)
(4) Soils. A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be required
where practicable to determine the suitability of recharge facilities.
§ 189-10 SOLID WASTE § 189-10
185:397
The evaluation shall be performed by a qualified design
professional and, at a minimum, address soil permeability, depth to
bedrock and subgrade stability. The general process for designing
the infiltration BMP shall be:
(a) Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and manmade
features within the site to determine general areas of
suitability for infiltration practices. In areas where
development on fill material is under consideration, conduct
geotechnical investigations of subgrade stability; infiltration is
not permitted to be ruled out without conducting these tests.
(b) Provide field tests such as double ring infiltrometer or
hydraulic conductivity tests (at the level of the proposed
infiltration surface) to determine the appropriate hydraulic
conductivity rate. Percolation tests are not recommended for
design purposes.
(c) Design the infiltration structure for the required retention
(Rev) volume based on field determined capacity at the level of
the proposed infiltration surface.
(d) If on-lot infiltration structures are proposed by the applicant's
design professional, it must be demonstrated to the
municipality that the soils are conducive to infiltrate on the lots
identified.
(5) Carbonate areas. The applicant is required to investigate the ability
of all areas on the site which are not underlain by carbonate rock to
meet the infiltration requirements of § 189-10E(3). If this
investigation proves infeasible, infiltration can occur on areas
underlain by carbonate rock by following the recommended
procedure below in conjunction with Figure B-4 in Ordinance
Appendix B.116 However, the applicant is not required to use
infiltration in carbonate areas even if the site falls into the
Recommended range on Figure B-4 in Ordinance Appendix B. If
infiltration is not proposed, the calculated infiltration volume
[§ 189-10E(3)] shall be treated by an acceptable BMP.
(a) Infiltration BMP loading rate percentages in Figure B-4 in
Ordinance Appendix B shall be calculated as follows:
(b) The area tributary to the infiltration BMP shall be weighted as
follows:
116. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 189-10 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-10
185:398
Area Description Weighting
All disturbed area to be made
impervious
100%
All disturbed areas to be made
pervious
50%
All undisturbed impervious areas 100%
All undisturbed pervious areas 0%
(c) Soil thickness is to be measured from the bottom of any
proposed infiltration BMP. The effective soil thickness in Figure
B-4 in Ordinance Appendix B is the measured soil thickness
multiplied by the thickness factor based on soil permeability, as
follows:
Permeability Range
(inches per hour) Thickness Factor
6.0 to 12.0 0.8
2.0 to 6.0 1.0
1.0 to 2.0 1.4
0.75 to 1.0 1.2
0.5 to 0.75 1.0
(d) The design of all facilities over Karst shall include an
evaluation of measures to minimize adverse effects.
(6) Stormwater hotspots.
(a) Following is a list of examples of designated hotspots. If a site
is designated as a hotspot, it has important implications for
how stormwater is managed. First and foremost, untreated
stormwater runoff from hotspots shall not be allowed to
recharge into groundwater where it may contaminate water
supplies. Therefore, the Rev requirement shall not be applied
to development sites that fit into the hotspot category. (The
entire WQv must still be treated.) Second, a greater level of
stormwater treatment shall be considered at hotspot sites to
prevent pollutant washoff after construction. The EPA's NPDES
stormwater program requires some industrial sites to prepare
and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan.
(b) Examples of hotspots:
[1] Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities.
[2] Vehicle fueling stations.
[3] Vehicle service and maintenance facilities.
§ 189-10 SOLID WASTE § 189-10
185:399
[4] Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities.
[5] Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.).
[6] Industrial sites (based on Standard Industrial Codes).
[7] Marinas (service and maintenance).
[8] Outdoor liquid container storage.
[9] Outdoor loading/unloading facilities.
[10] Public works storage areas.
[11] Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials.
[12] Commercial container nursery.
[13] Other land uses and activities as designated by an
appropriate review authority.
(c) The following land uses and activities are not normally
considered hotspots:
[1] Residential streets and rural highways.
[2] Residential development.
[3] Institutional development.
[4] Office developments.
[5] Nonindustrial rooftops.
[6] Pervious areas, except golf courses and nurseries [which
may need an integrated pest management (IPM) plan].
(d) Large highways [average daily traffic volume (ADT) greater
than 30,000] are not designated as a stormwater hotspot;
however, it is important to ensure that highway stormwater
management plans adequately protect groundwater.
(7) Caution shall be exercised where infiltration is proposed in source
water protection areas as defined by the local municipality or water
authority.
(8) Infiltration facilities shall be used in conjunction with other
innovative or traditional stormwater control facilities that are
found within the PA DEP State BMP Manual.
(9) Caution shall be exercised where salt or chloride (municipal salt
storage) would be a pollutant since soils do little to filter this
pollutant and it may contaminate the groundwater. The qualified
design professional shall evaluate the possibility of groundwater
contamination from the proposed infiltration facility and perform a
hydrogeologic justification study if necessary.
§ 189-10 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-10
185:400
(10) The infiltration requirement in high-quality or exceptional value
waters shall be subject to the Department's Chapter 93
Antidegradation Regulations.
(11) Dependent upon certain land use or hotspots, an impermeable liner
will be required in detention basins where the possibility of
groundwater contamination exists. A detailed hydrogeologic
investigation may be required by the municipality.
(12) The municipality shall require the applicant to provide safeguards
against groundwater contamination for land uses that may cause
groundwater contamination should there be a mishap or spill.
(13) For projects that disturb one acre or more, unless otherwise
specified in the Zoning Ordinance,117 the following setbacks for
infiltration facilities shall apply:
(a) One hundred feet from water supply wells.
(b) Ten feet downslope or 100 feet upslope from building
foundations.
(c) Fifty feet from septic system drainfields.
(d) Fifty feet from a geologic contact with carbonate bedrock,
unless a preliminary site investigation is done in the carbonate
bedrock to show the absence of special geologic features
within 50 feet of the proposed infiltration area.
(e) One hundred feet from the property line unless documentation
is provided to show all setbacks from wells, foundations and
drainfields on the neighboring property will be met.
F. Water quality requirements.
(1) Developed areas shall provide adequate storage and treatment
facilities necessary to capture and treat stormwater runoff. The
retention volume computed under § 189-10E may be a component
of the water quality volume if the applicant chooses to manage both
components in a single facility. If the infiltration volume is less than
the water quality volume, the remaining water quality volume may
be captured and treated by methods other than recharge/
infiltration BMPs. The required water quality volume (WQv) is the
storage capacity needed to capture and treat a portion of
stormwater runoff from the developed areas of the site. To achieve
this goal, the following criterion is established:
(a) The following calculation formula is to be used to determine
the water quality storage volume, (WQv), in acre-feet of
storage for the Sacony Creek watershed:
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 189-10 SOLID WASTE § 189-10
185:401
WQv = [(P)(Rv)(A)] / 12
Where
WQv = Water quality volume (acre-feet).
P = 1 inch.
A = Total contributing drainage area to the water
quality BMP (acres).
Rv = 0.05 + 0.009(l) where I is the percent of the area
that is impervious surface [(impervious area / A) *
100].
(b) This volume requirement can be accomplished by the
permanent volume of a wet basin or the detained volume from
other BMPs.
(c) Release of water can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the
invert of the water quality orifice is at the invert of the facility).
The design of the facility shall provide for protection from
clogging and unwanted sedimentation.
(2) For areas within defined special protection subwatersheds which
include exceptional value (EV) and high-quality (HQ) waters, cold
water fishery (CWF) the temperature and quality of water and
streams shall be maintained.
(3) To accomplish the above, the applicant shall use innovative or
traditional stormwater control facilities that are found within the
PA DEP State BMP Manual.
(4) If a perennial or intermittent stream passes through the site, the
applicant shall create a stream buffer extending a minimum of 50
feet to either side of the top-of-bank of the channel. The buffer area
shall be maintained with appropriate native vegetation (reference
to Appendix F of Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management
Practices for Developing Area for plant lists). If the applicable rear
or side yard setback is less than 50 feet, the buffer width may be
reduced to 25% of the setback to a minimum of 10 feet. If an
existing buffer is legally prescribed (i.e., deed, covenant, easement,
etc.) and it exceeds the requirements of this article, the existing
buffer shall be maintained. This does not include lakes or wetlands.
G. Streambank erosion requirements.
(1) In addition to control of the water quality volume, in order to
minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on downstream
streambank erosion, the primary requirement is to design a BMP to
detain the post-development two-year, twenty-four-hour design
storm to the existing conditions one-year peak flow using the SCS
Type II distribution. Additionally, provisions shall be made (such as
adding a small orifice at the bottom of the outlet structure) so that
§ 189-10 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-10
185:402
the post-development one-year storm takes a minimum of 24 hours
to drain from the facility from a point where the maximum volume
of water from the one-year storm is captured (i.e., the maximum
water surface elevation is achieved in the facility). Release of water
can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the invert of the water
quality orifice is at the invert of the facility).
(2) The minimum orifice size in the outlet structure to the BMP shall be
a three-inch diameter orifice, and a trash rack shall be installed to
prevent clogging. On sites with small contributing drainage areas
to this BMP that do not provide enough runoff volume to allow a
twenty-four-hour attenuation with the three-inch orifice, the
calculations shall be submitted showing this condition. Orifice sizes
less than three inches can be utilized, provided that the design will
prevent clogging of the intake.
H. Stormwater management districts.
(1) The Sacony Creek Watershed has been divided into stormwater
management districts as shown in Appendix D118 and as follows.
(2) In addition to the requirements specified in the table below, the
groundwater recharge, water quality and streambank erosion
control requirements shall be implemented. Development sites
located in each of the districts must control post-development
runoff rates to predevelopment runoff rates for the design storm as
follows:
District Subareas
Post-
Development Predevelopment
A 1-8, 11, 999 2-year 1-year
10-year 10-year
50-year 50-year
B 43-67 2-year 1-year
10-year 2.33-year
50-year 10-year
C 9, 10, 12-41 2-year 1-year
10-year 2.33-year
50-year 50-year
D 68-72, 75 2-year 1-year
10-year 2.33-year
50-year 10-year
E 42, 73-74,
76-92
2-year 1-year
118. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 189-10 SOLID WASTE § 189-10
185:403
District Subareas
Post-
Development Predevelopment
5-year 5-year
10-year 10-year
25-year 25-year
50-year 50-year
100-year 100-year
I. Stormwater Management District implementation provisions
(performance standards).
(1) General. Post-development rates of runoff from any regulated
activity shall not exceed the peak release rates of runoff prior to
development for the design storms specified in § 189-10H of this
article. [Amended 8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 5-2010]
(2) District boundaries. The boundaries of the Stormwater
Management Districts are shown on an official map which is
available for inspections at the Borough municipal building. A copy
of the official map at a reduced scale is included in Appendix D. The
exact location of the Stormwater Management District boundaries
as they apply to a given development site shall be determined by
mapping the boundaries using the two-foot topographic contours
(or most accurate data required) provided as part of the drainage
plan.
(3) Sites located in more than one district. For a proposed
development site located within two or more release category
subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall be the
predevelopment peak discharge for that subarea multiplied by the
applicable release rate. The calculated peak discharges shall apply
regardless of whether the grading plan changes the drainage area
by subarea. An exception to the above may be granted if discharges
from multiple subareas recombine in proximity to the site. In this
case, peak discharge in any direction shall follow Management
District A criteria, provided that the overall site discharge meets
the management district criteria for which the discharge is located.
(4) Off-site areas. Off-site areas which drain through a proposed
development site are not subject to release rate criteria when
determining allowable peak runoff rates. However, on-site drainage
facilities shall be designed to safely convey off-site flows through
the development site.
(5) Site areas. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed
development activity differs significantly from the total site area,
only the proposed impact area shall be subject to the management
district criteria. In other words, unimpacted areas bypassing the
§ 189-10 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-10
185:404
stormwater management facilities would not be subject to the
management district criteria.
J. Design criteria for stormwater management facilities.
(1) Any stormwater facility located on state highway rights-of-way
shall be subject to approval by PENNDOT.
(2) Any stormwater management facility (i.e., detention basin)
designed to store runoff and requiring a berm or earthen
embankment required or regulated by this article shall be designed
to provide an emergency spillway to handle flow up to the onehundred-
year post-development conditions. The height of
embankment must be set as to provide a minimum 1.0 foot of
freeboard above the maximum pool elevation computed when the
facility functions for the one-hundred-year post-Mydevelopment
inflow. Should any stormwater management facility require a dam
safety permit under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105 et seq., the facility
shall be designed in accordance with 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105 and
meet the regulations of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105 concerning dam
safety which may be required to pass storms larger than the onehundred-
year event.
(3) Any facilities that constitute water obstructions (e.g., culverts,
bridges, outfalls of stream enclosures) and any work involving
wetlands as directed in the regulations of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105
et seq. (as amended) shall be designed in accordance with 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 105 and will require a permit from PA DEP. Any other
drainage conveyance facility that doesn't fall under the regulations
of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105 must be able to convey, without damage
to the drainage structure or roadway, runoff from the twenty-fiveyear
design storms with a minimum 1.0 foot of freeboard measured
below the lowest point along the top of the roadway. Roadway
crossings located within designated floodplain areas must be able
to convey runoff from a one-hundred-year design storm with a
minimum 1.0 foot of freeboard measured below the lowest point
along the top of roadway. Any facility that constitutes a dam as
defined in the regulations of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105 et seq.
regulations may require a permit under dam safety regulations.
Any facility located within a PENNDOT right-of-way must meet
PENNDOT minimum design standards and permit submission
requirements.
(4) Any drainage conveyance facility and/or channel that doesn't fall
under the regulations of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105 et seq. must be
able to convey, without damage to the drainage structure or
roadway, runoff from the ten-year design storm. Conveyance
facilities to or exiting from stormwater management facilities (i.e.,
detention basins) shall be designed to convey the design flow to or
from that structure. Roadway crossings located within designated
floodplain areas must be able to convey runoff from a one-hundred-
§ 189-10 SOLID WASTE § 189-10
185:405
year design storm. Any facility located within a PENNDOT right-ofway
must meet PENNDOT minimum design standards and permit
submission requirements.
(5) Storm sewers must be able to convey post-development runoff from
a twenty-five-year design storm without surcharging inlets.
(6) Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open
channels and at all points of discharge.
(7) The design of all stormwater management facilities shall
incorporate sound engineering principles and practices. The
Borough shall reserve the right to disapprove any design that
would result in the continuation of an adverse hydrologic or
hydraulic condition within the watershed.
(8) All wet basin designs shall incorporate biologic minimization
controls consistent with the West Nile Guidance found in Appendix
G.119
(9) No stormwater detention facility shall be placed within 50 feet of a
special geologic feature. No stormwater subsurface conveyance
facility shall be constructed within 50 feet of a special geologic
feature, unless it is constructed of durable pipe utilizing watertight
joints.
K. Calculation methodology. Stormwater runoff from all development sites
shall be calculated using either the Rational Method or a Soil-Cover-
Complex methodology.
(1) Any stormwater runoff calculations involving drainage areas
greater than 200 acres, including on- and off-site areas, shall use a
generally accepted calculation technique that is based on the
NRCS Soil-Cover-Compels Method. Table 1 summarizes acceptable
computation methods. It is assumed that all methods will be
selected by the design professional based on the individual
limitations and suitability of each method for a particular site. The
Borough may approve the use of the Rational Method to estimate
peak discharges from drainage areas that contain fewer than 200
acres.
119. Editor's Note: Appendix G is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 189-10 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-10
185:406
Table 1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Plans
Method
Method
Developed by Applicability
TR-20 (or commercial
package based on
TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of full
hydrology computer model
is desirable or necessary
TR-55 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans within
limitations described in
TR-55
HEC-1 US Army
Corps of
Engineers
Applicable where use of full
hydrologic computer model
is desirable or necessary
PSRM Penn State
University
Applicable where use of a
hydrologic computer model
is desirable or necessary;
simpler than TR-20 or
HEC-1
Rational Method (or
commercial computer
package based on
Rational Method)
Emil
Kuichling
(1889)
For sites less than 200
acres or as approved by the
municipality and Municipal
Engineer
Other methods Varies Other computation
methodologies approved by
the municipality and
Municipal Engineer
*NOTE: Successors to the above methods are also acceptable.
These successors include WINNTR55 for TR55 and WINTR20 for
TR20 and SWMM.
(2) All calculations consistent with the requirements of this article
using the Soil-Cover-Complex Method shall use the appropriate
design rainfall depths for the various return period storms
presented in Table B-1 in Appendix B120 of this article. If a
hydrologic computer model, such as PSRM or HEC-1, is used for
stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration of rainfall shall
be 24 hours. The NRCS S-curve as shown in Figure B-1, Appendix B
of this article shall be used for the rainfall distribution.
(3) For the purposes of predevelopment flow rate determination,
undeveloped land shall be considered as meadow condition, unless
the natural ground cover generates a lower curve number or
Rational "C" value (i.e., forest).
120. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 189-10 SOLID WASTE § 189-10
185:407
(4) All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall
intensities consistent with appropriate times of concentration for
overland flow and return periods from the Design Storm Curves
from PENNDOT Design Rainfall Curves (1986) (Figure B-3). Times
of concentration for overland flow shall be calculated using the
methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time to
time by NRCS). Times of concentration for channel and pipe flow
shall be computed using Manning's equation. NRCS lag equation
divided by 0.6 is an acceptable method for Tc in undeveloped areas.
(5) Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed
conditions to be used in the Soil-Cover-Complex Method shall be
obtained from Table B-2 in Appendix B121 of this article.
(6) Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for
use in the Rational Method shall be obtained from Table B-3 in
Appendix B.122 of this article.
(7) Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning Equation shall be
used for hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity of
open channels, pipes and storm sewers. Values for Manning's
roughness coefficient (n) shall be consistent with Table B-4 in
Appendix B of this article. Full flow shall be assumed for closed
conduits. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities
shall be designed to meet the performance standards of this article
using any generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or
method.
(8) The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet
the performed standards of this article shall be verified by routing
the design storm hydrograph through these facilities using the
Storage-Indication Method. For drainage areas greater than 20
acres in size, the design storm hydrograph shall be computed using
a calculation method that produces a full hydrograph. The Borough
may approve the use of any generally accepted full hydrograph
approximation technique which shall use a total runoff volume that
is consistent with the volume from a method that produces a full
hydrograph.
L. Limestone and/or sinkhole prone areas.
(1) The ability to retain and maximize the groundwater recharge
capacity of the area being developed is encouraged. Design of the
stormwater management facilities shall give consideration to
providing groundwater recharge to compensate for the reduction
in the percolation that occurs when the ground surface is paved
and roofed over. A detailed geologic evaluation of the project site
121. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
122. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 189-10 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-10
185:408
§ 189-11. Drainage plan requirements.
shall be performed to determine the suitability of recharge
facilities. The evaluation shall be performed by a qualified geologist
and/or soil scientist and at a minimum, address soil permeability,
depth to bedrock, susceptibility to sinkhole formation and subgrade
stability. Where pervious pavement is permitted for parking lots,
recreational facilities, nondedicated streets or other areas,
pavement construction specifications shall be noted on the plan.
(2) Whenever a basin will be located in an area underlain by limestone,
a geological evaluation of the proposed location shall be conducted
to determine susceptibility to sinkhole formations. The design of all
facilities over limestone formations shall include measures to
prevent groundwater contamination and, where necessary,
sinkhole formation. Soils used for the construction of basins shall
have low-erodibility factors ("K" factors). The municipality may
require the installation of an impermeable liner in detention basins.
(3) It shall be the developer's responsibility to verify if the site is
underlain by limestone. The following note shall be attached to all
drainage plans and signed and sealed by the developer's engineer/
surveyor/landscape architect/architect:
I, _______________, certify that the proposed detention basin (circle
one) is/is not underlain by limestone.
A. General requirements. For any of the activities regulated by this article,
the final approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the
issuance of any building or occupancy permit or the commencement of
any land disturbance activity may not proceed until the property owner
or developer or his/her agent has received written approval of a
drainage plan from the Borough unless the project qualifies for an
exemption from the requirements to submit a drainage plan.
B. General exemptions. The following land use activities are exempt from
the drainage plan submission requirements of this article:
(1) Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
(2) Agricultural plowing and tilling are exempt from the rate control
and SWM site plan preparation requirements of this article,
provided that the activities are performed according to the
requirements of 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102.
(3) Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the
rate control and SWM site plan preparation requirements of this
article, provided that the activities are performed according to the
requirements of 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102.
C. Stormwater quantity control exemption.
§ 189-10 SOLID WASTE § 189-11
185:409
(1) Any regulated activity that meets the impervious area exemption
criteria in Table 2 shall not be required to implement the
stormwater quantity controls, specified in § 189-10H of this article.
These criteria shall apply to the total development even if
development is to take place in phases. The date of the municipal
ordinance adoption shall be the starting point from which to
consider tracts as "parent tracts" in which future subdivisions and
respective impervious area computations shall be cumulatively
considered. Impervious areas existing on the "parent tract" prior to
adoption of this article shall not be considered in cumulative
impervious area calculations for exemption purposes.
Table 2
Impervious Area Exemption Criteria
Total Parcel Size
(acres)
Minimum
Distance*
(feet)
Impervious Area
Exemption
(square feet)
Less than 1/4 0 2,500
More than 1/4 to 1 0 5,000
More than 1 acre 100 10,000
*NOTE: The minimum distance between the proposed impervious
area and/or stormwater controls/structures discharge point to the
downstream property line.
(2) Submissions for projects that utilize the exemption under
§ 189-11C shall reference Ordinance Appendix I123 to meet the
requirements of groundwater recharge (§ 189-10E), water quality
(§ 189-10F), and streambank erosion (§ 189-10G) controls of this
article. Drainage plans in accordance with § 189-11E(2)(a)[2],
(b)[7], [8], [11], [15], [22] and (d)[2] must still be submitted. Any
exemption must first be approved by the municipality.
D. Additional exemption requirement.
(1) Exemption responsibilities. An exemption shall not relieve the
applicant from implementing such measures as are necessary to
protect the public health, safety and property. An exemption shall
not relieve the applicant from providing adequate stormwater
management for regulated activities to meet the requirements of
this article.
(2) HQ and EV streams. This exemption shall not relieve the applicant
from meeting the special requirements for watersheds draining to
high-quality (HQ) or exceptional value (EV) waters, identified and
source water protection areas (SWPA) and requirements for
nonstructural project design sequencing (§ 189-10D, groundwater
123. Editor's Note: Appendix I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 189-11 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-11
185:410
recharge (§ 189-10E), water quality (§ 189-10F), and streambank
erosion (§ 189-10G).
(3) Drainage problems. If a drainage problem is documented or known
to exist downstream of, or expected from the proposed activity,
then the municipality may require a drainage plan submittal. All
regulated activities occurring in drainage areas tributary to waters
designated HQ/EV pursuant to 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 93, shall not
change any biological, chemical, or physical characteristics,
including volume, rate, velocity, course, current, cross section, or
temperature of the waters, unless the activity is specifically
permitted in accordance with the environmental laws of the
commonwealth.
E. Drainage plan contents.
(1) The drainage plan shall consist of a general description of the
project including sequencing items described in § 189-10D,
calculations, maps and plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the
associated computations and erosion and sedimentation control
plan by title and date. The cover sheet of the computations and
erosion and sedimentation control plan shall refer to the associated
maps by title and date. All drainage plan materials shall be
submitted to the Borough in a format that is clear, concise, legible,
neat and well organized; otherwise, the drainage plan shall be
disapproved and returned to the applicant.
(2) The following items shall be included in the drainage plan:
(a) General:
[1] General description of the project including those areas
described in § 189-10D.
[2] General description of the permanent stormwater
management techniques, including construction
specifications of the materials to be used for stormwater
management facilities.
[3] Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural
computations for all stormwater management facilities.
[4] An erosion and sediment control plan, including all
reviews and approvals by the Conservation District.
[5] A general description of nonpoint source pollution
controls.
[6] Regulated activities that create disconnected impervious
areas smaller than 1,000 square feet are exempt from the
peak rate control and the SWM site plan preparation
requirements of this article.
§ 189-11 SOLID WASTE § 189-11
185:411
(b) Map(s) of the project area shall be submitted on twenty-fourinch
by thirty-six-inch or thirty-inch by forty-two-inch sheets
and shall be prepared in a form that meets the requirements
for recording in the offices of the Recorder of Deeds in and for
Berks County. The contents of the maps(s) shall include, but
not be limited to:
[1] The location of the project relative to highways,
municipalities or other identifiable landmarks.
[2] Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep
slopes (greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may
be used.
[3] Existing streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water
within the project area.
[4] Other physical features, including flood hazard
boundaries, sinkholes, streams, stream buffers, existing
drainagecourses, areas of natural vegetation to be
preserved and the total extent of the upstream area
draining through the site.
[5] The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers and water lines within 50 feet of property lines.
[6] An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
[7] Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount
of impervious area that would be added.
[8] Proposed structures, roads, paved areas and buildings.
[9] Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep
slopes (greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may
be used.
[10] The name of the development, the name and address of
the owner of the property and the name of the individual
or firm preparing the plan.
[11] The date of submission.
[12] A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more
than 50 feet; for tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale shall
be one inch equals no more than 100 feet.
[13] A North arrow.
[14] The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to
the nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
[15] Existing and proposed land use(s).
§ 189-11 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-11
185:412
[16] A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond
the property boundary that would be affected by the
project.
[17] Horizontal and vertical profiles of all open channels,
including hydraulic capacity.
[18] Overland drainage paths.
[19] A fifteen-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater
management facilities that would provide ingress to and
egress from a public right-of-way.
[20] A note on the plan indicating the location and
responsibility for maintenance of stormwater management
facilities that would be located on/off site. All on/off site
facilities shall meet the performance standards and design
criteria specified in this article.
[21] A construction detail of any improvements made to
sinkholes and the location of all notes to be posted, as
specified in this article.
[22] A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the
stormwater management system to be a permanent fixture
that can be altered or removed only after approval of a
revised plan by the Borough and the Conservation District.
[23] The following signature block for the Borough Engineer:
"I, (Borough Engineer), on this date (date of signature),
have reviewed and hereby certify that the drainage plan
meets all design standards and criteria of the Sacony
Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Regulations."
[24] The location of all erosion and sedimentation control
facilities.
[25] The following signature block for the Design Engineer:
"I, (Design Engineer), on this date (date of signature),
hereby certify that the Drainage Plan meets all design
standards and criteria of the Sacony Creek Watershed Act
167 Stormwater Management Ordinance."
(c) Supplemental information.
[1] A written description of the following information shall be
submitted:
[a] The overall stormwater management concept for the
project designed in accordance with § 189-10D.
§ 189-11 SOLID WASTE § 189-11
185:413
[b] Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this
article.
[c] Stormwater management techniques to be applied,
both during and after development.
[d] Expected project time schedule.
[e] Development stages (project phases) if so proposed.
[f] An operation and maintenance plan in accordance
with § 189-11E(2)(e), of this article.
[2] A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, where
applicable, including all reviews and approvals, as
required by PA DEP.
[3] A geologic assessment of the effects of runoff on sinkholes
as specified in this article.
[4] The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and
peak flows) on adjacent properties and on any existing
municipal stormwater collection system that may receive
runoff from the project site.
[5] A declaration of adequacy and highway occupancy permit
from the PENNDOT district office when utilization of a
PENNDOT storm drainage system is proposed.
(d) Stormwater management facilities.
[1] All stormwater management facilities must be located on a
plan and described in detail.
[2] When groundwater recharge methods, such as seepage
pits, beds or trenches, are used, the locations of existing
and proposed septic tank infiltration areas and wells must
be shown.
[3] All calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the
design of the stormwater management facilities must be
shown.
(e) Responsibilities for operations and maintenance of stormwater
controls and BMPs.
[1] No regulated earth disturbance activities within the
municipality shall commence until approval by the
municipality of a stormwater control and BMP operations
and maintenance plan which describes how the permanent
(e.g., post-construction) stormwater controls and BMPs
will be properly operated and maintained.
§ 189-11 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-11
185:414
[2] The following items shall be Included in the stormwater
control and BMP operations and maintenance plan:
[a] Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the
requirements for recording at the offices of the
Recorder of Deeds of Berks County. The contents of
the map(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
[i] Clear identification of the location and nature of
permanent stormwater controls and BMPs;
[ii] The location of the project site relative to
highways, municipal boundaries or other
identifiable landmarks;
[iii] Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet
or others as appropriate;
[iv] Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of
water within the project site area;
[v] Other physical features, including flood hazard
boundaries, sinkholes, streams, existing
drainagecourses, and areas of natural vegetation
to be preserved;
[vi] The locations of all existing and proposed utilities,
sanitary sewers, and water lines within 50 feet of
property lines of the project site;
[vii] Proposed final changes to the land surface and
vegetative cover, including the type and amount
of impervious area that would be added;
[viii] Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas,
and buildings; and
[ix] A fifteen-foot wide access easement around all
stormwater controls and BMPs that would provide
ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way.
[b] A description of how each permanent stormwater
control and BMP will be operated and maintained, and
the identity of the person(s) responsible for operations
and maintenance;
[c] The name of the project site, the name and address of
the owner of the property, and the name of the
individual or firm preparing the plan; and
[d] A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging
that the stormwater controls and BMPs are fixtures
§ 189-11 SOLID WASTE § 189-11
185:415
that can be altered or removed only after approval by
the municipality.
[3] The stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan for the project site shall establish
responsibilities for the continuing operation and
maintenance of all permanent stormwater controls and
BMPs, as follows:
[a] If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be
separately owned and in which streets, sewers and
other public improvements are to be dedicated to the
municipality, stormwater controls and BMPs may also
be dedicated to and maintained by the municipality.
[b] If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a
single ownership, or if sewers and other public
improvements are to be privately owned and
maintained, then the operation and maintenance of
stormwater controls and BMPs shall be the
responsibility of the owner or private management
entity.
[4] The municipality shall make the final determination on the
continuing operations and maintenance responsibilities.
The municipality reserves the right to accept or reject the
operations and maintenance responsibility for any or all of
the stormwater controls and BMPs.
(f) Municipality review of stormwater control and BMP operations
and maintenance plan.
[1] The municipality shall review the stormwater control and
BMP operations and maintenance plan for consistency
with the purposes and requirements of this article, and any
permits issued by DEP.
[2] The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing
whether the Stormwater Control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan is approved.
[3] The municipality may require a record drawing of all
stormwater controls and BMPs, and an explanation of any
discrepancies with the operations and maintenance plan.
F. Plan submission. For all activities regulated by this article, the steps
below shall be followed for submission. For any activities that require
an NPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction
activities, a PA DEP joint permit application and are regulated under
Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway Management) or Chapter 106
(Floodplain Management) of PA DEP's Rules and Regulations, require a
PENNDOT highway occupancy permit or require any other permit
§ 189-11 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-11
185:416
under applicable state or federal regulations, the permits) shall be part
of the plan.
(1) For projects which require SALDO approval, the drainage plan
shall be submitted by the applicant as part of the preliminary plan
submission where applicable for the regulated activity.
(2) For these regulated activities that do not require SALDO approval,
see § 189-11A, General requirements.
(3) Four copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted. Distribution of
the drainage plan will be as follows:
(a) Two copies to the Borough accompanied by the requisite
Borough review fee, as specified in this article.
(b) Two copies to the Borough Engineer.
G. Drainage plan review.
(1) The Borough Engineer shall review the drainage plan for
consistency with the adopted Sacony Creek Watershed Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan. The Borough shall require receipt
of a complete plan as specified in this article.
(2) The Borough Engineer shall review the drainage plan for any
submission or land development against the Borough Subdivision
and Land Development Regulations124 not superseded by this
article.
(3) For activities regulated by this article, the Borough Engineer shall
notify the Borough, in writing, within 30 calendar days, whether
the drainage plan is consistent with the stormwater management
plan. Should the drainage plan be determined to be consistent with
the stormwater management plan, the Borough Engineer will
forward an approval letter to the Borough Secretary and/or
designated representative with a copy to the developer. Should the
drainage plan be determined to be inconsistent with the
stormwater management plan, the Borough Engineer will forward
a disapproval letter to the Borough Secretary and/or designated
representative and developer citing the reason(s) for the
disapproval. Any disapproved drainage plans may be revised by the
developer and resubmitted consistent with this article.
(4) For regulated activities defined by § 189-4 of this article, which
require a building permit, the Borough Engineer shall notify the
Borough Code Official, in writing, within a time frame consistent
with the building regulations and/or Borough Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations,125 whether the drainage plan is
124. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Subdivision and Land Development.
125. Editor's Note: See Ch. 77, Building Construction, and Ch. 195, Subdivision and Land
Development.
§ 189-11 SOLID WASTE § 189-11
185:417
consistent with the stormwater management plan and forward a
copy of the approval/disapproval letter to the developer. Any
disapproved drainage plan may be revised by the developer and
resubmitted consistent with this article. [Amended 8-17-2010 by
Ord. No. 5-2010]
(5) For regulated activities under this article that require an NPDES
permit application, the applicant shall forward a copy of the
municipality's letter stating that the drainage plan is consistent
with the stormwater management plan to the Conservation
District. The DEP and the Conservation District may consider the
municipality's review comments in determining whether to issue a
permit.
(6) The Borough shall not approve any subdivision or land
development for regulated activities defined by § 189-4 of this
article if the drainage plan has been found to be inconsistent with
the stormwater management plan, as determined by the Borough
Engineer. All required permits from the PA DEP must be obtained
prior to approval. [Amended 8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 5-2010]
(7) The Borough Code Official shall not approve a building permit
application for any regulated activity defined by § 189-4 of this
article if the drainage plan has been found to be inconsistent with
the stormwater management plan, as determined by the Borough
Engineer, or without considering the comments of the Borough
Engineer. All required permits from the PA DEP must be obtained
prior to issuance of a building permit. [Amended 8-17-2010 by
Ord. No. 5-2010]
(8) The developer shall be responsible for completing an as-built lar
survey of all stormwater management facilities included in the
approved drainage plan. The as-built Mylar survey and an
explanation of any discrepancies with the design plans shall be
submitted to the Borough Engineer for final approval. In no case
shall the Borough approve the as-built survey until the Borough
receives a copy of an approved declaration of adequacy, highway
occupancy permit from the PENNDOT district office, and any
applicable permits from the PA DEP.
(9) The Borough's approval of a drainage plan shall be valid for a
period not to exceed one year. This one-year time period shall
commence on the date that the Borough signs the approved
drainage plan. If stormwater management facilities included in the
approved drainage plan have not been constructed, or if an as-built
survey of these facilities has not been approved within this oneyear
time period, then the Borough may consider the drainage plan
disapproved and may revoke any and all permits. Drainage plans
that are considered disapproved by the Borough shall be
resubmitted in accordance with Subsection I of this section.
§ 189-11 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-11
185:418
§ 189-12. Inspections.
§ 189-13. Fees and expenses.
H. Modification of plans.
(1) A modification to a submitted drainage plan for a development site
that involves a change in stormwater management facilities or
techniques or that involves the relocation or redesign of
stormwater management facilities or that is necessary because soil
or other conditions are not as stated on the drainage plan as
determined by the Borough Engineer shall require a resubmission
of the modified drainage plan consistent with Subsection F of this
section and be subject to review as specified in Subsection G of this
section.
(2) A modification to an already approved or disapproved drainage
plan shall be submitted to the Borough, accompanied by the
applicable review fee. A modification to a drainage plan for which a
formal action has not been taken by the Borough shall be submitted
to the Borough, accompanied by the applicable Borough review fee.
I. Resubmission of disapproved drainage plans. A disapproved drainage
plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions addressing the Borough
Engineer's concerns documented, in writing, to the Borough Engineer
in accordance with Subsection F of this section and be subject to review
as specified in Subsection G of this section. The applicable Borough
review fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved drainage
plan.
A. The Borough Engineer or his assignee shall inspect all phases of the
installation of the permanent stormwater management facilities.
B. During any stage of the work, if the Borough Engineer determines that
the permanent stormwater management facilities are not being
installed in accordance with the approved stormwater management
plan, the Borough shall revoke any existing permits and, if required,
issue a stop-work order effective until a revised drainage plan is
submitted and approved, as specified in this article.
C. A final inspection of all stormwater management facilities shall be
conducted by the municipality or its designee and to confirm
compliance with the approved drainage plan prior to the issuance of
any occupancy permit.
A. General. The fees required by this article are the Borough review fees.
The Borough review fee shall be established by the Borough to defray
review costs incurred by the Borough and the Borough Engineer. All
fees shall be paid by the applicant. The fee schedule shall be adopted
from time to time by resolution.
§ 189-11 SOLID WASTE § 189-13
185:419
§ 189-14. Maintenance responsibilities.
B. Borough drainage plan review fees. The Borough shall establish a
review fee schedule based on the size of the regulated activity and
based on the Borough's costs for reviewing drainage plans. The
Borough shall periodically update the review fee schedule to ensure
that review costs are adequately reimbursed.
C. Expenses covered by fees. The fees required by this article shall provide
for the following:
(1) Administrative costs.
(2) The review of the drainage plan, including drainage easements, by
the Borough and its engineers and preparation of a written report.
(3) The site inspections.
(4) The inspection of stormwater management facilities and drainage
improvements during construction and preparation of written
reports.
(5) The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater
management facilities and drainage improvements presented in
the drainage plan and preparation of a letter of acceptance and/or
dedication.
(6) Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this article, to correct violations and to assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions and perpetual
maintenance of facilities.
A. Performance guaranty.
(1) The applicant shall provide security to the Borough for the timely
installation and proper construction of all stormwater management
controls as required by the approved stormwater plan and this
article equal to 110% of the full construction cost of the required
controls, as well as administrative, legal and engineering fees.
(2) For other regulated activities, the municipality may require a
financial guaranty from the applicant.
(3) At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the
release of the performance guaranty the applicant or his
representatives shall:
(a) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer,
architect, surveyor or other qualified person verifying that all
permanent facilities have been constructed according to the
plans and specifications and approved revisions thereto.
(b) Provide a set of record drawings.
§ 189-13 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-14
185:420
(4) After the municipality receives the certification, a final inspection
shall be conducted by the municipality or designee to certify
compliance with this article.
B. Adherence to approved stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any
permanent stormwater control and BMP required by an approved
stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan, or to
allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to
an approved stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance
plan.
C. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately owned
stormwater controls and facilities.
(1) Prior to final approval of the site's stormwater management plan,
the property owner shall sign and record an operations and
maintenance agreement with the Borough covering all stormwater
control facilities and BMPs which are to be privately owned. The
agreement shall be substantially the same as the agreement in
Appendix A126 of this article.
(2) Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all
facilities. The maintenance agreement shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Borough Solicitor and Borough Council.
All legal, administrative and engineering costs incurred by the
Borough associated with the agreement or its enforcement shall be
the responsibility of the owner.
D. Stormwater management easements.
(1) Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used
for off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the
municipality.
(2) Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the
property owner if necessary for access for inspections and
maintenance, or preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance,
infiltration, and detention areas and other stormwater controls and
BMPs, by persons other than the property owner. The purpose of
the easement shall be specified in any agreement under Subsection
C.
E. Recording of approved stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan and related agreements.
(1) The owner of any land upon which permanent stormwater controls
and BMPs will be placed, constructed or implemented, as described
in the stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance
126. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 189-14 SOLID WASTE § 189-14
185:421
plan, shall record the following documents in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds for Berks County, within 15 days of approval
of the stormwater control and BMP operations plan by the
municipality:
(a) The operations and maintenance plan, or a summary thereof;
(b) Operations and maintenance agreements under § 189-14C;
and
(c) Easements under § 189-14D.
(2) The Borough may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply
with this section.
F. Borough stormwater control and BMP operation and maintenance fund.
(1) Persons installing stormwater controls or BMPs shall be required to
pay a specified amount to the Borough Stormwater Maintenance
Fund to help defray costs of periodic inspections and maintenance
expenses. The amount of the deposit shall be determined as
follows:
(a) If the stormwater control or BMP is to be privately owned and
maintained, the deposit shall cover the cost of periodic
inspections performed by the Borough for a period of 10 years,
as estimated by the Borough Engineer. After that period of
time, inspections will be performed at the expense of the
Borough.
(b) If the stormwater control or BMP is to be owned and
maintained by the Borough, the deposit shall cover the
estimated costs for maintenance and inspections for 10 years.
The Borough Engineer will establish the estimated costs
utilizing information submitted by the applicant.
(c) The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to
present worth of the annual series values. The Borough
Engineer, after research and consultation, shall determine the
present worth equivalents which shall be subject to the
approval of the Borough Council.
(2) If a stormwater control or BMP is proposed that also serves as a
recreation facility (e.g., ballfield, lake), the Borough may reduce or
waive the amount of the maintenance fund deposit based upon the
value of the land for public recreation purpose.
(3) If, at some future time, a stormwater control or BMP (whether
publicly or privately owned) is eliminated due to the installation of
storm sewers or other storage facility, the unused portion of the
maintenance fund deposit will be applied to the cost of abandoning
the facility and connecting to the storm sewer system or other
§ 189-14 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-14
185:422
§ 189-15. Enforcement; violations and penalties; appeals; when
effective.
facility. Any amount of the deposit remaining after the costs of
abandonment are paid will be returned to the depositor.
(4) If stormwater controls or BMPs are accepted by the municipality
for dedication, the municipality may require persons installing
stormwater controls or BMPs to pay a specified amount to the
municipal Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and
Maintenance Fund, to help defray costs of operations and
maintenance activities. The amount may be determined as follows:
(a) If the stormwater control or BMP is to be owned and
maintained by the municipality, the amount shall cover the
estimated costs for operations and maintenance for 10 years,
as determined by the municipality.
(b) The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the
annual series values.
(5) 127Long-term maintenance. The municipality shall require
applicants to pay a fee to the Municipal Stormwater Maintenance
Fund to cover long-term maintenance of stormwater control and
best management practices.
(6) Stormwater related problems. The municipality may require
applicants to pay a fee to the Municipal Stormwater Maintenance
Fund to cover stormwater-related problems which may arise from
the land development and earth disturbance.
G. Post-construction maintenance inspections.
(1) Basins should be inspected by the land owner/developer or
responsible entity (including the Borough Engineer for dedicated
facilities) on the following basis:
(a) Annually for the first five years.
(b) Once every three to five years thereafter.
(c) Immediately after the cessation of a one-hundred-year or
greater storm event.
(2) The entity conducting the inspection should be required to submit a
report to the Borough regarding the condition of the facility and
recommending necessary repairs, if needed.
A. Right-of-entry.
127. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(5), which provided for adjustment if the stormwater
control or BMP also served as a recreation facility, was repealed 8-17-2010 by Ord. No.
5-2010. This ordinance also renumbered Subsection F(6) and (7) as Subsection F(5) and
(6).
§ 189-14 SOLID WASTE § 189-15
185:423
(1) Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the Borough may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the Borough to investigate or ascertain the
condition of the subject property in regard to any aspect regulated
by this article.
(2) Stormwater control and BMP owners and operators shall allow
persons working on behalf of the municipality ready access to all
parts of the premises for the purposes of determining compliance
with this article.
(3) Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right
to temporarily locate on any stormwater control or BMP in the
municipality such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring
and/or sampling of the discharges from such stormwater control or
BMP.
(4) Unreasonable delays (more than 24 hours) in allowing the
municipality access to a stormwater control or BMP is a violation of
this article.
B. Notification. In the event that a person fails to comply with the
requirements of this article or fails to conform to the requirements of
any permit issued hereunder, the Borough shall provide written
notification of the violation. Such notification shall set forth the nature
of the violation(s) and establish a time limit for correction of these
violation(s). Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject
such person to the penalty provisions of this article. All such penalties
shall be deemed cumulative. The Borough shall have the right to pursue
any administrative and/or judicial remedy available to it in addition to
the specific remedies set forth herein. It shall be the responsibility of
the owner of the real property on which any regulated activity is
proposed to occur, is occurring or has occurred to comply with the
terms and conditions of this article.
C. Public nuisance.
(1) Any violation of any provision of this article is deemed a public
nuisance.
(2) Each day that a violation of any provision continues constitutes a
separate violation of this article.
D. Enforcement generally.
(1) Whenever the municipality finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the
municipality may order compliance by written notice to the
responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
(a) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(b) The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
§ 189-15 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-15
185:424
(c) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(d) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(e) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation
costs;
(f) The implementation of stormwater controls and BMPs; and
(g) Operation and maintenance of stormwater controls and BMPs.
(2) Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violations(s). Said
notice may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail
to take the required action within the established deadline, the
work will be done by the municipality or designee and the expense
thereof shall be charged to the violator.
(3) Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this article. All such penalties
shall be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality
from pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
E. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
(1) Any building, land development or other permit or approval issued
by the municipality may be suspended or revoked, in whole or in
part, by the municipality for:
(a) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of
the permit;
(b) A violation of any provision of this article; or
(c) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act
during construction or development which constitutes or
creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the
life or property of others.
(2) A suspended permit or approval may be reinstated by the
municipality, in whole or in part, when:
(a) The municipality or designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the stormwater controls and BMPs, or the
elimination of the hazard or nuisance; and/or
(b) The municipality is satisfied that the violation of the article,
law, or rule and regulation has been corrected.
(3) A permit or approval which has been revoked in whole or in part by
the municipality cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for
a new permit under the procedures outlined in this article.
§ 189-15 SOLID WASTE § 189-15
185:425
F. Liability disclaimer.
(1) Neither the granting of any approval nor the compliance with the
provisions of this article or with any condition imposed by the
Borough, its officials, employees or designated representatives
hereunder shall relieve any person from any responsibility for
damage to persons or property resulting therefrom, or as otherwise
imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the Borough, its
officials, employees or designated representatives.
(2) The granting of any permit which includes any stormwater
management requirements shall not constitute a representation,
guaranty or warranty of any kind by the Borough, its officials,
employees or designated representatives thereof of the
practicability or safety of any stormwater structure or facility, use
or other plan proposed and shall create no liability or cause of
action against the Borough, its officials, employees or designated
representatives for any damage that may result.
G. Penalties.
(1) Any person who has violated any provisions of this article shall,
upon a judicial determination thereof, be subject to civil judgment
for each such violation of not more than $1,000 nor less than $500,
plus costs of suit. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate offense. All fines resulting from a civil judgment shall be
paid to the Borough.
(2) In addition, the Borough may issue stop-work orders, seek
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate relief or proceeding
at law or in equity for the enforcement of this article.
H. Enforcement. The municipal governing body is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce all of the provisions of this article. All inspections
regarding compliance with the drainage plan shall be the responsibility
of the municipality or other qualified persons designated by the
municipality.
(1) A set of design plans approved by the municipality shall be on file at
the site throughout the duration of the construction activity.
Periodic inspections may be made by the municipality or designee
during construction.
(2) Adherence to approved plan. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to undertake any regulated activity defined by
§ 189-4 on any property except as provided for in the approved
drainage plan and pursuant to the requirements of this article. It
shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control structure required
by the drainage plan pursuant to this article or to allow the
property to remain in a condition which does not conform to the
approved drainage plan. [Amended 8-17-2010 by Ord. No.
5-2010]
§ 189-15 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-15
185:426
§ 189-16. Prohibited actions.
(3) At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the
release of the performance guarantee, the owner or his
representatives shall:
(a) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer,
architect, surveyor or other qualified person verifying that all
permanent facilities have been constructed according to the
plans and specifications and approved revisions thereto.
(b) Provide a set of as-built (record) drawings.
(4) After receipt of the certification by the municipality, a final
inspection shall be conducted by the municipality or designated
representative to certify compliance with this article.
(5) Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit and at the request of
the applicant, the governing body will schedule a hearing to discuss
the noncompliance if there is no immediate danger to life, public
health or property. The expense of a hearing shall be the owner's
responsibility.
(6) Occupancy permit. An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless
the certification of completion pursuant to § 189-15H(3)(a) has
been secured. The occupancy permit shall be required for each lot
owner and/or applicant for all subdivisions and land development in
the municipality.
I. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Borough of
Kutztown Council may appeal to the County Court of Common Pleas of
Berks County, Pennsylvania, within 30 days of that decision.
J. Effective date. This article shall be in force and effect on the earliest
date allowed by law.
A. Prohibited discharges and connections.
(1) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows any non-stormwater discharge including sewage,
process wastewater, and wash water to enter the waters of this
commonwealth is prohibited.
(2) No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into surface
waters of this commonwealth which are not composed entirely of
stormwater, except as provided in Subsection A(3) below, and
discharges allowed under a state or federal permit. [Amended
8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 5-2010]
(3) The following discharges are authorized unless they are
determined to be significant contributors to pollution to the waters
of this commonwealth:
§ 189-15 SOLID WASTE § 189-16
185:427
(a) Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
(b) Potable water sources, including water line flushing.
(c) Irrigation drainage.
(d) Air conditioning condensate.
(e) Springs.
(f) Water from crawl space pumps.
(g) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or
hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spill
material has been removed) and where detergents are not
used.
(h) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(i) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing
drains.
(j) Lawn watering.
(k) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(l) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(m) Water from individual residential car washing.
(n) Routine external building wash down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(4) In the event that the municipality or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection A(3) significantly contribute to
pollution of the waters of this commonwealth, the municipality or
DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
[Amended 8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 5-2010]
B. Roof drains. Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration
or vegetative BMPs and to the maximum extent practicable satisfy the
criteria for disconnected impervious areas.
C. Alteration of SWM BMPs. No person shall modify, remove, fill,
landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs, facilities, areas, or structures,
without the written approval of the municipality.
§ 189-16 KUTZTOWN CODE § 189-16
185:428
Chapter 192
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 160.
Public health; nuisances — See Ch. 168.
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
195.
Transient retail businesses — See Ch. 206.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 212.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 189-16 SOLID WASTE § 189-16
185:429

ARTICLE I
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 1-14-1970 by Ord. No. 2-1970; amended in its entirety
5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 5-1996]
§ 192-1. Removal required. [Amended 3-21-2006 by Ord. No.
4-2006]
The owner, occupant or tenant of every property fronting upon or alongside
of any of the streets or other public ways in the Borough of Kutztown, Berks
County, Pennsylvania, is hereby required to remove or cause to be removed
from all of the sidewalks in front of or alongside of such property all snow,
ice, hail or sleet thereon fallen, formed or deposited by any means or cause,
such removal to be to a minimum width of 36 inches, within 24 hours after
each occasion on which such snow, ice, hail or sleet shall have ceased to
fall, form or be deposited. The following shall be responsible for conforming
to the requirements of this section:
§ 192-1.1. Depositing snow unlawfully.
In removing said snow, ice, hail or sleet as required by § 192-1 of this
article, or in removing snow, ice, hail or sleet from any private property
and/or the right-of-way of any streets or other public ways in the Borough
of Kutztown, it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or tenant of any
property fronting upon or alongside of any of the streets or other public
ways in the Borough of Kutztown, or any agents or employees of any of
them, to put, push, shovel, place, dump, pile, deposit or cause to be put,
pushed, shoveled, placed, dumped, piled or deposited any snow, ice, hail or
sleet so removed:
A. Where the property is owner-occupied, the owner shall be responsible.
B. Where the property is occupied by tenants and is not a rooming house,
multiple - dwelling or multiple business property, such tenants shall be
responsible.
C. In all other cases, the owner shall be responsible.
D. Upon any place which this chapter, this Code or any other applicable
law requires to be kept clear of snow, ice, hail and sleet;
E. On any parcel of private real property without the express permission of
the owner of the parcel upon which such snow, ice, hail or sleet is to be
placed; or
F. In any manner at a street intersection which will obstruct the vision of
pedestrians or vehicle drivers or the passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
A. Upon any portion of the cartway of any such street or other public way
that has been plowed or otherwise cleared of snow, ice, hail or sleet;
§ 192-1 SOLID WASTE § 192-1.1
185:431
§ 192-2. Removal by Borough; assessments of costs.
In any case where the owner, occupant or tenant, or any agents or
employees of any of them, as aforesaid, shall fail, neglect or refuse to
comply with any of the provisions of § 192-1 of this article within the time
limit prescribed therein or shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with
any of the provisions of § 192-1.1 of this article, the Borough authorities
may proceed immediately to clear all snow, ice, hail and/or sleet from the
sidewalk of such delinquents or from such other improper location and to
collect the expenses thereof, with any additional amount allowed by law,
from such owner, occupant or tenant, as the case may be, which may be in
addition to any fine or penalty imposed under § 192-3 of this article.
§ 192-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-24-2000 by Ord. No.
6-2000; 9-21-2004 by Ord. No. 21-2004; 3-16-2011 by Ord. No.
2-2011]
B. Upon the traveled portion of the cartway of any such street or other
public way, whether or not such traveled portion of the cartway has
been plowed or otherwise cleared of snow, ice, hail or sleet;
C. In a manner which obscures the visibility of any fire hydrant and/or
obstructs or impedes access to any fire hydrant;
D. Upon any place which this chapter, this Code or any other applicable
law requires to be kept clear of snow, ice, hail and sleet;
E. On any parcel of private real property without the express permission of
the owner of the parcel upon which such snow, ice, hail or sleet is to be
placed; or
F. In any manner at a street intersection which will obstruct the vision of
pedestrians or vehicle drivers or the passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
A. Any owner, occupant or tenant who shall fail to remove or cause the
removal of any snow, ice, hail or sleet from any sidewalk as required by
§ 192-1 of this article or who shall violate or permit any agent or
employee to violate any of the provisions of § 192-1.1 of this article shall
be issued by a police officer or a duly appointed parking enforcement
officer a written snow removal notice requiring immediate compliance
with this article. Notification of the snow removal notice shall be placed
in conspicuous location on the door or entrance to the subject property,
indicting the nature of the violation, the time of the violation, the
remedial action required to be accomplished with 24 hours of the notice
posting, the dollar amount of the penalty charged, and the place where
the penalty shall be paid and the manner of payment. Any owner,
occupant or tenant who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction of a snow removal notice, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25.
If the owner, occupant or tenant fails to make payment on the snow
removal notice within 10 days, a snow removal citation may be issued,
and upon conviction thereof, any owner, occupant or tenant shall be
§ 192-1.1 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-3
185:432
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $600 and
costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days; provided, however, that such
fine and costs of prosecution may be in addition to any expenses and
additional amounts authorized by law, imposed as provided in § 192-2
of this article.
B. Should any owner, occupant or tenant, fail to take remedial action
necessary to comply with this article within 24 consecutive hours from
the issuance and posting of the original snow removal notice, a police
officer or a duly appointed parking enforcement official may issue a
snow removal citation, and upon conviction thereof, any owner,
occupant or tenant shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50
nor more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days;
provided, however, that such fine and costs of prosecution may be in
addition to any expenses and additional amounts authorized by law,
imposed as provided in § 192-2 of this article. Each period of 24
continuous hours after posting of the notice of violation during which
snow, ice, hail or sleet is permitted to remain upon any sidewalks in
violation of the terms of § 192-1 or upon any other improper location in
violation of the terms of § 192.1.1 of this article shall constitute a
separate offense punishable as such.
§ 192-3 SOLID WASTE § 192-3
185:433

ARTICLE II
Street Specifications
[Adopted 6-4-1974 as Ord. No. 4-1974]
§ 192-4. General purpose.
The construction and reconstruction of streets in the Borough of Kutztown
shall be done in conformity with the specifications, regulations and
provisions set forth in this article.
§ 192-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kutztown.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Kutztown.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The corporate official appointed by the Borough
Council as the Borough Manager or such official's properly designated
representative.128
BOROUGH SECRETARY — The corporate official appointed by the Borough
Council as the Borough Secretary or such official's properly designated
representative.129
ENGINEER — The Engineer of the Borough of Kutztown appointed by
Borough Council.
STREET130 — A public or private right-of-way, excluding driveways,
intended for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation which
provides a means of access to abutting property. The word "street" includes
thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, court, drive, expressway, highway, alley,
lane and road or similar terms. "Street" shall include all the land within
the street right-of-way lines, whether improved or not. Streets shall be
classified as follows:
ARTERIAL STREET — A street serving a large volume of comparatively
high-speed and long-distance traffic. At the date of adoption of this
article, "arterial streets" within the Borough were West Main Street,
East Main Street, Greenwich Street, Noble Street and Willow Street.
A.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street which intercepts minor streets to
provide a route to give access to community facilities and/or other
collector and arterial streets. Generally, streets in industrial and
commercial subdivisions shall be considered "collector streets." At the
date of adoption of this article, "collector streets" within the Borough
were Normal Avenue, Constitution Boulevard, North Constitution
B.
128. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 192-4 SOLID WASTE § 192-5
185:435
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent appointed by the Borough
Council or its duly authorized representative.[Amended 12-26-1995 by
Ord. No. 12-1995]
§ 192-6. Inspection. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
All work done pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be inspected by
the Borough Manager or his duly authorized representative.
§ 192-7. Minimum standards for streets. [Amended 12-26-1995 by
Ord. No. 12-1995; 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 9-2005]
All components of new streets or reconstructed streets in the borough shall
be in accordance with the guidelines and requirements for design of local
road and streets contained in Design Manual, Part II, Highway Design and
PennDOT Publication 408/2003 Edition, or latest edition and revisions, and
shall meet the following minimum required standards for materials and
construction methodology:
Boulevard, West Walnut Street, College Boulevard, Wentz Street and
North Elm Street.
A. Subgrade: all classes. All new streets or reconstructed streets in the
borough shall be constructed on a properly prepared subgrade in
accordance with Section 210, Subgrade, Publication 408/2003
PennDOT specifications, latest revision. Pavement base drain may be
required based on subgrade conditions. Pavement base drain shall be
installed in accordance with Section 610, Pipe Underdrain and
Pavement Base Drain, PennDOT Publication 408/2003, latest revision.
B. Geotextiles: all classes. Geotextiles used in conjunction with
construction of new streets and reconstructed streets shall conform to
Section 212, Geotextiles, PennDOT Specifications, Publication 408/
2003, latest revision.
C. Subbase: all classes. The base course component of all new streets and
reconstructed streets within the Borough of Kutztown shall be placed
upon a 2A aggregate subbase meeting the requirements of Section 350,
Subbase, PennDOT Specifications, Publication 408/2003, latest
revision, and § 192-7(H) of this chapter.
D. Bituminous concrete base course: all classes. A bituminous concrete
base course shall be utilized for all new streets and reconstructed
streets in the borough in accordance with Sections 305, 309, 320 and
321, Bituminous Concrete Base Course, PennDOT Specifications,
Publication 408/2003, latest revision, and § 192-7H of this chapter.
Superpave asphalt mixture design, 25.0 mm, PG64-22 base course shall
be used. The design mix shall be submitted to the borough for review,
including the anticipated load requirements and appropriate ESAL.
E. Bituminous wearing course. The bituminous surface course shall be
utilized for all new streets and reconstructed streets in the borough in
§ 192-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-7
185:436
accordance with Sections 409 and 420 per PennDOT Specifications
Publication 408/2003, latest revision, and § 192-7H of this chapter. ID-2
or superpave asphalt mixture design, 9.5 mm, PG64-22 wearing course
shall be used. The design mix shall be submitted to the borough for
review, including the anticipated load requirements, appropriate ESAL
and skid resistance level.
F. Sealer. When the wearing course is placed adjacent to concrete or
utilities within the paved portion of the street before the surface has
cooled, it shall be sealed with hot bituminous material, PG64-22 or
rubberized asphalt material, for a distance of 12 inches from the
concrete or utility within the street area. The sealing material shall be
evenly applied to the surface by means of squeegees or other devices to
provide placement of material in a neat line immediately after
placement of wearing course to completely fill the surface voids and
provide a watertight joint along the concrete.
G. General requirements.
(1) All materials, methods of construction and equipment shall be in
accordance with PennDOT Specifications, Publication 408/2003,
latest revision.
(2) In the application of asphalt or other liquid materials, care must be
taken so that the same will not be applied excessively or carelessly
to the curbs, and in the event of the same, it shall be removed by
the applying party.
(3) Concrete curb or driveways chipped, broken or damaged during
roadway construction shall be properly repaired and/or replaced by
the person or persons responsible for the same.
H. Pavement Design Guidelines. The following are Pavement Design
Guidelines for use in the construction of streets in the Borough.
Type Local Accesses Collectors and Arterials
Alternates AADT
Up to 150
(inches)
150 to
600
(inches)
600 to
1500
(inches)
1500 to
2800
(inches)
2800 to
5000
(inches)
Flexible
pavements
1 1/2 1 1/2 1 1/2 1 1/2 1 1/2
Surface ID-2,
superpave
design
4 4 6 7 7
Base BCBC,
superpave
design
6 7 6 6 6
Subbase 2A aggregate 6 7 6 6 6
§ 192-7 SOLID WASTE § 192-7
185:437
§ 192-8. Requirements for dedication of streets for public use.
[Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
The Borough of Kutztown will accept into the Borough street system only
those streets within or adjacent to subdivisions or land developments which
have been constructed in accordance with the specifications and
requirements of this article and Chapter 195, Subdivision and Land
Type Local Accesses Collectors and Arterials
Alternates AADT
Up to 150
(inches)
150 to
600
(inches)
600 to
1500
(inches)
1500 to
2800
(inches)
2800 to
5000
(inches)
Surface ID-2,
superpave
design
2 1/2 2 1/2 3 3 3
Base Penetrated
base course
6 6 10 12 12
Subbase 2A aggregate 6 6 6 6 8
Surface ID-2,
superpave
design
2 1/2 2 1/2 3 3 3
Base Crushed
aggregate
6 8 10 12 12
Subbase 2A aggregate 6 6 9 10 12
Rigid
Pavement*
Plain cement
concrete
6 6 6 7 8
Subbase * * 6 6 6
Six-inch subbase on silty soils or poorly drained conditions.
NOTES:
1. AADT means average daily traffic.
2. Where 2-1/2 inches or greater of surface course is indicated, 1 inch shall be ID-2 or superpave
asphalt mixture design wearing course and the remainder ID-2 or Superpave Asphalt mixture
design binder course. Where 1 1/2” depth of surface course is indicated, the entire 1 1/2
inches shall be ID-2 Superpave Asphalt mixture design wearing course.
3. For rigid pavements, the contraction joints shall be sawed at a skew of 2 feet for every 12
feet of width at a spacing of 15 feet for all plain cement concrete slabs. Expansion joints shall
be provided at intersections where the adjoining pavement is concrete. The Borough shall
review scoring patterns prior to construction.
4. Bituminous concrete base course or plain cement concrete pavements are recommended for
all street construction in the Borough. The acceptability of the other alternatives listed above
shall be determined by the Borough after written request by the contractor.
4. Cross slope for roadways shall be 1/4 inch per foot. The acceptability of other alternative
cross slopes shall be determined by the Borough after written request by the contractor.
§ 192-7 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-8
185:438
Development, of the Borough. Proof of compliance with the specifications
and requirements of § 192-7 of this article shall be provided by written
request of the person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, trust
or other entity offering the street for dedication to have the engineer
perform a field investigation of construction completed. The cost of such
field investigation shall be borne by the person, firm or corporation offering
the street for dedication.
§ 192-9. Acceptance of dedication of street by Borough. [Amended
12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
The Borough may hereafter take into its street system any street
constructed in accordance with this article upon receipt of a petition
containing a general release in favor of the Borough, duly executed by all
of the abutting property owners, requesting the Borough to accept such
street into the Borough street system, provided that all other conditions
imposed by the Borough Code concerning the taking over of said streets
are complied with, and provided that curb has been installed on both
sides of the street in accordance with the requirements of Ordinance No.
14-1972 of the Borough of Kutztown, as from time to time amended and
supplemented.131
§ 192-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined a sum not in excess of $300 for each and
every offense, or, in default of the payment of fine and costs, such person
or persons shall be committed to the Berks County Jail for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
131. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 14-1972 was superseded by Ord. No. 3-1992; see Art. IV,
Construction and Maintenance, of this chapter.
§ 192-8 SOLID WASTE § 192-10
185:439

ARTICLE III
Street Excavations
[Adopted 1-20-2015 by Ord. No. 2-2015132]
§ 192-11. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Kutztown
Street Occupancy Ordinance."
§ 192-12. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ADJACENT AREA — The area surrounding the immediate area of the
permitted work can reasonably be assumed to have been affected by the
permitted work.
APPLICANT — The person or entity filing an application under this article
for a permit. Once a permit has been issued, the applicant, or his assignee
if the assignment of the permit shall have been approved by the Borough
Manager, shall be deemed the "permittee."
BACKFILL — Material used to replace or the act of replacing material
removed during construction.
BASE COURSE — The layer or layers of specified or selected material of
designed thickness placed on a subbase or a subgrade to support a surface
course.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown,
Berks County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The corporate official appointed by the Borough
Council as the Borough Manager or such official's properly designated
representative.
BOROUGH STREET — A street under the jurisdiction of the Borough.
BRIDGE — A structure, including supports, erected over a depression or
an obstruction, such as water, a street or railway, and having a track
or passageway for carrying traffic or other moving loads and having an
opening measured along the center of the cartway of more than 20 feet
between supports.
CARTWAY — That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the sidewalk or shoulder.
CLEAR ROADSIDE AREA — The portion of right-of-way beyond the
pavement edge within which no existing obstructions are located.
132. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Street Excavations, adopted
3-1-1983 by Ord. No. 1-1983, as amended.
§ 192-11 SOLID WASTE § 192-12
185:441
CULVERT — Any structure under the cartway with an opening of 20 feet or
less measured along the center of the cartway.
DESIGN MANUAL, PART 5 — A publication containing PennDOT's utility
relocation and accommodation policies, including any amendment thereto
and any substitution or replacement thereof.
DETOUR — To send traffic by a circuitous route around a portion of a
highway that has been closed in accordance with § 192-14J of this article
(relating to traffic control plans) or § 192-16H of this article (relating to
traffic protection and maintenance).
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen occurrence or combination of
circumstances which calls for immediate action or remedy.
EQUIPMENT — All machinery and equipment, together with the necessary
supplies for upkeep and maintenance, and also tools and apparatus
necessary for the proper construction and completion of the work.
FACILITY — Includes all privately, publicly or cooperatively owned lines
and systems for producing, transmitting or distributing communications,
electricity, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water, steam, waste and other
similar commodities which directly or indirectly serve the public and all
appurtenances and attachments thereto.
FLEXIBLE BASE PAVEMENT — A pavement structure which maintains
intimate contact with and distributes loads to the subgrade and depends on
aggregate interlock, particle friction, and cohesion for stability.
FORM 408 — A publication containing PennDOT's highway construction
specifications, including any amendment thereto and any substitution or
replacement thereof.
IMPROVED AREA — The area within the right-of-way which has been
constructed for street purposes, including roadbed, pavement, shoulders,
slope, sidewalks, drainage facilities and any other appurtenances.
INSPECTOR — The Borough's authorized representative assigned to
inspect permit operations.
PAVEMENT — The combination of subbase, base course, and surface course
placed on a subgrade to support the traffic load and distribute it to the
roadbed.
PENNDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PERMIT — A street occupancy permit issued by the Borough pursuant to
this article.
PERMITTEE — See definition of "applicant" above.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, copartnership, association,
corporation or political subdivision.
PLOWING — Placing utility cables underground by means of a plow
mechanism.
§ 192-12 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-12
185:442
PUBLICATION 213 — A PennDOT publication containing requirements for
work area traffic control during highway maintenance operations and utility
work, including any amendment thereto and any substitution or
replacement thereof.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area between the right-of-way lines of a street.
RIGID BASE PAVEMENT — A pavement structure which distributes loads
to the subgrade, having as one course a portland cement concrete slab of
relatively high bending resistance.
ROADWAY CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS — PennDOT Publication No. 72,
containing design standards for roadway construction, including any
amendment thereto and any substitution or replacement thereof.
SHOULDER — The portion of the cartway, contiguous to the traffic lanes,
for accommodation of stopped vehicles, for emergency use for lateral
support of base and surface courses and pavements.
STREET — A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, open to
vehicular use by the public. The term "street" shall include street, avenue,
boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, alley or viaduct.
STRUCTURE — Any material or a combination of materials which is
constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on or beneath the
ground or attachment to something located on or beneath the ground.
UTILITY — A person owning a utility facility, including any wholly owned
or controlled subsidiary, and including any plumber or any other contractor
hired or engaged by the owner.
§ 192-13. Permit required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, including any municipal authority
created by the Borough, except any department of the Borough, to
perform any work, including opening or excavation in or under any
Borough street, unless and until a permit therefor shall be secured from
the Borough for each separate undertaking. All work performed within
the right-of-way shall conform to the provisions of PennDOT Publication
213. Notwithstanding the aforesaid, a permit shall not be required in
the following instances:
(1) Emergency repairs of utility facilities may be performed by using
an emergency permit card pursuant to § 192-15 of this article
(relating to emergency work).
(2) Permit applications are not required for the placing of newspaper
receptacles or mailboxes, although their location is subject to the
maintenance requirements of the Borough.
(3) Permit applications are not required for accessing the utility facility
through a manhole.
§ 192-12 SOLID WASTE § 192-13
185:443
§ 192-14. Administrative requirements.
B. The Borough Manager or any duly authorized agent of the Borough may
prohibit any work being done without a proper permit or contrary to the
terms thereof.
A. Application for permit. Application, in writing, shall be made to the
Borough at the Borough Substation, 105 Railroad Street, Kutztown, PA
19530, or at such other address as Borough Council may from time to
time designate by resolution, on the appropriate form and signed by the
person making the proposed street opening or excavation, setting out
the location of the proposed work, opening or excavation, the size
thereof and the purpose therefore. The person making and signing said
application shall comply with all the provisions of this section as
hereinafter set forth.
B. Issuance of permits. Permits will only be issued to utilities.
C. Time extension. A permit is valid for a one-year period as specified on
the permit. If the permittee has not completed all authorized work by
the completion date specified on the permit, an application shall be
submitted requesting a time extension on the permit. If approved, a
supplement will be issued by the Borough.
D. Extension of permit scope. Whenever the excavation, opening or trench
exceeds the size set forth in the application, an amendment to the
permit must be secured within 48 hours to cover such extra excavation,
opening or trench.
E. Filing fee and certificates of insurance. The application shall be
accompanied by a filing fee as established from time to time by
appropriate resolution duly adopted by the Borough Council. In
addition, a certificate of insurance covering the utility which will be
making the excavation opening or trench shall also be submitted as set
forth in § 192-16L of this article before the permit is issued.
F. Deposit and bonding. Except for public utility corporations operating
under a franchise covering an area in whole or in part within the
Borough, the application shall be accompanied by a deposit or bond
with a surety that is licensed to transact such business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in double deposit amount to cover the
cost of temporary and permanent restoration and to cover the cost of all
inspections made by the Borough Inspector or Manager within the
improved area of the right-of-way of the street resulting from the
permitted work in the event that the Borough shall make said
restoration. The Borough may, at its option, permit the applicant to
make said restorations, but a deposit or bond in double the deposit
amount shall nevertheless accompany the application as a guaranty
that said restorations will be made. In either event, the amount of the
deposit or bond shall be established by the Borough Manager.
§ 192-13 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-14
185:444
G. Bonding of public utilities.
(1) Public utility corporations operating under a franchise covering an
area located in whole or in part within the Borough shall have on
file with the Borough a bond in the amount of $10,000 or as may
from time to time be established by resolution of Borough Council
with a surety that is licensed to transact such business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which bond shall be renewed
annually, covering the cost of temporary and permanent restoration
and covering the cost of all inspections made by the Borough
Inspector, professional consultant or Borough Public Works
Superintendent pertaining to all openings or excavations made or
to be made in a calendar year or shall furnish a bond in the amount
determined by the Borough Manager covering the aforesaid costs
pertaining to proposed openings or excavation set out in the
application. The aforesaid bonds shall have either corporate surety
or other surety approved by the Borough Solicitor and shall be
conditioned to indemnify the Borough in the event of any loss,
liability or damage that may result or accrue from or be due to the
making, existence or manner of guarding or constructing any such
opening or excavation during the term of said bond.
(2) Said bonds shall be approved or disapproved by the Borough
Solicitor. The bond shall then be filed with the Borough Manager.
H. Municipal exemption. Any municipal authority created by the Borough
shall be exempt from filing the permit fees, deposits and bonds and
from the inspection requirements of Subsections E, F, G and K of this
section. Any department of the Borough shall be exempt from all
regulations and requirements of this article.
I. Blasting bond and preblast inspections. When the applicant anticipates
that blasting operations will be necessary in order to perform the
permitted work, an executed blasting bond shall be submitted with the
application as set forth in § 192-16M of this article. The Borough
Manager shall determine the amount of the blasting bond. In addition,
the Borough Manager shall also determine the need for preblast
inspections of structures or facilities which may be affected by the
permitted work. Costs for said inspections shall be borne by the
applicant.
J. Traffic control plan. The applicant must submit a traffic control plan in
accordance with PennDOT Publication 213 with the application for
review and approval by the Borough Manager and Police Department
prior to issuance of the permit. The Traffic Control Plan must be in
accordance with PennDOT Publication 213, Work Zone Traffic Control
Guidelines.
K. Additional inspection fees. If the Borough Manager determines that the
permitted work is of sufficient magnitude or importance to warrant
assignment of one or more Borough inspectors to inspect the permitted
§ 192-14 SOLID WASTE § 192-14
185:445
work on a more than spot-inspection basis, the applicant shall be
charged for all salary, overhead and expenses incurred by each
assigned inspector and the Borough Manager or Public Works
Superintendent. The Fee Schedule shall be established by Borough
resolution.
L. Authorization to begin work. Upon application duly made in accordance
with the regulations set forth in this article, a permit will be issued by
the Borough Manager or Public Works Superintendent subject to this
article and the conditions contained on the permit and its attachments
and supplements. The permit will be the applicant's authority to
proceed with the work and will also serve as a receipt for the fees
accompanying the application.
M. Work completion notification. When all permitted work has been
completed, the Borough Manager or Public Works Superintendent shall
be notified within 48 hours of the completion of all work.
N. Additional deposits and fees. Should the costs of restorations and/or
inspections completed by the Borough exceed the amount of the deposit
or bond, the applicant shall, upon written notification by the Borough,
immediately reimburse the Borough for any portion of the costs
associated with making said inspections, consultant's fee and/or
restorations not covered by the deposit or bond.
O. Return of deposit or bond. When the Borough permits the applicant to
make the restorations in accordance with the requirements of § 192-17
of this article, the Borough shall, within 45 days of written notification
of completion of final restoration, return the portion of the deposit or
bond, other than the bond of a public utility corporation set forth in
Subsection G above, which was being held as a guaranty for the
performance of said restorations.
P. Bore holes. Bore holes will be considered street cuts and a restoration
charge of $5 will be levied for each bore hole made. A permit will be
required for each bore hole grouping. The permittee shall plug or seal
bore holes in a manner and with materials approved by the Borough to
the street surface within 30 days of boring. If the applicant does not
plug or seal these holes within the given time, the Borough reserves the
right to take any steps deemed necessary to repair the street, and the
associated costs shall then be paid by the permittee.
Q. Ahead-of-paving permit. Permits for street cuts performed in advance of
the Borough scheduled street improvements at the same location,
where the required work is completed in accordance with a schedule
approved by the Engineer and the Borough Public Works
Superintendent, will be issued at no charge. A detailed construction
plan must accompany each application for an "ahead-of-paving permit."
Excavation, backfilling and temporary street cut restoration will be
performed by the permittee at his/her cost as directed by the Engineer
of the Borough and the Public Works Superintendent. By August 30 of
§ 192-14 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-14
185:446
§ 192-15. Emergency work.
each year, the Borough shall provide all utilities operating in the
Borough of Kutztown with a list of all road projects proposed by
Borough Council during the succeeding calendar year.
A. Permit administration procedure. Emergency repairs involving the
placing of facilities or opening of the surface within the right-of-way
may be performed prior to obtaining a permit, provided that the
following procedure is adhered to:
(1) The utility shall immediately notify the Borough substation by
telephone when the necessity for an emergency repair occurs.
(2) Prior to opening the surface or placing utility facilities within the
right-of-way, the utility work crew shall enter the following
information on the emergency permit card hereinafter provided for
in legible handwriting, using indelible ink:
(a) Date emergency work is started.
(b) Time emergency is started.
(c) Location of emergency work site.
(d) Description of emergency work.
(3) The completed, original emergency permit card shall be located at
the work site and shall be available for inspection by any
representative of the Borough. Reproduced copies of the original
card are not valid.
(4) A regular permit shall be applied for within five days to confirm and
set forth, in detail, any work performed. The application number
shall then be entered on the emergency permit card by the
applicant.
(5) All work performed under the authority of an emergency permit
card shall conform to the regulations set forth in this article,
including without limitation those regulations set forth in § 192-16
of this article (relating to general conditions), § 192-17 of this
article (relating to special conditions - subsurface operations) and
§ 192-18 of this article (relating to special conditions - aboveground
facilities).
B. Use of card. Each emergency permit card is valid for two years or 25
emergency repairs, whichever occurs first.
(1) Emergency permit cards may be obtained by a utility by letter of
request addressed to the Borough Manager listing thereon the
number of emergency permit cards desired. The fee for such cards
shall be set by resolution of Borough Council.
§ 192-14 SOLID WASTE § 192-15
185:447
§ 192-16. General conditions.
The following conditions shall apply to permits issued pursuant to § 192-14
of this article:
(2) The holder of emergency permit cards is responsible for assigning
the proper emergency permit cards to its work crews.
(3) Each emergency permit card shall be returned to the Borough
within 15 days after either the 25th emergency repair authorized
by the card, or two years from the card issuance date, whichever
occurs first.
C. Exceptions. Emergency repairs to utility facilities within the right-ofway
do not require an emergency permit card in the following
instances; however, the provisions contained in PennDOT Publication
213 shall be adhered to:
(1) Accessing the utility facility through a manhole.
A. Scope of permit. The permit shall be binding upon the permittee, its
agents, contractors, successors and assigns.
(1) The permittee shall be responsible for causing compliance with all
terms and conditions of the permit by its agents, contractors and
successors.
(2) The permit shall be located at the work site and shall be available
for inspection by any representative of the Borough authorized to
inspect permits.
(3) The permit shall be maintained as a permanent record and remain
in effect, subject to the permit conditions and regulations set forth
in this article, as long as the facilities authorized by the permit
occupy the right-of-way.
(4) Responsibility for compliance with the terms of the permit cannot
be assigned or transferred by the permittee without first obtaining
approval from the Borough Manager or Public Works
Superintendent. Any facility installed under the authority of said
permit shall be subject to removal or relocation at the expense of
the permittee.
B. Additional restrictions. All work authorized by the permit is subject to:
(1) All applicable federal, state and Borough laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, including, but not limited to:
(a) Act No. 247, approved October 26, 1972 (P.L. 1017) (53 P.S.
§ 1611), as amended, concerning environmental control
measures related to pollution and the preservation of public
natural resources.
§ 192-15 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-16
185:448
(b) Act No. 287, approved December 10, 1974 (P.L. 852) (73 P.S.
§ 176 et seq.), or as amended by PA Act 121 of 2008,
concerning protection of the public health and safety by
preventing excavation or demolition work from damaging
underground utility facilities.
(c) Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
construction safety and health regulations, 39 FR 22801, June
24, 1974, as published in the Federal Register (29 CFR 1926.1
et seq.) or as amended.
(2) Any rights of any person.
(3) The conditions, restrictions and provisions of the permit.
C. Borough standards.
(1) The work shall be done at such time and in such manner as shall be
consistent with the safety of the public and shall conform to all
requirements and standards of the Borough. If at any time it shall
be found by the Borough that the work is not being done or has not
been properly performed, the permittee, upon being notified by the
Borough, shall immediately take the necessary steps, at its own
expense, to place the work in condition to conform to such
requirements or standards.
(2) Whenever any requirement or standard of the Borough is
superseded by a requirement or standard of the federal
government or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the
requirement or standard of the federal government or of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as applicable, shall apply.
D. Permittee responsibilities.
(1) The permittee shall be responsible for all costs and expenses
incident to or arising from the permitted work, including the
prescribed fees for the same, the cost of making and maintaining
temporary restoration of the disturbed areas and making
permanent restoration. The permittee shall reimburse the Borough
for any and all inspection costs related to the permitted work which
the Borough may deem it necessary to incur within 30 days after
receipt of the Borough's invoice.
(2) In the event of failure or neglect by the permittee to perform and
comply with the permit, the approved traffic control plan, or the
regulations set forth in this article, the Borough may immediately
revoke and annul the permit and order and direct the permittee to
remove any or all structures, equipment or property belonging to
the permittee and/or its contractors from the legal limits of the
right-of-way and to restore the right-of-way to its former condition.
In the event that the Borough determines that such structures,
equipment or property pose a threat to the public safety and the
§ 192-16 SOLID WASTE § 192-16
185:449
permittee fails to remove the same after notice from the Borough
to do so, any attorney of any court of record shall be authorized
to appear for the permittee and to enter an amicable action of
ejectment and confess judgment against the permittee, and the
Prothonotary shall be authorized to issue forthwith a writ of
possession with costs, without leave of court.
(3) If work is stopped on a project for any reason, other than at the end
of any normal workday, and any excavations or openings, in the
opinion of the Borough, remain open for an unreasonable period,
the permittee, if so directed, shall refill the excavations or
openings, and work shall not be resumed until the permittee is
prepared to proceed immediately with the work to its completion.
In the event that the permittee fails to refill the excavations or
openings or proceed until completion of the work upon notice from
the Borough to do so, the Borough may perform the necessary and
required work and shall be reimbursed for all costs including, but
not subject to, traffic control, consultant fees, police protection,
etc., by the permittee within 30 days after receipt of the Borough's
invoice.
(4) If the permittee, after making an opening in the surface to place or
repair a facility or for any other purpose, fails to restore any portion
of the right-of-way to conform to § 192-16 of this article (relating to
general conditions), § 192-17 of this article (relating to special
conditions - subsurface operations) and § 192-18 of this article
(relating to special conditions - aboveground facilities) upon notice
from the Borough to do so, the Borough reserves the right to do the
work, and the permittee shall reimburse the Borough for the costs
within 30 days after receipt of the Borough's invoice.
E. Altering vegetation prohibited. This permit does not authorize the
permittee to cut, remove or destroy trees or shrubbery within the rightof-
way unless specifically noted on the permit.
F. Altering drainage prohibited.
(1) Unless specifically authorized by the permit, the permittee shall
not:
(a) Alter the existing drainage pattern or the existing flow of
drainage water.
(b) Direct additional drainage of surface water toward, onto or
into or in any way affect the street right-of-way or street
facilities.
(2) The issuance of a permit does not authorize the permittee to direct,
divert or otherwise drain surface waters over the property of any
other property owner.
§ 192-16 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-16
185:450
(a) The issuance of a permit does not in any way relieve the
permittee from acquiring the consent, permission or other
authorization from any property owner who may be adversely
affected by drainage alterations.
(b) The permittee is responsible for any damage caused to any
private or public property as a result of work done under the
permit.
G. Equipment damage to street.
(1) To protect the pavement and shoulders, all equipment shall have
rubber wheels or runners and shall have rubber, wood or similar
protective pads between the outriggers and the surface unless
otherwise authorized by the permit.
(2) In the event that other than rubber-equipped machinery is
authorized for use, the pavement and shoulders shall be protected
by the use of matting, wood or other suitable protective material
having a minimum thickness of four inches, unless the permit
requires the permittee to repave the roadway full width.
(3) If the equipment damages the pavement or shoulders, the
permittee shall restore the pavement or shoulders to their former
condition, at the permittee's expense.
H. Traffic protection and maintenance. Maintenance and protection of
traffic shall be in accordance with the requirements of PennDOT as set
forth in Publication No. 213.
(1) The permittee shall provide and maintain all necessary precautions
to prevent injury or damage to persons and property in accordance
with instructions furnished by the Borough Manager or Public
Works Superintendent. A traffic control plan in accordance with
PennDOT Publication 213 shall be submitted to the Borough
Manager or Public Works Superintendent and approved by the
Borough Manager or Public Works Superintendent and Police
Department and a permit is issued before detouring any traffic.
(2) Work zone traffic control signs shall be placed in advance of the
actual operation in such a manner as to be visible to the traveling
public, and substantial barricades with adequate illumination shall
be provided and maintained for any excavations or openings in the
improved area in accordance with PennDOT Publication No. 213.
(3) Designated employees of the permittee shall be assigned by the
permittee to direct one-lane traffic and lane closures as approved
by the Borough. Flagmen shall be provided as specified in the
permit and in accordance with PennDOT Publication 213.
I. Streets under construction. No permit application will be approved for
occupancy of a section of right-of-way within which a street
§ 192-16 SOLID WASTE § 192-16
185:451
construction or reconstruction project is underway or, if a contract for
such a project has been let, until the project is completed and accepted
by the Borough. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply:
(1) In case of emergency, in which case the permittee shall procure the
consent of the Borough's Manager or Public Works Superintendent
to do such work as may be deemed necessary to correct the
existing emergency condition in accordance with § 192-15 of this
article (relating to emergency work); or
(2) Where the permittee has been authorized by the Borough to
relocate or adjust its facilities simultaneously with such street
construction.
J. Sharing facilities.
(1) Subsurface. The application shall identify any other utility's facility
that will be sharing a trench or structure with the applicant's
facilities.
K. Indemnification. The permittee shall fully indemnify and save harmless
and defend the Borough of and from all liability for damages or injury
occurring to any person or persons or property through or in
consequence of any act or omission of any contractor, agent, servant or
employee of the permittee or other person engaged or employed in,
about or upon the work by, at the instance or with the approval or
consent of the permittee; from any failure of the permittee or any such
person to comply with the permit or the regulations set forth in this
article; and from the failure, during the two-year period after
completion of the permitted work, of the street in the immediate area of
the work performed under the permit where there is no similar failure
of the street beyond the area adjacent to the area of the permitted
work.
L. Insurance. The permittee shall submit to the Borough a certificate or
certificates of insurance for public liability and property damage, in
form and amount satisfactory to the Borough, or as adopted by Borough
Council to cover any loss that may be incurred for or on account of any
matter, cause or thing arising out of the construction, reconstruction,
repair, relocation or installation of the permitted structures or facilities.
M. Blasting. No predrilling or blasting shall be permitted within the rightof-
way, unless authorized by the permit.
(1) If the permittee proposes to blast, the permittee shall make,
execute and deliver a bond to the Borough in an amount
determined by the Borough Manager with surety by a company
duly registered and authorized to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, conditioned that the Borough will
be saved harmless from any damages whatsoever to the improved
area and all other private and public property for a period of one
§ 192-16 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-16
185:452
year from the date of the completion of the last work covered by
the permit.
(2) When blasting is anticipated within 100 feet of any building or
structure, a detailed plan of excavating, shoring, blasting and
backfilling procedures shall be submitted with the application to
the Borough for review and approval. The Borough Manager may
require preblast inspections to be made of all structures or
facilities which in his opinion may be affected by the permitted
work.
(3) Only controlled blasting, as specified in Section 203.3, PennDOT
Form 408, latest edition shall be permitted within the improved
area.
N. Maintaining structure or facility. As long as the permittee operates and
leaves in place any structure or facility in, upon or along the right-ofway,
the permittee shall maintain and keep it in good order and repair.
O. Damaged structure or facility. If at any time the structure or facility
shall become damaged from any cause whatsoever, the permittee shall
have it removed, repaired or otherwise made safe immediately upon
notification from the Borough.
P. Damage to street.
(1) If there is a failure of the street, including slope or any other
appurtenance thereto, in the immediate area of the permitted work
within two years after completion of the permitted work and there
is no similar failure of the street beyond the area adjacent to the
area of the permitted work, the permittee shall have absolute
responsibility to make all temporary and permanent restoration,
including restoration of the adjacent area if it has also failed.
(2) If there is a failure of the street, including slope or any other
appurtenance thereto, in the area adjacent to the immediate area
of the permitted work within two years after the completion of the
permitted work and there is no similar failure of the street in the
area of the permitted work or beyond the area adjacent to the area
of the permitted work, it shall be presumed that the work done by
the permittee was the proximate cause of the failure, and the
permittee shall be responsible to make all temporary and
permanent restoration unless the presumption is rebutted by clear
and convincing evidence.
(3) Where the permittee has the responsibility to restore the street,
including slope or any other appurtenance thereto, under any of
the above provisions, including instances where a presumption of
responsibility has not been rebutted, the permittee shall have the
duty to restore the improved area in accordance with the original
permit. If the permittee fails to restore the improved area properly,
the Borough shall have the authority to do the work at the
§ 192-16 SOLID WASTE § 192-16
185:453
§ 192-17. Special conditions: subsurface operations.
permittee's expense. The permittee shall reimburse the Borough
for the costs within 30 days after receipt of the Borough's invoice.
Q. Future street changes. If at any time in the future the street in which a
permitted structure or facility is installed or constructed is altered for
public convenience or necessity, the owner of the facility shall, at its
own cost and expense, change or relocate all or any part of the
structure or facility authorized by the permit which interferes with such
street alterations or which is inconsistent with the purpose of the street
alterations.
R. Approval by inspector. Approval by the Borough's inspector of all or
part of any permitted work shall not constitute acknowledgment that
the work was performed in accordance with the permit, nor shall such
approval of the inspector act as a release of the permittee or waiver by
the Borough of its right to seek performance or restitution form the
permittee.
A. Drilling, boring, driving or tunneling across improved area.
(1) When crossing under any improved area, the opening for a utility
facility shall be drilled, bored or driven on a horizontal plane at a
minimum depth of three feet below the surface of the street and its
swale ditches.
(a) The facility may be placed by tunneling when authorized by the
permit. When tunneling, after the facility is placed the hole
shall be backfilled with 1:3:6 concrete of dry consistency and
tamped.
(b) Wet boring is prohibited.
(2) No openings for the purpose of placing utility facilities or other
structures under the improved area by drilling, boring, driving or
tunneling shall be made closer than three feet to the edge of the
roadway, unless the permit authorizes a lesser clearance.
(3) Facilities and other structures crossing under the improved area
shall be constructed so as to assure the safety of the traveling
public and to preclude the necessity of entering upon the improved
area to affect future maintenance or replacement. Such facilities
shall comply with applicable provisions of PennDOT Design
Manual, Part 5.
B. Trenching across improved area.
(1) No trenching shall be permitted across the improved area, unless
authorized by the permit.
§ 192-16 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-17
185:454
(2) Trenching across the improved area may be authorized by the
permit where drilling, boring, driving or tunneling are not feasible
because:
(a) The subsurface is solid rock.
(b) There are other facilities located longitudinally under the
improved area and their location precludes methods other than
trenching.
(c) Adjacent development in a very congested urban area makes
the construction of a tunneling or boring shaft impossible.
(d) The Borough Manager determines that the disruption to traffic
and length of exposure will be minimal.
(3) When trenching is specified in the permit and the utility facility is
to be placed across the street in one piece, the trenching operation
shall be performed by the following:
(a) Traffic shall be routed over 1/2 the pavement width.
(b) The closed half of the pavement shall be opened to the
required depth and bridged with steel plates.
(c) Traffic shall be shifted to the bridged half of the pavement.
(d) The remaining half of the pavement shall be opened to the
required depth.
(e) The facility shall be placed full width.
(f) The open trench shall be backfilled and restored half-width in
accordance with this section (relating to special conditions -
subsurface operations).
(g) Traffic shall be shifted to the restored half of the pavement.
(h) The bridging shall be removed and the remaining half of the
trench shall be backfilled and restored in accordance with this
section (relating to special conditions - subsurface operations).
(i) Traffic control must be in accordance with PennDOT
Publication 213.
C. Installation while street closed. If the Borough Manager or Public
Works Superintendent determines that the duration of trenching
operation can be minimized to allow a temporary closing of the street,
the entire cartway may be opened to install the facility. Permission to do
so must be stated on the permit.
D. Trench openings parallel to street.
(1) Trench openings for utility facilities and other structures shall be
made so that the near edge of the openings is at least three feet
§ 192-17 SOLID WASTE § 192-17
185:455
outside the edge of the cartway, unless the permit authorizes a
lesser clearance, with a minimum depth of three feet from the
surface to the top of the facility.
(2) On a paved street, the near edge of the trench opening shall be at
least 12 feet from the general center line of the traveled street, or
as authorized in Subsection I of this section.
(3) No trench opening shall be left open for a distance of more than
200 feet at any one time, unless authorized by the permit. In
addition, no more than 40 feet of trench shall be left open on the
shoulder of a street at the end of any workday, unless authorized by
the permit.
E. Plates or bridging required. Except for emergency repairs of utility
facilities or as set forth on the permit, work shall be stopped prior to
peak traffic hours that exist on a particular street on a particular day.
Steel plates or bridging shall be placed over all openings made within
the improved area which are less than six feet in either length or width
when work is stopped. The plates or bridging shall be extended a
minimum of 18 inches from each edge of the opening and shall be
secured in a safe manner.
F. Plowing installation of utility facilities.
(1) No plowing shall be permitted with the right-of-way, unless
authorized by the permit.
(2) Plowing operations will be authorized only in unpaved shoulders.
(3) Plowing operations are not allowed from November through
March, inclusive, unless authorized by the permit.
(4) No plowing shall be permitted with three feet from the edge of the
cartway. A greater distance shall be attained wherever possible.
(5) The opening shall be a minimum depth of three feet. If this depth
cannot be consistently maintained, the proper depth shall be
achieved by trenching.
(6) The utility facility shall be installed under any structures that are
less than three feet deep. All disturbed structures shall be repaired
or replaced by the permittee.
(7) The disturbed area shall be restored in conjunction with the
plowing operation. If heaving occurs, the disturbed area shall be
reshaped, backfilled with PennDOT 2A aggregate and compacted
until the disturbed area is restored to a condition equal to that
which existed before plowing.
G. Disposition of materials.
§ 192-17 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-17
185:456
(1) The permittee shall keep the improved area free of all material
which may be deposited by vehicles traveling upon or entering onto
the street during the performance of work authorized by the
permit.
(2) The permittee shall be responsible for controlling dust conditions
created by its own operations.
(3) All excess material and material that is not suitable for backfill
shall be removed and disposed of outside the right-of-way as the
work progresses.
(4) All retained suitable material shall be placed or stored on the side
of the operation farthest from traffic, unless otherwise authorized
by the permit, and in such a manner that there will be no
interference with the flow of water in any gutter, drain, pipe,
culvert, ditch or waterway.
H. Backfilling. All openings made in the cartway or in paved shoulders
shall be backfilled by the permittee in accordance with the following
minimum standards:
(1) The opening shall be backfilled with PennDOT 2A aggregate
material, compacted in not more than six-inch layers, with
approved vibratory compaction equipment.
(2) Compaction shall be completed to the bottom elevation of the
existing pavement.
(3) Temporary or permanent restoration shall be placed at the end of
each working day.
(4) Flowable fill is an acceptable backfill material and shall be in
accordance with PennDOT Publication 408, Section 220.
I. Restoration of flexible base pavements. Base and surface restoration of
flexile base pavements shall be done in accordance with one of the two
methods listed below, as specified in the permit.
(1) High early strength concrete restoration method. (To be used when
permanent restoration is made upon completion of backfill.) Prior
to replacement of the base course, one foot from each edge of the
trench shall be sawed or cut, in a neat straight line, to the bottom
elevation of the existing base course, and the detached material
shall be removed. Drilling shall not be permitted.
(a) The base course shall be replaced with a minimum of eightinch
high early strength concrete to the elevation of the
existing crushed aggregate base course. The high early
strength concrete shall then be cured in accordance with
Section 501.3, PennDOT Form 408. If a trench exceeds four
feet in width, No. 6 reinforcing bars shall be installed in the
concrete base course, placed at six-inch centers measured
§ 192-17 SOLID WASTE § 192-17
185:457
longitudinally in the direction of the trench, with a two-inch
clearance on each end and a three-inch clearance on the
bottom.
(b) Following the concrete curing, a tack coat shall be applied in
accordance with Section 460, PennDOT Publication 408.
(c) After the tack coat has cured, Superpave Asphalt Mixture
Design, HMA, bituminous binder and/or wearing course shall
be placed so as to conform to the existing pavement of depths
binder and wearing courses, but in no case shall the wearing
surface be less than 1 1/2 inches, in accordance with detail as
noted in Appendix.
(d) The edges of the repair shall be sealed with rubberized asphalt
for the surface course for a width of 12 inches centered on the
repair joint in accordance with PennDOT Publication 408,
Section 469.
(2) Ninety-day temporary and permanent restoration method. (To be
used when temporary restoration is made followed by a minimum
ninety-day settlement period.)
(a) Temporary restoration. Temporary restoration shall be made
and kept in place for a minimum of 90 days after backfilling the
trench. The PennDOT 2A aggregate backfill material shall be
placed in accordance with Subsection H of this section with a
surface of a two-inch minimum depth compacted PennDOT
approval bituminous material.
(b) Permanent restoration.
[1] After the minimum ninety-day period, but before 210 days,
the temporary restoration shall be removed and
permanent restoration made.
[2] Prior to making the permanent restoration, one foot from
each edge of the trench shall be sawed or cut, in a neat,
straight line, to the bottom elevation of the existing base
course, and the detached material shall be removed.
Drilling shall not be permitted. Exposed vertical and
horizontal surfaces shall be prepared as per PennDOT
Publication 408, Section 409.
[3] The permanent base course shall consist of Superpave
Asphalt Mixture Design, HMA, 25.0 mm, PG64-22 base
course meeting the requirements of Section 305, PennDOT
Form 408, and have a minimum depth of five inches or a
depth equal to the existing base course, whichever is
greater. If required, the permanent binder course shall
consist of Superpave Asphalt Mixture Design, HMA, 19.0
mm PG 64-22 binder course and be placed in accordance
§ 192-17 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-17
185:458
with the depths of the existing binder course, but in no
case shall the binder course be less than 2 1/2 inches.
[4] The permanent surface course shall consist of Superpave
Asphalt Mixture Design, HMA, 9-5 mm, PG 64-22 wearing
course and be placed in accordance with the depths of the
existing bituminous surface, but in no case shall the
wearing course be less than 1 1/2 inches. The appropriate
skid resistance level (SRL) and ESAL rating should be used
for all PennDOT bituminous asphalt mix design materials.
[5] The edge of the repair shall be sealed with rubberized
asphalt material for a width of 12 inches centered on the
repair joint in accordance with PennDOT Form 408,
Section 469.
J. Temporary and permanent restoration of plain or reinforced cement
concrete pavements.
(1) Upon completion of the trench backfill, the PennDOT 2A aggregate
shall be placed in accordance with Subsection H of this section with
a surface of a minimum two-inch compacted PennDOT approved
bituminous material. Permanent restoration can be made at any
time prior to the expiration of 210 days from the backfilling of the
trench. If permanent restoration is completed immediately after
backfilling, temporary restoration is not required.
(2) Prior to replacement of the base, one foot from each edge of the
trench shall be sawed or cut, in a neat, straight line, to a depth of at
least three inches, and the detached material shall be removed.
Drilling shall not be permitted where sawing or cutting is required.
(a) The replacement base shall consist of high early strength
concrete equal in depth to the original concrete pavement.
(b) On existing reinforced cement concrete pavements,
reinforcing steel and expansion tie bolts shall be placed in
accordance with PennDOT Roadway Construction Standard
RC-26, latest addition.
(c) The surface shall be restored as follows:
[1] The surface shall be cured in accordance with Section 501
of PennDOT Publication 408. After surface corrections
have been completed and just before the concrete
becomes nonplastic, the surface shall be given a textured
finish in accordance with Section 501 of PennDOT
Publication 408.
[2] Surface restoration of a cement concrete pavement which
has a bituminous surface shall be done in accordance with
Subsection I(1) of this § 192-17.
§ 192-17 SOLID WASTE § 192-17
185:459
[3] The edge of the repair shall be sealed with rubberized
asphalt material for the surface course for a width of 12
inches centered on the repair joint in accordance with
PennDOT Form 408, Section 469.
K. Shoulder restoration.
(1) Paved and stabilized shoulders.
(a) Temporary restoration. Temporary restoration shall be made
and kept in place for a minimum of 90 days after backfilling the
trench. The PennDOT 2A aggregate backfill material shall be
placed in accordance with Subsection H, or any substitution or
replacement thereof, of this section with a surface of a
minimum two-inch compacted PennDOT approved bituminous
material.
(b) Permanent restoration.
[1] After the minimum ninety-day period, but before 210 days,
the temporary restoration shall be removed and
permanent restoration shall be made.
[2] Prior to making the permanent restoration, one foot from
each edge of the trench shall be sawed or cut, in a neat,
straight line, to the bottom elevation of the existing base
course, and the detached materials shall be removed.
Drilling shall not be permitted. Exposed vertical and
horizontal surfaces shall be prepared per PennDOT
Publication 408, Section 409.
[3] Paved and stabilized shoulders shall be reconstructed and
restored to a serviceable condition, of the same type as
existed before the start of work.
(2) Unpaved shoulders.
(a) Retained material which complies with Section 206.2,
PennDOT Publication 408, may be used for backfill, up to
within 18 inches of final grade. The final 18 inches of backfill
shall consist of PennDOT 2A aggregate material. The width of
the shoulder shall be no less than four feet.
(b) If the length of the facility exceeds 50 feet, the shoulder shall
be graded, rolled and penetrated with a bituminous surface
treatment shall be constructed in accordance with PennDOT
Publication 408, Section 480.
L. Appurtenances to underground installations.
(1) The top of every manhole, valve box or other access to the facility
shall be at the same elevation as the surface in which it is located.
§ 192-17 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-17
185:460
§ 192-18. Special conditions: aboveground facilities.
(2) The surface surrounding manhole or valve covers located in
shoulders shall be paved in such a manner as to prevent washouts.
M. Additional restoration.
(1) All disturbed portions of the street, including all appurtenances
and structures, such as guardrail or drainpipes, shall be restored to
a condition equal to or better than that which existed before the
start of any work authorized by the permit.
(2) If the permittee opens the street pavement, whether to install a
new facility or to modify an existing facility or for any reason, and
the wearing course is less than five years old, the permittee shall,
in addition to the minimum restoration conditions outlined in this
section of this article (relating to special conditions - subsurface
operations), the entire cartway width shall be milled and overlaid
with superpave asphalt mixture design, 9.5 mm, HMA wearing
course including the appropriate skid resistance level (SRL) and
ESAL rating. If the wearing course is older than five years, the
permittee shall, in addition to the minimum restoration conditions
outlined in this section of this article (relating to special conditions
- subsurface operations), overlay the street pavement in
accordance with the following conditions:
(a) When a longitudinal opening longer than 10 feet and wider
than three feet is made in the street pavement, the permittee
shall overlay the traffic lane(s) in which the opening was made,
for the entire length of street that was opened.
(b) When two or more transverse trench openings are made by the
permittee in the street pavement less than 100 feet apart, the
permittee shall overlay all traffic lanes in which the openings
were made, for the entire length of the street between such
openings.
(3) Regardless of the age of the wearing course, when both
longitudinal and transverse trench openings are made in the street
pavement, the Borough may require the permittee to overlay all
traffic lanes in which such openings were made, for the entire
length of street that was opened, if the Borough Manager or Public
Works Superintendent determines that the present serviceability of
the street has been impaired by the openings.
(4) Any deviation of methods or materials from Section § 192-17 will
not be permitted; unless reviewed and approved by the Borough.
A. General rule. Permits will not be issued to install aboveground facilities
which the Borough Manager determines to have a high accident
potential.
§ 192-17 SOLID WASTE § 192-18
185:461
§ 192-19. Record examination.
All permit records, restoration records and emergency work records shall
be made available for examination by an authorized representative of the
Borough upon request.
§ 192-20. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
B. Location of aboveground facilities.
(1) New poles, guys and other aboveground facilities shall be installed
outside the street's clear roadside area as near the right-of-way line
as practicable, in accordance with Section 9.09B(1) of PennDOT
Design Manual, Part 5.
(2) Replacement of poles, guys and other aboveground facilities shall
comply with Section 9.08B(2) and (3) of PennDOT Design Manual,
Part 5.
(3) Installation of poles, guys and other aboveground facilities in
locations where highway curb exists shall comply with Section
9.08B(4) of PennDOT Design Manual, Part 5.
C. Location of wires, cables or conductors. All wires, cables or conductors
which overhang any portion of the right-of-way shall be placed so as to
provide a minimum vertical clearance of 18 feet over the roadway,
except where the National Electrical Safety Code requires vertical
clearances in excess of 18 feet due to voltage and/or span lengths.
D. Guys.
(1) Guys shall be placed so as to avoid interference with vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
(2) Guys shall be insulated or grounded in compliance with the
National Electrical Safety Code.
E. Identification of poles. Each pole shall bear the name or initials of the
facility owner and the pole number(s) assigned by the facility owner.
A. Enforcement. Any violation of the regulations set forth in this article
shall constitute grounds for imposition of any or all of the following
penalties:
(1) Upon receipt of oral or written notice of any violation(s) from the
Borough's authorized representative, the permittee shall cease to
perform any further work in the permitted area except to restore
the area to a safe condition. No further work shall commence in the
permitted area until the violation(s) has been remedied. Where the
permittee has received oral notice of the violation(s), written notice
shall be sent to the permittee within five days of receipt of the oral
notice.
§ 192-18 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-20
185:462
§ 192-21. Construal of provisions; modifications.
The provisions of this article are intended as minimum standards for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the residents and
inhabitants of the Borough. If an applicant for a permit is able to
demonstrate to the Borough of Kutztown Code Appeals Board (Code
Appeals Board), during a proceeding conducted under Chapter 12 of the
Code of the Borough of Kutztown, that the literal compliance with any
provision of this article will be unreasonable and will cause undue hardship
as applied to the applicant, the Code Appeals Board may grant a
modification of such provision, if the modification will not be contrary to the
public interest.
(2) Confiscation of the applicant's permit or emergency permit card by
the Borough Manager.
(3) Revocation of the applicant's permit or emergency permit card by
the Borough Manager.
(4) Removal by the utility facilities' owner of facilities installed without
a permit or in violation of the regulations set forth in this article.
B. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a
District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $250 nor
more than $500, together with costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, said person (including an officer of a
corporation if a corporation is the person involved) shall be subject to
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed 30 days. The
continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute a
separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of a violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense.
§ 192-20 SOLID WASTE § 192-21
185:463

ARTICLE IV
Construction and Maintenance
[Adopted 4-28-1992 as Ord. No. 3-1992]
§ 192-22. Requirements and specifications.
A. The grading of sidewalk areas and the constructing and repairing of
sidewalks, curbs, retaining walls and driveway entrances along the
streets and alleys of the Borough of Kutztown (hereinafter referred to in
this article as the "Borough") shall be done by the owner or owners of
the lot or lots abutting thereon in accordance with the lines and grades
established by ordinances as shown on the topographical survey of the
Borough or in accordance with details shown in the Appendix to this
article, which Appendix is made a part of this article, copies thereof
being on file with the Borough Code Office. [Amended 2-10-1998 by
Ord. No. 2-1998]
B. It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, trust or
other entity to grade any sidewalk area or construct or repair any
sidewalk, curb, driveway entrance or front or rear retaining wall within
the Borough, except in compliance with the provisions of this article
and the requirements for persons with disabilities as required by the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. [Amended 12-26-1995 by
Ord. No. 12-1995]
C. Any person, firm, corporation, trust or other entity desiring to grade
any sidewalk area, which is defined as the area located between the
curbline and the building line as from time to time shown on the
topographical survey of the Borough, or desiring to construct or repair
any sidewalk, curb, driveway entrance or front or rear retaining wall
shall first obtain a permit therefor from the Borough Code Office, which
permit will be issued only after the following conditions have been
satisfied: [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995; 2-10-1998
by Ord. No. 2-1998]
(1) The filing of a written application with the Borough Code Office
upon such form as is approved by the Council of the Borough
(hereinafter referred to in this article as the "Borough Council"), by
resolution, setting forth the location, purpose and detailed
description of the improvement;
(2) The approval of said application by the Borough Code Enforcement
Officer;
(3) The payment of a permit fee as set from time to time by resolution
of the Borough Council133 to the Borough Code Office at the time of
the filing of the application, which fee shall be the total fee per
property regardless of the number of improvements set forth in the
application; and
133. Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 192-22 SOLID WASTE § 192-22
185:465
(4) In all cases of new construction of any curb or of resetting any curb
in excess of 10 feet in length, and in the case of any other type
improvement when requested by the applicant, upon approval of
Borough Council, the Borough Engineer shall furnish the applicant
with necessary lines and/or grades, the cost of which shall be paid
for by the Borough; provided, however, that in the event the
applicant does not commence work within 90 days of the date that
the Borough Engineer provided the necessary lines and/or grades
and additional work is required to reset and/or to resubmit lines
and/or grades, the applicant shall reimburse the Borough for such
work. A permit shall be effective for a period of 90 days from the
date of issuance and may, prior to expiration of the original or
renewal period, be renewed by the Borough Code Office for an
additional period of 90 days upon application and payment of $5 for
each additional 90 days by the person, firm or corporation to whom
or which the original permit was issued. Permits shall not be
transferable.
D. All sidewalk areas shall be graded, and all sidewalks, curbs, driveway
entrances and front or rear retaining walls shall be constructed,
reconstructed or repaired only on the grades and lines as shown on the
topographical survey of the Borough and furnished by the Borough
Engineer in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) All sidewalk areas shall conform to curb grades, except that the
area shall have a one-fourth-inch ascending pitch per foot
measured from the outside curbline to the building line of the
respective lot or property.
(2) All separate curbs shall be eight inches wide across the top and
nine inches wide at the gutter line, with a seven-inch reveal, except
as directed by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer or required
by the provisions of § 192-23 of this article, and shall extend for
that width to a minimum depth of 18 inches from the top of the
finished curb so long as that depth is sufficient to achieve a
compacted, firm, even subsurface. If 18 inches of depth is
insufficient to achieve such compacted, firm, even subsurface, the
depth of the curb shall be increased to such depth as is necessary
to achieve such subsurface. [Amended 12-10-2002 by Ord. No.
13-2002]
(3) The outside edge of all sidewalks shall be set back four feet from
the inside face of the curb, and a grass plot area shall separate the
curb from the sidewalk; provided, however, that where the
sidewalk area is less than 10 feet in width, then the concrete
portion of the sidewalk shall be constructed next to the inside face
of the curb. In addition, where no grass plot exists at the time, the
then-existing sidewalk is to be repaired, replaced or extended
along the same property. Upon approval of the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer, the sidewalk may be repaired, replaced or
§ 192-22 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-22
185:466
extended along the same property in the same manner as the
existing sidewalk. [Amended 5-24-1994 by Ord. No. 2-1994]
(4) When new curb and/or driveways are to be constructed along
existing paved streets, the street paving shall be neatly saw cut
prior to the excavation for the placement of forms. In the case of
existing curb and/or driveways to be replaced, the adjacent street
paving shall be neatly saw cut prior to the removal of the existing
curb and/or driveway, and the area to be excavated between the
saw cut and existing curb shall be of sufficient width for the
placement of forms. On rigid paved streets, only the flexible overlay
paving, if same exists, shall be saw cut as directed by the Borough
Code Enforcement Officer or Borough Street Department
representative so as to prevent peeling of the overlay material.
Upon the completion and approval of the new curb, the street
opening shall be restored to the same condition as existed prior to
the permitted work or as directed by the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer or Borough Streets Department
representative. No surface gutters are permitted on newly
constructed sidewalks. All drains shall be installed under sidewalk
areas and shall be constructed of three-inch cast-iron pipe or PVC
Schedule 40 plastic pipe, which shall be placed in a four-inch sleeve
through the curb and in such a manner that the top of the sleeve
will be three inches below the top of the curb with scored joints
placed vertically to the center line of the sleeve; provided, however,
that whenever the installation of such pipe may, in the opinion of
the Borough Code Enforcement Officer, have an effect upon the
sidewalk and/or curb in the immediate area of the proposed
installation, which would cause deterioration, then upon
appropriate application by the property owner, other materials
approved by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer may be
installed, and such installation shall be in accordance with the
terms of such approval. All sidewalks shall not be less than five
inches in thickness, and the surface shall have a one-fourth-inch
pitch per linear foot ascending from the outside face of the curb.
Sidewalks shall be constructed four feet wide in sidewalk areas of
less than ten feet in width, as shown on the topographical survey of
the Borough, and sidewalks shall be constructed five feet wide in
sidewalk areas having a width of 10 feet or more, as shown on the
topographical survey of the Borough. Notwithstanding anything to
the contrary contained in this article, all sidewalks shall conform,
as to width to the majority type of then existing sidewalks in the
same block, except as provided for in § 192-23. [Amended
12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995; 3-12-2002 by Ord. No.
1-2002]
(5) Except as hereinafter provided, all driveway entrances shall have a
minimum curb radius of two feet and a maximum curb radius of
four feet eight inches on each side, shall have the outside edge
raised 13/4 inches above the flow line of the gutter and shall have a
§ 192-22 SOLID WASTE § 192-22
185:467
straight slope therefrom to the prescribed outside sidewalk edge
located four feet eight inches from the outside face of the curb
and shall have a sidewalk surface of the same grade and width
prescribed for sidewalks, and all driveway entrances, including
slope and sidewalk surface, shall be eight inches in thickness. No
single driveway entrance for a one-car garage shall be constructed
with a frontage exceeding 12 feet, or 24 feet for a two- or more
car garage, measured along the building line. In lieu of a driveway
entrance having curb radii as part of its construction, a depressed
curb driveway entrance may be used as set forth in the
Appendix.134 No single driveway entrance for a garage for two or
more cars shall be constructed with a frontage or width exceeding
24 feet measured along the building line. In the case of areas
zoned as commercial districts or industrial districts by Chapter
225, Zoning, and the Zoning Map of the Borough, as from time to
time in effect, all driveway entrances shall have a minimum curb
radius of 15 feet and a maximum curb radius of 35 feet on each
side, the exact radius to be subject to the approval of the Borough
Code Enforcement Officer. Except as hereinafter provided, such
driveway entrances shall have the outside edge raised 13/4 inches
above the flow line of the gutter and shall have a straight slope
therefrom to the prescribed outside edge and shall have a sidewalk
surface of the same grade in width prescribed for sidewalks. In
the case of stepdown driveway entrances, such driveway entrances
shall be constructed seven inches below the top of the curb radius
from the curbline to the inside sidewalk edge, except as provided
for in § 192-23 of this article. The width of any single driveway
entrance in such zoned areas shall not exceed 24 feet for oneway
traffic and 36 feet for two-way traffic in width measured along
the building line. Bituminous concrete material and/or any other
approved material placed upon driveway entrances shall in no way
impede the flow of stormwater runoff in the cartway area of the
streets. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
(6) The face of all retaining walls fronting on a street shall be located
on or set back from the building line, as shown on the
topographical survey of the Borough, and the face of all other
retaining walls shall be set back a minimum distance of two feet
from the right-of-way line of the alley line as shown on the
topographical survey of the Borough. All retaining walls shall be
constructed in accordance with good engineering practice as shall
be approved by the Borough Code Office. [Amended 3-12-2002
by Ord. No. 1-2002]
(7) All sidewalks, curbs, retaining walls and driveway entrances shall
meet material specifications and testing standards and
requirements as directed by the Borough Code Office and in
accordance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department
134. Editor's Note: The Appendix is on file in the Borough Code Office.
§ 192-22 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-22
185:468
of Transportation (PennDOT) specifications for sidewalks, curbs,
retaining walls and driveway entrances as listed in PennDOT
Publication 408 as from time to time amended except as required
by this article. Any required testing shall be paid for by the owner
of the property. All forms shall be inspected and approved by
the Borough Code Enforcement Officer prior to the placement of
concrete. Notwithstanding the aforesaid, sidewalks may be laid of
materials other than a concrete finish when the aesthetics or other
conditions in the immediate area would warrant the use of such
other material as provided for in § 192-26 of this article. The top
surfaces of sidewalks, curbs and driveway entrances shall receive
a wood floated finish or steel trowel and brushed finish, and the
finish tolerance shall be a true plane with 1/4 inch in 10 feet. The
exposed vertical surfaces of curbs and driveway entrances shall be
repaired of all honeycombed and defective areas and shall receive a
smooth-rubbed finish with a carborundum, brick or other abrasive,
until a uniform color and texture are produced. The finishing shall
be completed before the concrete is 36 hours old. Immediately
after finishing, all concrete shall be cured by using either an
approved impervious light-colored plastic covering placed and
maintained in contact with the concrete surface or an approved
impervious light-colored liquid curing compound sprayed on the
concrete surface. The curing shall be continued for at least five
days. The Borough Code Enforcement Officer may reject any
concrete sidewalks, curbs, retaining walls and driveway entrances
which do not conform to the requirements of this article.
[Amended 5-24-1994 by Ord. No. 2-1994; 12-26-1995 by Ord.
No. 12-1995; 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2-1998]
(8) Expansion joints made with a minimum of one-fourth-inch thick
preformed nonextruding and resilient bituminous joint filler shall
be placed every 20 feet to the full depth of curb and sidewalk and
where the sidewalk meets the outside face of a wall and/or curbing.
All curbs and sidewalks shall be scored at a minimum of every five
feet for five-foot-wide sidewalks and at a minimum of every four
feet for four-foot-wide sidewalks. All curbs shall be scored every 10
feet. Expansion joints shall be provided around all utilities, forming
a separate block measuring a minimum of two feet as shown in the
Appendix135 or as directed by the Borough Code Enforcement
Officer. Six-by-six/ten-by-ten welded wire mesh shall be omitted in
the forenoted utility block. Whenever a finish material other than
concrete is approved by Borough Council, it shall be laid on a
concrete base, as hereinabove specified for concrete sidewalks,
which concrete base, together with the approved alternative finish
material, shall bring the sidewalk to the proper topographical
grade. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
135. Editor's Note: The Appendix is on file in the Borough Code Office.
§ 192-22 SOLID WASTE § 192-22
185:469
§ 192-23. Disability facilities.
(9) All individual services for public utilities (excluding gas services)
shall be raised and/or lowered to the required elevation by the
person, firm or corporation installing the curb, sidewalk and/or
driveway of the abutting lot or property. In the case of gas services,
such work shall be done as directed by UGI. In the case of Borough
utilities, such work shall be done in accordance with applicable
Borough ordinances and regulations and shall be inspected by the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer.
(10) All traffic signs removed during construction of concrete curbs,
sidewalks and/or driveway entrances shall be replaced by the
person, firm or corporation or other entity performing the
installation, unless directed otherwise by the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer.
E. Present brick sidewalks requiring the replacement of more than 20% of
the total area shall be entirely replaced by a concrete pavement or
sidewalk or as otherwise permitted by Subsection D(8) of this section.
In the case of concrete sidewalks or curbs, in the event that any
concrete block thereof requires the replacement of more than 25% of
the total area of said concrete block, then said concrete block in need of
repair shall be replaced in its entirety; provided, however, that where a
portion of such a concrete block is removed for installation or repairs to
utilities, then said block shall be replaced in its entirety regardless of
the size in area of the removed portion.
F. Curbs and sidewalks shall be constructed along the front of each lot
within the Borough on which a new building or structure, other than a
private garage, is constructed where said lot adjoins a public street,
road or highway. In the case of a corner lot, curbing and sidewalks shall
be constructed along the front of the lot and the side of the lot adjacent
to the public street, road or highway, as provided for in § 192-23 of this
article. In the case of industrial development, the Code Appeals Board
may, as provided for in Chapter 12 of the Code of the Borough of
Kutztown, modify the requirement for a sidewalk if said industrial
development is located in an area of the Borough where, as provided for
in § 192-26, it is determined that sidewalk is not necessary. Such curb
and sidewalk shall be constructed within 60 days after such new
building or structure is completed and ready for occupancy. [Amended
7-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-1999]
A. Any person, firm, corporation, trust or other entity who or which
constructs and/or causes to be constructed and/or replaces any curb,
sidewalk and/or driveway entrance shall comply with the necessary
requirements so as to provide access and passage for persons with
disabilities. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
§ 192-22 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-23
185:470
§ 192-23.1. Repair and/or replacement. [Added 5-24-1994 by Ord.
No. 2-1994]
B. All curb and sidewalk hereafter constructed and/or replaced at street
intersections or legal crosswalks provided for pedestrian travel shall be
constructed so as to provide depressed curb and sidewalk ramps.
C. All step-down driveway entrances shall be constructed or replaced with
ramps so as to provide access and passage for persons with disabilities.
D. Depressed curbs, sidewalks and/or driveway entrances shall be
constructed or replaced in conformity with standards contained within
the Appendix of this article.136
E. In the event that any situation arises which is not provided for in the
Appendix, then the facilities shall be constructed so as to comply with
the Borough's Building Code,137 the Uniform Federal Accessibility
Standards (49FR31528) or latest revision thereof, the Americans with
Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines and any applicable laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the federal government or
agencies as from time to time shall be in effect. The most stringent of
any such requirements shall apply. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord.
No. 12-1995]
A. Conformity. Every owner of property shall, on notice from the Borough
Code Office within the time period noted in such notice, cause the
construction or reconstruction of curb, sidewalk and/or driveway ramp
which shall conform to all applicable requirements of this article in the
front of and/or alongside of such property. [Amended 2-10-1998 by
Ord. No. 2-1998]
B. Repair required. Every owner of property shall, on notice from the
Borough Code Office within the time period noted in such notice, repair
the curb, sidewalk and/or driveway ramp in the manner stipulated in
such notice in front of and/or alongside of such property. [Amended
2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2-1998]
C. Deterioration. Deterioration shall include cracking, scaling, spalling,
vehicular, fire damage and/or surface disintegration. Surface
disintegration is a deterioration of the concrete resulting in an irregular
surface with depressions greater than 1/2 inch in depth.
D. Repairs allowed. Minor cracks, holes or deteriorated sections of curb,
sidewalk and/or driveway ramps may be repaired with concrete sealant
materials installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications when less than 25% of an individual section of curb,
sidewalk or driveway ramp has deteriorated.
136. Editor's Note: The Appendix is on file in the Borough Code Office.
137. Editor's Note: See Ch. 77, Building Construction.
§ 192-23 SOLID WASTE § 192-23.1
185:471
E. Reconstruction or repair required. When one or more of the following
conditions exist, the section of curb, sidewalk or driveway shall be
reconstructed or repaired where applicable and as determined and
approved by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with
the provisions of this article:
(1) More than 25% of the walking surface of a section of curb, sidewalk
or driveway ramp is deteriorated.
(2) More than 25% of a section of curb, sidewalk or driveway ramp is
deteriorated.
(3) A section of sidewalk or driveway ramp is out of vertical alignment
with an adjacent section by 1/2 inch or more.
(4) A curb is out of vertical alignment with an adjacent section of the
curb and/or sidewalk by two inches or more, except at an
intersection, where maximum misalignment shall be 1/2 inch.
(5) A curb is out of horizontal alignment where abutting the adjacent
curb section by one inch or more.
(6) Repair criteria: 1/2 inch to one inch, two to one fillet to be placed;
more than one inch, four to one fillet to be placed.
(7) A section of a curb, sidewalk and/or driveway ramp having a crack
width of 1/2 inch at any one point greater than one foot in length.
(8) A sidewalk with a reverse grade or which is settled so as to cause
the ponding of water and/or formation of ice.
(9) Existing surface gutter, which is one inch or more below the
surface of the adjacent sidewalk, less than 12 inches wide and does
not conform to § 192-22D(4) of this article shall be modified with a
rainwater connector which conforms to § 192-22D(4) of this article.
(10) A curb, sidewalk and/or driveway ramp which is more than two
inches out of horizontal and/or vertical alignment from the required
topographical alignment or grade. In any block where more than
50% of the curbs, sidewalks and/or driveway ramps deviates from
the topographical horizontal and/or vertical alignment, any curb,
sidewalk and/or driveway ramp requiring reconstruction shall
conform to the alignment of the majority of such curb, sidewalk
and/or driveway ramps.
(11) The provisions of Subsection E(1) through (10) inclusive
hereinabove set forth in the within § 192-32.1E shall apply to a
minimum of four feet of accessible and traveled sidewalk width.
(12) Deteriorated sidewalks which constitute a hazard to pedestrian
travel shall be secured from pedestrian travel upon notice and shall
be repaired within 10 days from receipt of such notice.
§ 192-23.1 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-23.1
185:472
§ 192-24. Planting of trees and shrubbery. [Amended 12-26-1995 by
Ord. No. 12-1995; 7-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-1999]
Except as hereinafter provided, it is hereby declared to be unlawful for
any person, firm, corporation, trust or other entity to plant any trees,
evergreens, hedges, plants or shrubbery in any sidewalk area or within
two feet of the topographical building line along any street or road within
the Borough, the term "sidewalk area" being defined as the area located
between the topographical curbline and the topographical building line
as from time to time shown on the topographical survey of the Borough.
Notwithstanding the aforesaid, shade trees may be planted in the
prescribed grass plot between the curb and sidewalk where application
therefor has been made to the Council of the Borough of Kutztown and
said application is approved by the Council of the Borough of Kutztown. In
addition, hedges, plants and shrubbery may be planted within the required
rear grass area of the sidewalk area where such plantings will not obstruct
the required paved area of the sidewalk and/or create a hazard to
pedestrian traffic on said sidewalk where application therefor has been
made to the Council of the Borough of Kutztown and said Council shall have
approved such application.
§ 192-25. Placement of signs, barriers and lights. [Amended
12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
Any person, partnership, firm, corporation, trust or other entity grading any
sidewalk areas or constructing or repairing any curbs, gutters, sidewalks,
driveway entrances or retaining walls or removing any trees or shrubbery
or opening or excavating in or under any street, alley or sidewalk area or
storing or depositing materials on any street, alley or sidewalk area shall
place suitable signs, barriers and/or lights so as to protect the users of
streets, alleys or sidewalk areas in the vicinity thereof from injury to person
or property. In the event that the Borough Code Enforcement Officer or any
member of the Borough police force directs the person, partnership, firm,
corporation, trust or other entity conducting the work to place a certain
type and/or quantity of signs, barriers or lights in a certain manner, said
person, partnership, firm, corporation, trust or other entity shall promptly
comply with such direction. Any such direction given orally shall promptly
thereafter be confirmed in writing.
§ 192-26. Modifications. [Amended 5-24-1994 by Ord. No. 2-1994;
12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995; 7-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-1999]
(13) A monolithic curb and sidewalk may be repaired in conformity with
§ 192-22 of this article unless more than 50% requires
reconstruction. In such cases the curb and sidewalk shall be
removed and reconstructed.
A. The Code Appeals Board may, but shall not be required to, authorize a
modification of any of the requirements of this article if literal
enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions,
§ 192-23.1 SOLID WASTE § 192-26
185:473
§ 192-27. Enforcement.
as provided for in the following subsections, provided that such
modification shall not be contrary to the public interest and safety, and
that the purpose and the intent of this article is observed:
(1) Modification of driveway entrance width as required by
§ 192-22D(5) of this article.
(2) Modification of sidewalk materials as provided for in § 192-22D(7)
of this article.
(3) Modify the requirement for sidewalks as required by § 192-22F of
this article.
(4) Modification of the order of the Code Enforcement Officer as
regards the provisions of § 192-23.1 of this article regarding the
repair and/or replacement of existing curbs and sidewalks.
B. Financial hardship shall not be considered as the basis for the granting
for any modification by the Code Appeals Board from the provisions of
this article, except as pertains to § 192-26A(4) above as regards the
allowable time required to effect repairs and/or replacement.
C. All requests for modification shall be in accordance with § 12-8 of
Chapter 12 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown.
A. The neglect or refusal of the owner or owners of the abutting lot or
property to grade any sidewalk area and/or to cause to construct,
maintain or replace any curb, sidewalk, driveway entrance or to repair
and replace street paving is hereby declared to be and constitute a
nuisance. [Amended 3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 1-2002]
B. Any sidewalk curb, and/or driveway entrance hereafter not constructed
or repaired in conformity with the provisions of this article and/or with
the applicable established grades and lines shown on the topographical
survey of the Borough is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be
promptly reconstructed or repaired.
C. Any curb, sidewalk or driveway entrance heretofore constructed with
any materials which are not permitted by this article shall be permitted
to be repaired with the same materials used in the initial construction;
provided, however, that whenever said sidewalk, curb or driveway
entrance is replaced or whenever it is determined by Borough Council
that said sidewalk, curb or driveway entrance is in dangerous condition,
said sidewalk, curb or driveway entrance shall be replaced only in
accordance with this article.
D. Nuisances.
(1) Any trees, evergreens, hedges, plants or shrubbery hereafter
planted in violation of the provisions of this article is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
§ 192-26 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-27
185:474
§ 192-28. Violations and penalties.
(2) Any of the above-noted nuisances shall, subject to the above
provisions, be corrected and/or eliminated by the person, firm,
corporation, partnership, trust or other entity that owns the lot or
property abutting such nuisance or upon which such nuisance is
located within 30 days after being notified, in writing, by certified
first class mail, postage prepaid, by the Borough's Code
Enforcement Officer of such nuisance. In the event that correction
or elimination of the nuisance is started but not completed within
said thirty-day period, the Code Appeals Board may grant a
reasonable extension of time to complete the correction or
elimination of said nuisance. Upon failure of said person, firm,
corporation, partnership, trust or other entity to eliminate the
nuisance within the aforesaid time period or periods, the Borough
Council of the Borough of Kutztown may cause the nuisance to be
eliminated in conformity with the provisions of this article, and the
Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown shall be entitled to
recover from said person, firm, corporation, partnership, trust or
other entity who or which is the owner or owners of the lot or
property abutting such nuisance or upon which such nuisance is
located the cost of eliminating such nuisance plus an additional
10% of such cost, together with all charges and expenses, and, if
payment is not made, the Borough Council of the Borough of
Kutztown may file a municipal lien therefor in the Office of the
Prothonotary of Berks County against such lot or property or, in the
alternative, may bring an action in assumpsit against said owner or
owners for collection thereof. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No.
12-1995; 7-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-1999]
E. Any person shall have the right to appeal or request a permitted
modification or waiver with respect to a decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Kutztown. An application for
appeal or request for permitted modification or waiver shall be based
on a claim that the true intent of this chapter or the rules legally
adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
this chapter do not fully apply or an equivalent form of construction is
to be used. Such appeals and request shall be filed and heard as
prescribed in Chapter 12 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown.
[Added 7-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-1999]
A. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, trust or other entity who
violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this article or any order
or regulation made in connection therewith shall be guilty of a summary
offense and, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $1,000 and, in default of the payment thereof, undergo
imprisonment in the Berks County Prison for a period not exceeding 30
days. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
§ 192-27 SOLID WASTE § 192-28
185:475
§ 192-29. Indemnification of Borough. [Amended 12-26-1995 by
Ord. No. 12-1995]
Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, trust or other entity applying
for any permit under this article shall indemnify the Borough against all
liability of whatever nature arising during the performance of any work
or as a result of any work for which a permit is granted pursuant to this
article, whether or not said liability arises as a result of the negligence of
the person, firm, corporation or other entity to whom or which the permit
was issued.
§ 192-30. Borough Code Enforcement Officer.
All references in this article to the Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall
mean such officer or such officer's duly authorized representative.
§ 192-31. Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of
this article are hereby repealed insofar as they affect any work done after
the effective date of this article, but said ordinances shall not be repealed
insofar as they apply to permits issued or acts or violations occurring
before the effective date of this article. Except as aforesaid, Ordinance No.
14-1972, entitled "An Ordinance of the Borough of Kutztown, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, Regulating the Grading of Sidewalk Areas, the Construction
and Repair of Curbs, Gutters, Sidewalks, Driveway Entrances, and
Retaining Walls and Requiring Permits Therefor; Requiring the
Construction of Curbs and Sidewalks Under Certain Circumstances;
Regulating the Planting of Trees and Shrubbery in or near the Sidewalk
Area; Regulating the Making of Openings or Excavations in or under
Streets, Alleys, and Sidewalk Areas, and the Storage or Depositing of
Materials on Streets, Alleys, and Sidewalk Areas, and Requiring Permits
Therefor; Requiring the Placement of Signs, Barriers and Lights; Providing
for Indemnification of the Borough for Liability; Providing Penalties and
Remedies for Violation Thereof; Providing for Repeal of Certain
Ordinances," enacted and approved on December 5, 1972, and Ordinance
No. 13-1974, Ordinance No. 2-1983, Ordinance No. 9-1984 and Ordinance
No. 13-1984 are hereby specifically repealed.
B. The Borough Code Enforcement Officer may revoke any permit issued
to any person, firm, corporation or other entity violating any of the
provisions of this article.
C. The imposition of penalties hereinabove prescribed shall not preclude
the Borough from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent the performance of work or acts declared to be unlawful under
the provision of this article or to restrain, correct or abate a violation or
seek relief by a complaint in equity.
§ 192-28 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-32
185:476
§ 192-32. Conflicts.
Notwithstanding anything hereabove set forth in this article, whenever the
provisions of this article shall be inconsistent with the provisions of Chapter
195, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Borough, as from time
to time are in effect, and the provisions of said subdivision regulations
are more restrictive or contain more stringent requirements than are set
forth in this article, then in such event the provisions of said subdivision
regulations shall prevail and be applicable.
§ 192-32 SOLID WASTE § 192-32
185:477
Chapter 195
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 123.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 192.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 192-32 KUTZTOWN CODE § 192-32
185:478
ARTICLE I
Authority, Title and Purpose
§ 195-1. Authority.
This chapter provides for the control of the subdivision and development of
land and the approval of plats and replats of land within the jurisdiction of
the borough as ordained by the Borough Council of the borough under the
authority of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. 138
§ 195-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance of the Borough of Kutztown."
§ 195-3. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide standards to guide the
subdivision, resubdivision and development of land within the borough
in order to promote the public health, safety and convenience and the
general welfare of the residents and inhabitants of the borough.
B. This chapter shall be administered to assure orderly growth and
development consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and Chapter 225,
Zoning, for the borough; to assure the protection and proper use of
land; to assure adequate provision for traffic circulation, drainage,
utilities, recreation facilities, erosion and sediment control and public
services; to assure development consistent with the natural features of
the borough; to assure properly designed streets and neighborhoods;
and to assure coordination of design among adjoining developments.
138. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-1 SOLID WASTE § 195-3
185:479

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 195-4. Word usage and definitions.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of these regulations, have the meanings indicated:
(1) Words in the singular include the plural, and those in the plural
include the singular.
(2) Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
(3) The words "person," "subdivider," "owner" and "developer" include
a corporation, incorporated association and a partnership, or other
legal entity, as well as an individual.
(4) The word "building" includes structures and shall be construed as if
followed by the phrase "or part thereof."
(5) The word "watercourse" includes channel, creek, ditch, dry run,
spring, stream and river.
(6) The words "should" and "may" are permissive; the words "shall,"
"must" and "will" are mandatory and directive.
(7) For words used in this chapter but not defined in this chapter, any
definition established in Chapter 225, Zoning, shall apply.
(8) Words in the masculine gender include the feminine and the neuter.
B. Other terms or words used herein shall be interpreted or defined as
follows:
ACCESS DRIVE — A private drive providing vehicular access between a
public or private street and a building parking area and/or loading area
within a land development.
ALLEY — See "service street."
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who
has filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors
and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT (APPLICATION) — Every
application, whether preliminary or final, required to be filed and
approved prior to start of construction or development.
BLOCK — A tract of land or a lot or group of lots, bounded on all sides
by streets, public parks, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses or bodies
of water, boundary lines of the borough or by any combination thereof.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania. It
shall also mean the representative designated by the Borough Council
to receive and process applications for development. 139
§ 195-4 SOLID WASTE § 195-4
185:481
BOROUGH CODE OFFICIAL — The agent or official designated by
Borough Council to administrate and enforce Chapter 225, Zoning, or
his duly authorized representative.[Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
2-1998]
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of
Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — A duly registered professional engineer
employed by the Borough Council or engaged as a consultant thereto,
or his duly authorized representative.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The corporate official appointed by the
Borough Council as the Borough Manager or such official's properly
designated representative.[Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No.
12-1995]
BOROUGH PLANNING COMMISSION (COMMISSION) — The Planning
Commission of the Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH SECRETARY — The corporate official appointed by the
Borough Council as the Borough Secretary or such official's properly
designated representative.[Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No.
12-1995]
BOROUGH SOLICITOR — The Solicitor appointed by the Borough
Council or his duly authorized representative. 140
BUILDING — Any combination of materials forming any structure
which is erected on the ground and permanently fixed thereto,
designed, intended or arranged for the housing, sheltering, enclosure
or structural support of persons, animals, or property of any kind.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line within a property establishing
the minimum required distance between any building or structure and
a street right-of-way.
CARBONATE AREAS — Land within the borough which contains soils
formed in material from limestone.
CARTWAY — The portion of a street right-of-way, paved or unpaved,
intended for vehicular use.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given
distance from the intersection of the street center lines.
CODE OFFICIAL — The agent or official designated by Borough Council
to administrate and enforce Chapter 225, Zoning, or his duly authorized
representative.[Added 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2-1998]
139. Editor's Note: The former definition of "Borough Code Enforcement Officer," which
immediately followed this definition, was deleted 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2-1998. See now
the definition of "Code Official."
140. Editor's Note: The former definition of "Borough Superintendent," which immediately
followed this definition, was deleted 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995.
§ 195-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-4
185:482
COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough of
Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
COMMON PARKING AREA — A parking facility other than those
provided within the lot lines of a lot on which one single-family
detached dwelling, one single-family semidetached dwelling, one
townhouse, one two-family detached dwelling or one two-family
semidetached dwelling is located.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which in accordance with
the provisions of the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act of 1980,
as amended, 141 are designated for separate ownership and the
remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the
owners of those portions. Real estate is not a "condominium" unless
the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit
owners.
COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown, Berks
County, Pennsylvania.
COUNTY — The County of Berks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the
County of Berks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way established for public use to facilitate
pedestrian access through a subdivision block.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for
any general and public use, reserving to himself no other rights than
those that are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the
public uses to which the property has been devoted.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DWELLING — A building arranged, intended, designed or used as the
living quarters for one or more families living independently of each
other within the building. The term "dwelling" shall not be deemed to
include hotel, motel or tourist home.
DWELLING UNIT — Any structure, or part thereof, designed to be
occupied as living quarters as a single housekeeping unit.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited
use of private land for public or quasi-public purpose, and within which
the owner of the property shall not erect any permanent structure, but
shall have the right to make any other use of the land which is not
inconsistent with the rights of the grantee or this chapter.
ENDORSEMENT — The application of the signatures of the President
and Secretary of the Borough Council and the Borough Seal to the plan.
141. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 195-4 SOLID WASTE § 195-4
185:483
ENGINEER — A licensed professional engineer registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
FIRE CHIEF — The person so elected by the Kutztown Fire Company
No. 1 or his duly authorized representative.
FLOODPLAIN — A land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source.
GRADE — The inclination, with the horizontal, of a road, unimproved
land, etc., which is generally expressed by stating the vertical rise or
fall as a percentage of the horizontal distance.
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical additions and changes to the land
that may be necessary to produce usable and desirable lots.
IMPROVEMENTS AGREEMENT — An agreement between the Borough
of Kutztown and a subdivider which provides for an improvements
guaranty for the completion of improvements within the subdivision
or land development, establishes responsibilities of the borough and
subdivider regarding the completion and observation of improvements
and specifies such other items regarding improvements which are
agreed to between the borough and the subdivider.
IMPROVEMENTS GUARANTY (FINANCIAL SECURITY) — Any security
which is accepted by the borough to guarantee that certain
improvements will be made within the subdivision or land development,
including performance bonds, escrow agreements and any other
collateral or surety agreements.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT OF LAND) —
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
The following are excluded from the definition of "land
development:"
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling
or single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than
three residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
(a)
(3)
§ 195-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-4
185:484
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is
authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or
other person having a proprietary interest in land.
LOT, FLAG — A lot of irregular shape that has a narrow access strip (not
meeting the minimum lot widths requirements of Chapter 225, Zoning,
and thus too narrow for the construction of a principal building) leading
from a street or other right-of-way to a wider portion of the lot which
is intended for construction or a principal building and which wider
portion complies with the minimum lot width requirements of Chapter
225, Zoning.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat
or otherwise permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of a lot
excluding space within all street rights-of-way and permanent drainage
easements.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — A guaranty by the developer of the
structural integrity of improvements dedicated to the borough.
MARKER — A metal pipe or pin of at least three-fourths (3/4) inch in
diameter and at least 24 inches in length.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and
ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park,
improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile
home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which
has been so designated and improved that it contains two or more
mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MONUMENT — A stone or concrete monument with a flat top at
least four inches in diameter or square, containing a copper or brass
dowel (one-fourth-inch drill hole) and at least 24 inches in length. It is
recommended that the bottom sides or radius be at least two inches
greater than the top, to minimize movements caused by frost.
MULTIPLE-DWELLING BUILDING — A building providing separate
dwelling units for three or more families.
The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings
on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
(b)
§ 195-4 SOLID WASTE § 195-4
185:485
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Kutztown, Berks County,
Pennsylvania.
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision or land development
plan (including all required supplementary data), prepared for official
recording to define property rights and proposed streets and other
improvements.
PLAN, OFFICIAL — The Comprehensive Development Plan and/or
Master Plan and/or Future Land Use Plan and/or Ultimate Right-of-
Way Plan and/or Official Map and/or Topographical Survey and/or other
such plans, or portions thereof, as may have been adopted pursuant to
statute.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative subdivision or land development
plan (including all required supplementary data), in lesser detail than
a final plan, showing, among other things, topographical data and
approximate proposed street and lot layout as a basis for consideration
prior to preparation of a final plan.
PLAN, RECORD — The copy of the final plan which contains the original
endorsements of the County Planning Commission and the Borough
Council and which is intended to be recorded with the County Recorder
of Deeds.
PLAN, SKETCH — An informal plan indicating salient existing features
of a tract and the general layout of a proposed subdivision or land
development.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough
of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
PLAT — A map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other
recreational areas; sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal
and other publicly owned or operated facilities; and publicly owned or
operated scenic and historic sites.
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the Borough Council or Planning Commission, intended to inform
and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with
this chapter.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the borough.
Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the
particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first
publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication
shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
RESERVE STRIP — A parcel of ground in separate ownership
separating a street from other adjacent properties, or from another
street, either proposed or existing.
§ 195-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-4
185:486
RESUBDIVISION — Any replatting of land, including changes to
recorded subdivision or land development plans. See also "subdivision."
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot extending between and having
frontage on two generally parallel streets, excluding service streets,
with vehicular access solely from one street.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as
a street, alley, crosswalk or for other public or semipublic purposes.
SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM, PUBLIC — A sanitary sewage
collection system in which sewage is carried from individual lots by a
system of pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant, generally not
confined to one neighborhood.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The required length of roadway visible to the
driver of a passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when
the view is unobstructed by traffic. Sight distance measurement shall
be made from a point 3.5 feet above the center line of the road surface
to a point five-tenths (0.5) feet above the center line of the road surface.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials.
STREET — A public or private right-of-way, excluding driveways,
intended for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation
which provides a means of access to abutting property. The word
"street" includes thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, court, drive,
expressway, highway, alley, lane and road or similar terms.
ARTERIAL STREET — A street serving a large volume of
comparatively high-speed and long-distance traffic. At the date of
adoption of this chapter, arterial streets within the borough were
West Main Street and East Main Street.
(1)
COLLECTOR STREET — A street which intercepts minor streets
to provide a route to give access to community facilities and/or
other collector and arterial streets. Generally, streets in industrial
and commercial subdivisions shall be considered collector streets.
At the date of adoption of this chapter, collector streets within
the borough were Normal Avenue, Willow Street, Constitution
Boulevard, Greenwich Street, North Constitution Boulevard, Noble
Street, West Walnut Street, College Boulevard, Wentz Street and
North Elm Street.
(2)
CUL-DE-SAC STREET — A minor street intersecting another street
at one end and terminating in a vehicular turnaround at the other
end, or a minor street which intersects another street at one end,
forms a loop and intersects itself. The length of a cul-de-sac street
shall be measured from the intersection of street right-of-way lines
nearest the turnaround to the farthest portion of the turnaround,
along the center line of the cul-de-sac street.
(3)
§ 195-4 SOLID WASTE § 195-4
185:487
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the
land.
SUBDIVIDER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision or a land development.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agriculture purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling shall be exempted. The term "subdivision" shall refer, as
appropriate in this chapter, to the process of subdividing land or to
the land proposed to be subdivided. The term "subdivision" includes
resubdivision.
SURVEYOR — A licensed surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
UTILITY LINE(S) — All electric, telephone, television cables, whether
overhead or underground, and gas, oil and other distribution and
transmission pipes. The term shall also apply to electric supply lines to
street and/or tract lighting.
HALF (PARTIAL) STREET — A street, generally parallel and
adjacent to a property line, having a lesser right-of-way width than
normally required for improvement and use of the street.
(4)
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A minor street parallel and
adjacent to an arterial street, but separated from it by a reserve
strip, which provides access to abutting properties and control of
intersections with the arterial street.
(5)
MINOR STREET — A street used primarily to provide access to
abutting properties or buildings.
(6)
SERVICE STREET (ALLEY) — A minor right-of-way providing
secondary vehicular access to the side or rear of two or more
properties.
(7)
The enumerating of lots shall include as a lot that portion of the
original tract remaining after other lots have been subdivided
therefrom.
(1)
The combining of two or more recorded lots into one lot via the
creation of a new deed shall not constitute subdivision, provided
that no existing lot is divided by any means.
(2)
§ 195-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-4
185:488
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, PUBLIC — A system for supplying
and distributing water from a common source to dwellings and other
buildings, but generally not confined to one neighborhood.
§ 195-4 SOLID WASTE § 195-4
185:489

ARTICLE III
Jurisdiction and Application
§ 195-5. New applications.
After the effective date of this chapter, no subdivision or land development
of any lot, tract or parcel of land within the borough shall be made, and
no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other improvements
in connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated
for public use or travel or for the common use of occupants of buildings
abutting thereon except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 195-6. Prior approved plans.
In the case of a preliminary or final plan approved without conditions or
approved by the applicant's acceptance of conditions prior to the date this
chapter became effective, this chapter shall not be applied to adversely
affect the right of the applicant to commence and to complete any aspect of
the approved development in accordance with the terms of such approval
within the time periods established within the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended. 142 After the expiration of such time periods,
the development shall be subject to this chapter.
§ 195-7. Resubdivision.
Any replatting or resubdivision of land, including a change of a recorded
plan, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 195-8. Condominium conversion.
A. The conversion of a building to condominium ownership shall be
considered a subdivision and shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter; furthermore, each unit of occupancy shall comply with the
current requirements of all applicable codes and other ordinances of
the borough as a separate unit of occupancy.
B. Condominium declarations shall be submitted to and approved by the
borough and after such approval shall be filed with the Recorder of
Deeds of the County of Berks and the borough. Condominium
declarations shall be in accordance with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act of 1980, as amended. 143
142. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
143. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 195-5 SOLID WASTE § 195-8
185:491

ARTICLE IV
Procedures
§ 195-9. Submission and review requirements.
A. Hereafter, subdivision and land development plans shall be reviewed by
the Borough Planning Commission, the County Planning Commission
and other borough, state or county officials as necessary and shall be
approved or disapproved by the Borough Council in accordance with
the procedures specified in this chapter.
B. For all subdivisions and land developments, except those exempted
from standard procedures in § 195-15 of this chapter, a preliminary plan
and a final plan shall be submitted.
C. Procedures described in this Article IV that are not mandated by the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended, 144 are discretionary as to the Borough Council, and any
failure of the Borough Council, its Planning Commission or any other
agent or employee of the borough to abide by said permissive
procedures shall not invalidate any action taken hereunder. However,
said procedures, as to any applicant, are mandatory unless waived by
the Borough Council in accordance with § 195-44.
D. In accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources (DER), the borough shall
revise its official plan for sewage disposal whenever a new subdivision
is proposed, unless the DER determines that the proposal is for the use
of individual on-lot sewage systems serving detached single-family
dwelling units in a subdivision of 10 lots or fewer and certain criteria
set forth in the Rules and Regulations of the DER are met.
(1) An official plan revision for new land development shall be
submitted to the DER in the form of a completed sewage facilities
planning module provided by the DER and including all information
required by the DER.
(2) The subdivider or developer or his agent shall complete the DER
sewage facilities planning module and submit it to the borough for
action.
(3) No plan revision for new land development will be considered
complete unless it includes all information specified within the
DER's Rules and Regulations.
(4) The borough shall not adopt a proposed revision to the official plan,
conditionally or otherwise, until it determines that the proposal
complies with this chapter, Chapter 225, Zoning, and the
Comprehensive Plan. If changes to the proposed revision or the
applicable plan, regulations or ordinance are necessary, the
144. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-9 SOLID WASTE § 195-9
185:493
§ 195-10. Sketch plan.
changes shall be completed prior to adoption of the revision by the
borough.
(5) Upon adoption of a proposed revision to the borough's official plan,
or refusal to adopt such a proposal revision, the borough shall
forward the proposed revision or statement refusing to adopt to the
DER. The DER may approve or disapprove a proposed plan revision
for new land development.
(6) The time limits for actions by borough and county agencies and the
DER are set forth in the Rules and Regulations of the DER.
(7) Subdividers and developers are advised that no subdivision or land
development plan will be finally approved and released for
recording by the borough until all necessary approvals of the
official plan revision or requests for exceptions to the requirement
to revise the official plan have been secured from the borough and
the DER. This fact and time limits for action should be considered
by subdividers and developers when submitting the DER sewage
facilities planning module to the borough.
A. Status. Except in the case of a sketch plan for record, submission of a
sketch plan is optional. Such submission shall not constitute official
submission of a plan to the borough, and the sketch plan is submitted
only for informal discussion between the developer and the Borough
Planning Commission.
B. Required plan data. When submitted, sketch plans shall comply with
the requirements of § 195-16.
C. Submission.
(1) No less than 28 days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the
Borough Planning Commission, the subdivider shall submit nine
copies of the sketch plan, nine copies of any supplementary data,
the required filing fee and six copies of the application for review of
sketch plan (Form 1)145 to the borough.
(2) In the case of a subdivision or land development adjoining
Maxatawny Township, the subdivider shall submit an additional
copy of the sketch plan to the borough. The borough will solicit a
review and report from the township.
D. Distribution. The borough shall distribute the plans and supplementary
data as follows:
(1) Two copies to the Secretary of the Borough Planning Commission.
145. Editor's Note: Form 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-9 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-10
185:494
(2) Two copies to the County Planning Commission in the case of a
sketch plan for record. The plans and supplementary data shall be
accompanied by one copy of Form 1,146 the county's referral form
and the required filing fee.
(3) Two copies to the Borough Engineer.
(4) One copy to the Borough Code Official. [Amended 2-10-1998 by
Ord. No. 2-1998]
(5) One copy retained by the Borough Secretary for the permanent
files of the Borough Council.
(6) One copy to the Borough Manager.
E. Review by Borough Planning Commission.
(1) The sketch plan shall be reviewed by the Borough Planning
Commission at one or more regularly scheduled or special
meetings. The Commission shall request the Borough Code Official
and the Borough Engineer to review the sketch plan and submit
comments thereon to the Commission. The Borough Manager may
review the plan and comment as applicable to the Commission.
[Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2-1998]
(2) Within 15 calendar days after the final meeting at which the sketch
plan is reviewed by the Borough Planning Commission, and not
later than 90 days following the date of the regular meeting of the
Commission next following the date of submittal of the sketch plan
to the borough, the Commission Secretary will send the comments
of the Commission regarding the sketch plan to the developer and
the Borough Council.
F. Review of sketch plan for record by Borough Council.
(1) In the case of a sketch plan for record submitted under the minor
subdivision (§ 195-15A) or lot annexation (§ 195-15D) provisions of
this chapter, after the sketch plan is reviewed by the Borough
Planning Commission, the sketch plan shall be reviewed by the
Borough Council at one or more regularly scheduled or special
meetings and either approved or disapproved by the Council.
(2) Borough Council shall render its decision and communicate it to
the applicant not later than 90 days following the date of the
regular meeting of the Planning Commission next following the
date the application is filed, provided that, should the said next
regular meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing of the
application, the said ninety-day period shall be measured from the
30th day following the day the application has been filed.
146. Editor's Note: Form 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-10 SOLID WASTE § 195-10
185:495
§ 195-11. Preliminary plan.
(3) The decision of the Borough Council shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him at his
last known address not later than 15 days following the decision.
(4) When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite
the provisions of this chapter relied upon.
(5) Failure of the Borough Council to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
required herein shall be deemed an approval of the application in
terms as presented unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of
presentation of communication of the decision, in which case
failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of
presentation of communication shall have like effect.
(6) In the case of a sketch plan for record submitted to the County
Planning Commission for review, no official action shall be taken by
the Borough Council until the Council has received the written
report of the County Planning Commission, provided that the
report is received within 30 days from the date the plan was
forwarded to the County Planning Commission for review. If such
report is not received within 30 days, the Borough Council may
proceed to take action on the plan without consideration of
comments from the County Planning Commission.
A. Submission.
(1) Preliminary plans and required supplementary data for all
subdivisions and land developments shall be submitted to the
Borough Manager for review, unless exempted in § 195-15. Plans
shall be submitted by the developer to the borough no less than 28
days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the Borough
Planning Commission at which it is to be considered. The Planning
Commission has the right to waive this requirement in its sole
discretion.
(2) Any revised preliminary plan submitted to the borough for review
shall be submitted by the developer to the Borough Manager no
less than 28 days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the
Borough Planning Commission at which it is to be considered. The
Planning Commission has the right to waive this requirement in its
sole discretion.
(3) Official submission of a preliminary plan shall include:
(a) Submission of five completed applications for review of
preliminary plan (Form 2).147
§ 195-10 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-11
185:496
(b) Submission of 10 black-on-white prints on paper of the
preliminary plan which shall comply with the requirements of
§ 195-17.
(c) Submission of eight copies of all other information and plans
which are required by § 195-17.
(d) Payment of the filing fee.
(e) An affidavit that the applicant is the landowner of the land
proposed to be developed and has the authority to proceed on
behalf of all parties claiming any ownership interest therein.
(f) In the case of a subdivision or land development adjoining
Maxatawny Township, the subdivider shall submit an
additional copy of the preliminary plan to the borough. The
borough will solicit a review and report from the township.
(4) In the case of a subdivision or land development which proposes
vehicular access or stormwater drainage onto a state route, the
subdivider shall submit the preliminary plan and all supplementary
data to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation with a
request for review of his proposed access and drainage and shall
submit evidence of such submission to the borough at the time of
preliminary plan submission.
(5) In the case of a preliminary plan calling for the installation of
improvements beyond a five-year period, a schedule shall be filed
by the applicant delineating all proposed sections as well as
deadlines within which applications for final plan approval of each
section are intended to be filed. Such schedule shall be updated
annually by the applicant on or before the anniversary of the
preliminary plan approval, until final plan approval of the final
section has been granted, and any modification in the aforesaid
schedule shall be subject to approval of the Borough Council in its
discretion. Each section in any residential subdivision or land
development, except for the last section to be developed, shall
contain a minimum of 25% of the total number of dwelling units as
depicted on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser percentage is
approved by the Borough Council in its discretion.
(6) Failure of the subdivider to submit all items required under
Subsection A(3), (4) and (5) or failure of the preliminary plan to
comply with the requirements of § 195-17 shall be grounds for the
Borough Manager to refuse to accept the preliminary plan for
review.
B. Distribution. The Borough Manager shall distribute submitted
information as follows:
147. Editor's Note: Form 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-11 SOLID WASTE § 195-11
185:497
(1) To the Borough Planning Commission:
(a) Two copies of the preliminary plan.
(b) One copy of application for review of preliminary plan.
(c) Two copies of all other required information and plans.
(2) To the County Planning Commission:
(a) Two copies of the preliminary plan.
(b) One copy of application for review of preliminary plan.
(c) One copy of all other required information and plans.
(d) The county's referral form and required filing fee.
(3) To the Borough Engineer:
(a) Two copies of the preliminary plan.
(b) One copy of application for review of preliminary plan.
(c) Two copies of all other required information and plans.
(4) To the Borough Code Official: [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
2-1998]
(a) One copy of the preliminary plan.
(b) One copy of application for review of preliminary plan.
(5) To be retained by the borough:
(a) Two copies of the preliminary plan.
(b) One copy of application for review of preliminary plan.
(c) Two copies of all other required information and plans.
(6) To the Borough Manager:
(a) One copy of the preliminary plan.
(b) One copy of all other required information and plans.
C. Review by Borough Planning Commission. When a preliminary plan has
been accepted for review by the Borough Manager, the Borough
Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plan at one or more
regularly scheduled or special meetings.
(1) The Borough Engineer shall review the preliminary plan to
determine whether the preliminary plan meets the requirements of
this chapter and submit a written report thereon to the Borough
Planning Commission.
§ 195-11 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-11
185:498
(2) The Borough Code Official shall review the preliminary plan to
determine whether the preliminary plan meets the requirements of
Chapter 225, Zoning, and other applicable codes and submit a
written report thereon to the Borough Planning Commission.
[Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2-1998]
(3) The Borough Manager shall review the preliminary plan to
determine its conformance to the Borough Public Improvements
Requirement Manual and other utility requirements. The Borough
Manager shall submit a written report to the Borough Planning
Commission and recommend changes, alterations or modifications,
as he may deem necessary.
(4) After the final meeting at which the preliminary plan is reviewed by
the Borough Planning Commission, the Commission shall notify the
Borough Council, in writing, of its comments regarding the
preliminary plan. The Commission may recommend that the
preliminary plan be approved, be approved subject to conditions or
be disapproved. If the Commission recommends that the
preliminary plan be disapproved because the provisions of this
chapter have not been met, the specific provisions of this chapter
which have not been met shall be noted. The Commission will notify
Borough Council within 15 days after the final meeting at which it
reviews the preliminary plan.
D. Review by Borough Council. After a preliminary plan has been reviewed
by the Borough Planning Commission and the written comments of the
Commission regarding the preliminary plan have been forwarded to the
Borough Council, the plan shall be reviewed at one or more regularly
scheduled or special meetings by the Borough Council.
(1) No official action shall be taken by the Borough Council with
respect to a preliminary plan until the borough has received the
written report of the County Planning Commission, provided that
the report is received within 30 days from the date the preliminary
plan was forwarded to the County Planning Commission for review.
If such report is not received within 30 days, the Borough Council
may proceed to take action on the preliminary plan without
consideration of comments from the County Planning Commission.
(2) Before acting on a preliminary plan, the Borough Council may hold
a public hearing thereon after public notice.
(3) The decision of the Borough Council regarding the preliminary plan
shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant
personally or mailed to him by certified mail at his last known
address not later than 15 days following the decision. If delivered
personally, the applicant shall give the borough a receipt indicating
he has received the decision.
§ 195-11 SOLID WASTE § 195-11
185:499
(4) The Borough Council shall render its decision and communicate it
to the applicant not later than 90 days following the date of the
regular meeting of the Borough Planning Commission next
following the date the application is filed, provided that, should the
said next regular meeting occur more than 30 days following the
filing of the application, the said ninety-day period shall be
measured from the 30th day following the day the application has
been filed. The subdivider may grant an extension of time to the
borough. Failure of the Borough Council to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
required herein shall be deemed an approval of the application in
terms as presented unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of
presentation of communication of the decision, in which case,
failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of
presentation of communication shall have like effect.
(5) When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite
the provisions of this chapter relied upon.
(6) The Borough Council may approve a preliminary plan subject to
conditions acceptable to the applicant, provided that the applicant
indicates his written acceptance of those conditions to the Borough
Council within 10 days of the date of the written notification from
the Borough Council. Approval of a preliminary plan shall be
rescinded automatically upon the applicant's failure to accept or
reject such conditions within 10 days.
(7) If the preliminary plan proposes a staging plan calling for the
submission of the final plan in sections, the boundaries of the
sections as well as the order and timing of submittal of the final
plans therefor shall be subject to the approval of Borough Council.
In approving a staging plan, the Borough Council, in its discretion,
may:
(a) Impose conditions to the development of any single stage,
phase or section which shall be complied with prior to the
commencement of the next or any subsequent stage, phase or
section of the subdivision or land development;
(b) Impose conditions which shall be met by the developer within a
time period specified by Borough Council, said time period to
commence after the completion of any stage, phase or section
if development of the subsequent stage, phase or section
during which such conditions were to be met is not
commenced within said time period;
(c) Impose conditions which must be met within a time period
specified by Borough Council in the event of a subsequent
§ 195-11 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-11
185:500
§ 195-12. Final plan.
change in the use of the buildings constructed within the
subdivision or land development; and
(d) Require any or all conditions imposed by the Borough Council
to be set forth and included on the final or recorded plan
pertaining to any or all stages, phases or sections of the
subdivision or land development prior to the recording of any
such final or recorded plan.
(8) The approval of a preliminary plan does not authorize the recording
of a subdivision or land development plan nor the sale, lease or
transfer of lots, nor the construction of dwellings or other
buildings. Approval is only an expression of approval of a general
plan to be used in preparing the final subdivision or land
development plan for final approval and recording upon fulfillment
of all requirements of this chapter.
(9) Three copies of the approved preliminary plan shall be submitted to
the Borough Electric Department within five days of approval of the
same for the use of the Borough Electric Department to lay out, size
and determine the rights-of-way that will be required and the
materials necessary to supply electrical service and to prepare a
cost estimate for same.
(a) The plan shall also include street and tract lighting as required
in § 195-18E(68) for review by the borough.
(b) The Borough Electric Department shall submit a plan to the
developer which shall indicate the location of electric lines and
required rights-of-way, along with comments regarding the
proposed street/tract lighting; said information shall be added
to the final plan, prior to final approval of the same.
(c) In addition, the Borough Electric Department shall submit a
cost estimate for the required electrical system which shall be
included in the improvements agreement.
A. Submission.
(1) Within 12 months after approval of the preliminary plan by the
Borough Council, the developer shall submit a final plan and all
required supplementary data to the Borough Manager unless an
extension of time is granted by the Council. If an extension is not
granted, failure to submit the final plan within 12 months may
result in a determination by the Borough Council that it will
consider any plat submitted after 12 months as a new preliminary
plan.
(2) The final plan shall be submitted to the Borough Manager no less
than 28 days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the
§ 195-11 SOLID WASTE § 195-12
185:501
Borough Planning Commission at which it is to be considered. The
Planning Commission has the right to waive this requirement in its
sole discretion.
(3) Any revised final plan submitted to the borough for review shall be
submitted by the developer to the Borough Manager no less than
28 days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the Borough
Planning Commission at which it is to be considered. The Planning
Commission has the right to waive this requirement in its sole
discretion.
(4) Official submission of a final plan shall include:
(a) Submission of five completed applications for review of final
plan (Form 3). 148
(b) Submission of 10 black-on-white prints on paper of the final
plan which shall comply with the requirements of § 195-18.
(c) Submission of eight copies of all other supplementary data and
plans as outlined in § 195-18.
(d) Submission of evidence of review of an erosion and sediment
control plan by the Berks County Conservation District.
(e) Submission of evidence that the final plan has been submitted
to the telephone, cable television and gas companies which will
serve the subdivision or land development.
(f) An affidavit that the applicant is the landowner of the land
proposed to be developed and has the authority to proceed on
behalf of all claiming any ownership interest therein.
(g) In the case of a subdivision or land development adjoining
Maxatawny Township, the subdivider shall submit an
additional copy of the final plan to the borough. The borough
will solicit a review and report from the township.
(5) Failure of the subdivider to submit all items required under
Subsection A(4) or failure of the final plan to comply with the
requirements of § 195-18 shall be grounds for the Borough
Manager to refuse to accept the final plan for review.
(6) The Borough Council may permit the subdivider to submit a final
plan in sections in accordance with the schedule provided for in
§ 195-11A(5), subject to such requirements or improvement
guaranties in future sections as it finds essential for the protection
of any finally approved section of the subdivision or land
development.
148. Editor's Note: Form 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-12 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-12
185:502
(7) The final plan shall conform to the approved preliminary plan,
except that it shall incorporate all modifications required by the
Borough Council in its approval of the preliminary plan. Failure to
comply with past reviews shall constitute grounds for the Borough
Council to disapprove the final plan.
B. Distribution. The borough shall distribute submitted information as
follows:
(1) To the Borough Planning Commission:
(a) Two copies of the final plan.
(b) One copy of application for review of final plan.
(c) Two copies of all supplementary data and plans.
(2) [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2-1998] To the Borough
Code Official:
(a) One copy of the final plan.
(b) One copy of application for review of final plan.
(3) To the Borough Engineer:
(a) Two copies of the final plan.
(b) One copy of application for review of final plan.
(c) Two copies of all supplementary data and plans.
(4) To the Borough Manager:
(a) One copy of the final plan.
(b) One copy of all supplementary data and plans.
(5) To be retained by the borough:
(a) Two copies of the final plan.
(b) One copy of application for review of final plan.
(c) Two of all supplementary data and plans.
(6) To the County Planning Commission, in the case of a subdivision
submitted under § 195-15B or 195-15E:
(a) Two copies of the final plan.
(b) One copy of application for review of final plan.
(c) One copy of all supplementary data and plans.
(d) The county's referral form and required filing fee.
§ 195-12 SOLID WASTE § 195-12
185:503
C. Review by Borough Planning Commission. When a final plan has been
accepted for review, the Borough Planning Commission shall review the
final plan at one or more regularly scheduled or special meetings.
(1) The Borough Engineer shall review the final plan to determine
whether the final plan meets the requirements of this chapter and
submit a written report thereon to the Borough Planning
Commission.
(2) The Borough Code Official shall review the final plan to determine
whether the final plan meets the requirements of Chapter 225,
Zoning, and other applicable codes and submit a written report
thereon to the Borough Planning Commission. [Amended
2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2-1998]
(3) The Borough Manager shall review the final plan to determine its
conformance to the Borough Public Improvements Requirement
Manual and other utility requirements. The Borough Manager shall
submit a written report to the Borough Planning Commission and
recommend changes, alterations or modifications, as he may deem
necessary. The report shall include an estimate of the cost of
construction of underground electric service.
(4) After the final meeting at which the final plan is reviewed by the
Borough Planning Commission, the Commission shall notify the
Borough Council in writing of its comments regarding the plan. The
Commission may recommend that the final plan be approved or
disapproved. If the Commission recommends that the final plan be
disapproved because the provisions of this chapter have not been
met, the specific provisions of this chapter which have not been
met shall be noted. The Commission will notify Borough Council
within 15 days after the final meeting at which it reviews the final
plan.
D. Review by Borough Council. After a final plan has been reviewed by the
Borough Planning Commission and the written comments of the
Commission regarding the plan have been forwarded to the Borough
Council, the plan shall be reviewed by the Borough Council at one or
more regularly scheduled or special meetings.
(1) If the final plan has been forwarded to the County Planning
Commission for review, no official action shall be taken by the
Borough Council with respect to the final plan until the borough
has received the written report of the County Planning
Commission, provided that the report is received within 30 days
from the date the final plan was forwarded to the County Planning
Commission for review. If such report is not received within 30
days, the Borough Council may proceed to take action on the final
plan without consideration of comments from the County Planning
Commission.
§ 195-12 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-12
185:504
§ 195-13. Completion and guarantee of improvements.
(2) Before acting on a final plan, the Borough Council may hold a
public hearing thereon after public notice.
(3) The Borough Council shall render its decision and communicate it
to the applicant not later than 90 days following the date of the
regular meeting of the Planning Commission next following the
date the application is filed, provided that, should the said next
regular meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing of the
application, the said ninety-day period shall be measured from the
30th day following the day the application has been filed. Failure of
the Borough Council to render a decision and communicate it to the
applicant within the time and in the manner required herein shall
be deemed an approval of the application in terms as presented
unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time
or change in the prescribed manner of presentation of
communication of the decision, in which case, failure to meet the
extended time or change in manner of presentation of
communication shall have like effect.
(4) The decision of the Borough Council shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant personally or mailed by certified
mail to him at his last known address not later than 15 days
following the decision. If delivered personally, the applicant shall
give the borough a receipt indicating he has received the decision.
(5) When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite
the provisions of the ordinance relied upon.
(6) A final plan shall not be recorded, nor shall any zoning or building
permit be issued, until the requirements of § 195-13 of this chapter
have been met.
A. Subdivision improvements agreement. No final plan shall be endorsed
by the Borough Council unless an improvements agreement in a form
acceptable to the Borough Council and Borough Solicitor is executed. A
unit breakdown of all improvements required by this chapter pursuant
to Form 4149 shall be included within such agreement.
B. Completion and guarantee of improvements.
(1) No final plan shall be endorsed by the Borough Council unless all
the improvements required by this chapter and the improvements
agreement have been installed, inspected and approved in
accordance with this chapter and said agreement.
149. Editor's Note: Form 4 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-12 SOLID WASTE § 195-13
185:505
(2) In lieu of the completion of any improvements as stated in
Subsection B(1) above, prior to endorsement of the record plan, the
subdivider shall deposit with the borough a financial security in an
amount sufficient to cover the cost of all improvements or common
amenities required by this chapter and the improvements
agreement and the cost of preparing as-built drawings of those
improvements. The financial security may be in the form of an
irrevocable letter of credit or restrictive or escrow account in a
federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution or other
type of financial security which the Borough Council approves. The
financial security shall guarantee the completion of all required
improvements on or before the date fixed in the formal action of
approval or accompanying improvements agreement for
completion of the improvements.
(3) The subdivider shall also submit a cash deposit to the borough to
cover the cost established by the borough for improvement
materials and labor to be provided by the borough pursuant to the
improvements agreement.
(4) When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate financing,
the Borough Council shall furnish the developer with a signed copy
of a resolution indicating approval of the final plan contingent upon
the developer obtaining a satisfactory financial security. The record
plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the improvements
agreement is executed. The resolution or letter of contingent
approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the
improvements agreement is not executed within 90 days unless a
written extension is granted by the Borough Council; such
extension shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in
writing at the request of the developer.
(5) The amount of the financial security to be posted for the completion
of the required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of
completion estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for
completion by the developer. Annually the borough may adjust the
amount of the financial security by comparing the actual cost of the
improvements which have been completed and the estimated cost
for the completion of the remaining improvements as of the
expiration of the 90th day after either the original date scheduled
for completion or a rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to
said adjustment, the borough may require the developer to post
additional security in order to assure that the financial security
equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be posted by the
developer in accordance with this subsection.
(6) The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by an applicant and prepared by an engineer and
certified by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of
such cost. Such estimate shall be submitted to the borough no less
§ 195-13 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-13
185:506
than 14 days prior to the meeting of the Borough Council at which
such estimate is to be considered. The Borough Council, upon the
recommendation of the Borough Engineer, may refuse to accept
such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant and the
Borough Council are unable to agree upon an estimate, then the
estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another engineer
chosen mutually by the borough and the applicant. The estimate
certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and
reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event that a third
engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall
be paid equally by the borough and the applicant.
(7) If the party posting the financial security requires more than one
year from the date of posting of the financial security to complete
the required improvements, the amount of the financial security
may be increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period
beyond the first anniversary date of posting of financial security or
to an amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the
required improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration
of the initial one-year period.
(8) The party posting the financial security may request the Borough
Council to release or authorize release, from time to time, such
portions of the financial security necessary for payment to the
contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall be in
writing addressed to the Borough Council, and the Council shall
have 45 days from receipt of such requests within which to allow
the Borough Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Borough Council
that such portion of the work upon the improvements has been
completed in accordance with the approved subdivision or land
development plan. Upon such certification, the Borough Council
shall authorize release by the bonding company or lending
institution of an amount as estimated by the Borough Engineer
fairly representing the value of the improvements completed. If the
Borough Council fails to act within said forty-five-day period, the
Council shall be deemed to have approved the release of funds as
requested. The Borough Council may, prior to final release at the
time of completion and certification by the Borough Engineer,
require retention of 10% of the estimated cost of the aforesaid
improvements.
(9) In the case where development is projected over a period of years,
the borough may authorize submission of final plans by sections or
stages of development, subject to such requirements or
improvement guaranties in the future sections or stages of
development as it finds essential for the protection and proper
development of any finally approved section of the development.
C. Remedies to effect completion of improvements. In the event that any
improvements which are required by this chapter have not been
installed as provided in this chapter or in accord with the approved final
§ 195-13 SOLID WASTE § 195-13
185:507
plan, the borough may enforce any improvements agreement by
appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If the proceeds of such
improvements guaranty are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or
making repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by said
financial security, the borough may, at its option, install part of such
improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land development
and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the
moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the improvements. All
of the proceeds, whether resulting from the improvements guaranty
or from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer,
or both, shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements
covered by such financial security.
D. Release of improvements guaranty.
(1) When the developer has completed all of the necessary and
appropriate improvements, the developer shall notify the Borough
Council, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the
improvements and shall send a copy of the notice to the Borough
Engineer.
(2) The Borough Council shall within 10 days after receipt of notice of
completion of improvements direct and authorize the Borough
Engineer to inspect the improvements. The Borough Engineer shall
then submit a written report regarding the improvements to the
Council and promptly mail a copy of the report to the developer by
certified or registered mail.
(3) The report shall be made and mailed by the Borough Engineer
within 30 days after receipt of authorization from the Borough
Council. The report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or
rejection of the improvements, either in whole or in part. If the
improvements or any portion thereof shall not be approved or shall
be rejected by the Borough Engineer, the report shall contain a
statement of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
(4) The Borough Council shall notify the developer within 15 days of
receipt of the Engineer's report, in writing, by certified or
registered mail, of their action.
(5) If any portion of the improvements shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the Borough Council, the developer shall proceed to
complete the improvements, and upon completion, the same
procedure of notification as outlined above shall be followed.
(6) When completed improvements have been approved by the
borough, the improvements guaranty shall be reduced by no more
than the amount which was estimated in the improvements
agreement for the approved improvements.
E. Preparation of as-built plans.
§ 195-13 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-13
185:508
§ 195-14. Recording of final plan or sketch plan.
(1) As-built plans for all improvements within the subdivision or land
development listed in the subdivision improvements agreement
shall be submitted to the borough within 30 days after inspection
and approval of the improvements by the borough and prior to the
release of the improvements guaranty and acceptance of any such
improvements by the borough. Plans shall be in accordance with
the requirements of § 195-18 of this chapter, shall be Mylars in
reproducible form and shall be certified by the developer's
engineer to be in accordance with actual construction. The location
and elevation of all sewer laterals and water services shall also be
indicated. The developer shall be responsible for the preparation of
such plans.
(2) If any information relating to potential lot owners shown on the
recorded plan shall have been changed, such as lot boundaries,
easements and maintenance responsibilities, a revised subdivision
and/or land development plan shall be filed with the borough in
accordance with the procedures of this chapter.
F. Maintenance guaranty. Where the Borough Council accepts dedication
of all or some of the required improvements within a subdivision or land
development following completion, the Borough Council may require
the posting of a maintenance guaranty to secure structural integrity of
said improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements in
accordance with the design specifications as depicted on the final plan
for a term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of
dedication. The maintenance guaranty shall be of the same type as
permitted for installation of improvements, and the amount of the
maintenance guaranty shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of
installation of the improvements.
A. Endorsement by Borough Council. After the procedures required by
this chapter have been completed and the Borough Council approves
the final plan, the Borough Planning Commission shall sign and the
Borough Council shall endorse at least seven copies of the final plan or
sketch plan for record.
(1) The endorsed plans shall be clear and legible black-on-white prints
on material acceptable to the Recorder of Deeds.
(2) Before any final plan is released for recording, a copy of any
permits required by the Pennsylvania Departments of
Environmental Resources and Transportation shall be submitted to
the borough.
(3) The borough shall receive one reproducible reproduction of the
final plan as approved and recorded within 15 days of recording.
The reproducible shall contain the Recorder of Deeds information
as to Deed Book Volume and date of recording.
§ 195-13 SOLID WASTE § 195-14
185:509
(4) All streets, parks or other improvements shown on the final plan
shall be deemed to be private until such time as they have been
offered for dedication to the borough and accepted by Borough
Council. The acceptance of any improvements shall be by a
separate action of the Council and shall not be effected by approval
of a subdivision or land development plan.
(5) The developer shall agree with the borough to tender, if requested,
a deed of dedication for any and all public improvements, including
easements. Upon completion of any public improvements shown on
an approved subdivision or land development plan and within 90
days after approval of such public improvements, as herein
provided, the borough may require that the developer offer such
public improvements for dedication. In such a case, the developer
shall prepare a deed of dedication and forward same to the
borough for review by the Borough Solicitor. The borough may
require that the developer supply a title insurance certificate from
a reputable title insurance company before any property is
accepted by the borough.
B. Filing with recorder of deeds.
(1) Upon approval of a final plan or sketch plan of record by the
Borough Council or the acceptance of the conditions of a
conditional approval by the applicant in case of a plan approved
subject to conditions, the developer shall within 90 days of such
final approval or acceptance of conditions complete all conditions
of approval and comply with all requirements of § 195-13. After the
applicant's completion of all conditions of approval and compliance
with all requirements of § 195-13, the Borough Council may
endorse the record plan. The developer shall within 90 days of such
endorsement record the plan in the office of the Recorder of Deeds.
The Recorder of Deeds shall not accept any plan for recording
unless the plan contains the endorsement of the Borough Council
and official notification of review by the County Planning
Commission. Endorsement of the Borough Council shall consist of
the signatures of the President of the Council and the Borough
Secretary and the Borough Seal on the plan. The developer should
contact the County Recorder of Deeds Office to determine all
applicable requirements for recording. If the subdivider falls to
record the plan within such period, the approval action of the
Borough Council shall be null and void. If the approval action
becomes null and void, then a preliminary plan must be submitted,
unless Borough Council for cause shown allows a final plan to be
submitted.
(2) All final plan sheets which contain restrictive notes, lot boundaries,
easements, maintenance responsibilities, other lot owner
responsibilities and such other information relating to potential lot
owners shall be recorded.
§ 195-14 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-15
185:510
§ 195-15. Plans exempted from standard procedures.
A. Minor subdivision: sketch plan for record. In the case of any subdivision
in which all proposed lots will have frontage on and direct vehicular
access to an existing improved borough or state street, the parcel being
subdivided will be divided into a total of not more than three lots or
parcels after the effective date of this chapter, and the lots will be used
for only single-family detached dwellings, the developer may submit
only a sketch plan for record to the borough. The sketch plan shall
contain all information required by § 195-16 of this chapter and be
submitted and reviewed in accordance with § 195-10. The sketch plan
shall be submitted to the County Planning Commission for review. The
Borough Council may also require submission to and review by the
County Conservation District when recommended by the Borough
Engineer. Submission to and review by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation may be required if there is frontage on a state street.
Further subdivision from a tract subdivided under this section or
subdivision of a lot or tract created under this section will require a
review of plans in accordance with the standard procedures of this
chapter, and this shall be noted on the sketch plan for record.
B. Resubdivision: revised final plan.
(1) Any resubdivision of land, including changes to recorded plans,
shall be considered a subdivision and shall comply with all
requirements of this chapter; however, in those instances where
only lot lines shown on a recorded plan will be changed, all
resultant lots will conform to Chapter 225, Zoning, and this
chapter, easements will not be changed, street horizontal and
vertical alignment will not be changed, block sizes will not be
changed, utility sizes and locations will not be changed, open space
and recreation areas will not be changed and the number of lots
will not be increased, the Borough Council may at its discretion
permit the developer to submit only a revised final plan to the
borough for review.
(2) In addition to all items specified in § 195-18 of this chapter, the plan
shall graphically show the lot line changes being made. The revised
final plan shall be reviewed in accordance with § 195-12 and shall
be submitted to the County Planning Commission for review.
(3) If the revision of lot lines would result in the relocation of driveway
access points previously approved by PennDOT, the Borough
Council shall require submission of the revised final plan to
PennDOT for approval.
C. Auction sale. In the case of the proposed subdivision of land by process
of auction sale, the following procedure may be used by the developer:
(1) The developer shall prepare and submit a preliminary plan in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 195-15 SOLID WASTE § 195-15
185:511
(2) The preliminary plan shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter and in addition contain the following notation:
This property is intended to be sold by auction on or about
___________ 19 _____, in whole or in part according to this plan.
Sale of lots at such auction shall be in the form of agreement
to purchase, and no actual transfer of ownership or interest in
such lots shall occur until a final plan showing such subdivision
of property is approved by the Borough Council in accordance
with the Borough subdivision and land development ordinance and
recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds.
(3) After approval of the preliminary plan by the Borough Council, the
auction sale may proceed. After the auction sale, the developer
shall prepare and submit a final plan in accordance with this
chapter.
D. Lot annexations: sketch plan for record. Where the conveyance, sale or
transfer of land from one parcel to an adjacent parcel is proposed for
the sole purpose of increasing lot size, and not for the purpose of
creating a separate new lot or a land development, the developer may
submit only a sketch plan for record to the borough. The sketch plan
shall contain all information required by § 195-16 of this chapter and be
submitted and reviewed in accordance with § 195-10. Precise bearings
and distances from field survey shall be shown for the parcel being
transferred, and evidence shall be submitted that the parcel from which
a parcel is being transferred will not violate or further violate, as the
case may be, any requirement of Chapter 225, Zoning, or other borough
regulations. If development is subsequently proposed for the parcel
which has been increased in size, no building or zoning permit shall be
issued unless all applicable requirements of borough regulations are
complied with. The subdivision plan shall contain a notation that the
parcel being transferred is not to be considered a separate building lot.
E. Abbreviated subdivision: final plan. In the case of any subdivision in
which all proposed lots will have frontage on and direct vehicular
access to an existing improved borough or state street, the parcel being
subdivided will be divided into more than three but not more than six
lots or parcels, and the lots will be used for only single-family detached
dwellings, the Borough Council may at its discretion permit the
developer to submit only a final plan to the borough, rather than both
preliminary and final plans. The final plan shall contain all information
required by § 195-18 of this chapter and shall be submitted and
reviewed in accordance with § 195-12. The final plan shall be submitted
to the County Planning Commission for review. Submission to and
review from the County Conservation District shall be required when
recommended by the Borough Engineer. Submission to and review by
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation may be required if
there is frontage on a state street. Further subdivision from a tract
subdivided under this section or subdivision of a lot or tract created
§ 195-15 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-15
185:512
under this section will require a review of plans in accordance with the
standard procedures of this chapter, and this shall be noted on the final
plan.
F. Exempted land developments: final plan. In the case of a land
development consisting of a single nonresidential building or two
single-family detached dwellings on a lot or lots, the developer may
submit only a final plan to the borough. The final plan shall contain all
information required by § 195-18 of this chapter and shall be submitted
and reviewed in accordance with § 195-12. The final plan shall be
submitted to the County Planning Commission for review. Submission
to and review from the County Conservation District shall be required
when recommended by the Borough Engineer. Submission to and
review by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation may be
required if there is frontage on a state street.
G. Requirements pertaining to curb and sidewalk. The sketch plan for
record referred to in Subsection A above and the final plan referred to
in Subsections E and F above shall provide for the installation of curb
and sidewalk adjacent to all existing and proposed public streets within
the proposed subdivision in accordance with § 195-42D of this chapter.
§ 195-15 SOLID WASTE § 195-15
185:513

ARTICLE V
Plan Requirements
§ 195-16. Sketch plans.
A. The sketch plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of one inch
equals 20 feet or one inch equals 50 feet with all dimensions shown in
feet and hundredths of a foot, except that if the average size of the
proposed lots is two acres or larger, the plan may be drawn to a scale of
one inch equals 100 feet.
B. The sketch plan shall be made on sheets no smaller than eighteen by
twenty-four (18 x 24) inches and no larger than thirty-six by forty-eight
(36 x 48) inches.
C. If the sketch plan requires more than one sheet, a key diagram showing
the relative location of all the sheets shall be drawn on each sheet. In
addition, a match line shall be drawn on each sheet, and the developer
shall indicate along each match line what sheet is adjoined at that
match line.
D. The sketch plan shall contain at least the following data, legibly drawn
to scale:
(1) The name and address of the developer.
(2) The name and address of the record owner.
(3) The name of the subdivision or land development.
(4) The date of the plan.
(5) Plan status.
(6) Tract boundaries.
(7) A statement of the total acreage of the tract.
(8) North point.
(9) Source of title to the land as shown in the records of the County
Recorder of Deeds. A copy of the deed shall be submitted with the
plan.
(10) Graphic scale.
(11)Written scale.
(12) The name and address of the person or firm responsible for the
design of the subdivision or land development.
(13) The names of owners of adjoining properties and the names of
adjoining subdivisions.
§ 195-16 SOLID WASTE § 195-16
185:515
(14) A location map, drawn to scale, with sufficient information to
enable the Borough Planning Commission to locate the property
being subdivided or developed. This map shall also show all
existing streets within or adjacent to the tract, proposed streets
within the subdivision or land development and proposed streets
within adjacent recorded subdivisions or land developments.
(15) Significant topographical and physical features such as
watercourses, water bodies, quarries, railroad tracks, onehundred-
year floodplains, wetlands, tree masses, rock
outcroppings, existing buildings, existing on-site sewage disposal
and water supply systems, areas of carbonate geology, areas of
fifteen- to twenty-five-percent slope and over twenty-five-percent
slope and historic resources.
(16) Proposed streets and lot layout.
(17) When apartments and/or townhouses are proposed, the building,
street and access drive, recreation and parking layout shall be
shown.
(18) When commercial or industrial buildings are proposed, the
building, street and access drive, parking and loading layout shall
be shown.
(19) Approximate lot sizes.
(20) Proposed street cartway and right-of-way widths.
(21) A statement telling what methods of water supply and sewage
disposal will be used.
(22) A statement telling the use for each proposed lot, parcel and
building indicated on the plan.
(23) Mapping of soils types throughout the tract.
(24) Contour lines at intervals of no more than 10 feet taken from
U.S.G.S. maps, aerial survey or field survey, with source of datum.
(25) Existing easements and utilities on or adjacent to the tract.
(26) Zoning district lines within the property and zoning district
designations and area, yard and height requirements applicable to
the property.
(27) All areas of the one-hundred-year flood and the one-hundred-year
floodway (as the same are shown on the Official Zoning Map 150 of
the Borough of Kutztown) within the subdivision or land
development shall be clearly delineated, and base flood elevations
for the one-hundred-year flood shall be provided.
150. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included at the end of this volume.
§ 195-16 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-16
185:516
E. In the case of a sketch plan of record, the plan shall also include the
following:
(1) A signed and notarized certification of ownership and
acknowledgment of plan.
(2) Certificates for approval by the Borough Planning Commission and
Borough Council.
(3) The seal of the surveyor or engineer responsible for the plan.
(4) Precise bearings and distances for all parcels to be conveyed
(which shall be field surveyed).
(5) Building setback lines and all proposed structures.
(6) Existing street cartway and right-of-way lines and widths.
(7) An erosion and sediment control plan, which shall be reviewed by
the Berks County Conservation District and approved by the
Borough Council. The borough may permit at its discretion a
statement that individual lot purchasers will be responsible for the
preparation of erosion and sediment control plans prior to any
earthmoving activities.
(8) If the subdivision proposes a new driveway intersection with a state
route, a copy of the Highway Occupancy Permit for such
intersection. Any conditions listed in a permit shall be noted on the
plan. In lieu of a permit for a driveway intersection, the Borough
Council may permit the following note to be placed on the plan:
A Highway Occupancy Permit is required pursuant to Section 420
of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L 1242, No. 428), known as the "State
Highway Law," _ before a driveway access to a state highway is
permitted. Access to the state highway shall only be as authorized
by a Highway Occupancy Permit.
The approval of this subdivision/land development plan shall in no
way imply that a state highway permit can be acquired or that
the borough will support, encourage or not oppose the granting
of such a permit. It is possible that access to the property from a
state highway will not be permitted by the Commonwealth and the
property therefore cannot be used for the purpose intended by any
purchaser.
Purchasers are accordingly warned and should govern themselves
accordingly, acquiring state and local Highway Occupancy Permits
before purchasing any premises.
F. Where a sketch plan shows the proposed subdivision or land
development of only a portion of the developer's total property, the
sketch plan shall be accompanied by a drawing showing the entire
contiguous land holdings of the developer and indicating the area of
ultimate proposed subdivision or land development. (This drawing shall
§ 195-16 SOLID WASTE § 195-16
185:517
§ 195-17. Preliminary plans.
be shown on a separate sheet from the sketch plan.) The proposed
street system for the remainder of the property proposed for ultimate
subdivision or land development shall be shown so that the street
system in the submitted portion can be considered in relation to future
connections with the unsubmitted portion. In the case of extremely
large properties, the Borough Planning Commission may delimit the
area for which a prospective street system on adjacent property must
be shown. The developer shall also include a statement indicating
proposed future land use for the unsubmitted portion of his property.
A. The preliminary plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of one
inch equals 20 feet or one inch equals 50 feet with all dimensions shown
in feet and hundredths of a foot, except that if the average size of the
proposed lots is two acres or larger, the plan may be drawn to a scale of
one inch equals one (100) hundred feet.
B. The preliminary plan shall be made on sheets no smaller than eighteen
by twenty-four (18 x 24) inches and no larger than thirty-six by fortyeight
(36 x 48) inches.
C. If the preliminary plan requires more than one sheet, a key diagram
showing the relative location of all the sheets shall be drawn on each
sheet. In addition, a match line shall be drawn on each sheet, and the
developer shall indicate along each match line what sheet is adjoined at
that match line.
D. A plan index, listing the title of each sheet included in the submission,
shall be included on the plans intended for eventual recording.
E. The preliminary plan shall show:
(1) The name of the proposed subdivision or land development, which
shall be other than just the name of the subdivider or landowner.
(2) The name of the borough.
(3) Plan status.
(4) North point.
(5) Graphic scale.
(6) Written scale.
(7) The date of the plan, including the month, day and year that the
original drawing was completed and, in the case of revised
drawings the month, day and year that the original drawing was
revised, and a description of each revision.
(8) The name and address of the record owner.
(9) The name and address of the developer.
§ 195-16 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-17
185:518
(10) Source of title to the tract.
(11) A copy of the deed(s) for the tract.
(12) The name, address and seal of the engineer or surveyor responsible
for the plan.
(13) The names of any abutting subdivisions and land developments and
the book and page numbers where recorded.
(14) The names of the owners of any adjacent unplatted land and the
book and page numbers where recorded.
(15) A location map for the purpose of locating the property being
subdivided or developed, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 800
feet, showing the relation of the property, differentiated by tone or
pattern, to adjoining property and to all roads, municipal
boundaries, recorded subdivision and land development plans and
recorded but unconstructed streets within 1,000 feet of the
subdivision or land development. A scale, north point and the
proposed street system within the subdivision or land development
shall be shown.
(16) Total tract boundaries of the property being subdivided or
developed showing bearings and distances.
(a) The source of tract boundary data shall be given if not from
field survey.
(b) If the developer is going to retain a single parcel with an area
in excess of 10 acres and that parcel will not be improved
beyond its current level of improvement, that parcel may be
considered residue and may be identified by deed plotting. If
the retained parcel has an area of 10 acres or less, it shall be
considered a lot within the subdivision and described to the
accuracy requirements of this chapter.
(17) Total acreage of the tract.
(18) Zoning district lines within the subdivision or land development
and zoning district designations and area, yard and height
requirements applicable to the subdivision or land development.
(19) Contour lines at vertical intervals of not more than two feet for land
with average natural slope of 4% or less and at intervals of not
more than five feet for land with average natural slope exceeding
4%. Contour lines shall be from aerial or field survey.
(20) The location and elevation of the datum to which contour
elevations refer. Datum used shall be a known, established bench
mark. Sanitary sewer manholes shall not be used as a datum base.
§ 195-17 SOLID WASTE § 195-17
185:519
(21) All existing buildings, sanitary sewer lines, on-site sewage disposal
systems, water lines, wells, fire hydrants, utility lines, storm
drainage facilities, bridges, railroad tracks and other significant
man-made features within the proposed subdivision or land
development and within 50 feet of the boundaries of the proposed
subdivision or land development.
(22) All existing soils types boundaries.
(23) Soils characteristics for detention and retention pond areas.
(24) Natural drainage channels, watercourses and water bodies.
(25) Tree masses and isolated live trees over one foot in diameter.
(26) Quarries and rock outcroppings.
(27)Wetlands.
(28) One-hundred-year floodplains, including delineation of floodway
and flood fringe, established by study of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), with base flood elevations for the
one-hundred-year storm. For those watercourses for which studies
have not been performed by FEMA, calculated one-hundred-year
floodplains shall be established by the developer in accordance
with Appendix IV of this chapter. When a subdivision or land
development contains a floodplain, the elevation of roads, building
sites and public utilities in the vicinity of the floodplain shall be
given.
(29) All existing streets and streets recorded but not constructed on or
abutting the tract, including names, existing and ultimate right-ofway
widths and lines, cartway widths and lines and approximate
grades.
(30) All existing easements and the purposes for which they have been
established, deed restrictions and covenants.
(31) All proposed streets, their location, suggested name, right-of-way
and cartway widths and lines, center line radii of horizontal curves,
intended ownership, a statement of any conditions governing their
use and classification (i.e. collector). The designation of minor,
collector and arterial streets is subject to the approval of the
Borough Council.
(a) Streets to be dedicated shall be indicated. For streets which
will not be dedicated, the arrangements to be made for the
ownership and maintenance of those streets shall be given.
(b) In the event that the preliminary plan provides for any private
streets, a notation shall appear thereon acknowledging that
private streets can not thereafter be dedicated as public
streets unless curb and sidewalk has been constructed
§ 195-17 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-17
185:520
adjacent thereto. The preliminary plan shall also provide for
the installation of curb and sidewalk adjacent to all existing
and proposed public streets within the proposed subdivision or
land development except where such curb and sidewalk may
exist in good condition at the time the preliminary plan is filed.
(32) Location, width and purpose of all proposed easements.
(33) Building setback lines along each street, lot line and utility line and
all proposed structures.
(34) Lot lines, with approximate dimensions.
(35) Approximate lot areas.
(36) Lot numbers.
(37) A statement of the total number of lots and parcels.
(38) Intended use of lots.
(39) The location, size and material of all water mains, with connections
to existing facilities; fire hydrants; storage tanks; and water
sources.
(40) The location, size, material and grade of all sanitary sewers, with
connections to existing facilities; pumping stations; force mains;
and sewage treatment plants, with type and degree of treatment
proposed and size and capacity of treatment facilities. In the event
that pumping stations are proposed, information shall be submitted
as to the electrical requirements, including phase, voltage and
kilowatt (kw) demand.
(41) Horizontal and vertical location, size, material and grade of all
storm drainage facilities, with connections to existing facilities.
Cross sections shall be shown for all drainage swales. The borough
may require profiles to be shown for drainage swales.
(42) The location, size and proposed use of all parks, playgrounds,
recreation areas, public buildings and other public uses. Areas to
be dedicated to the borough shall be noted. Areas to be reserved
for public use but not to be dedicated shall be noted, any conditions
governing such areas shall be listed and the arrangements to be
made for the ownership, administration and maintenance of these
areas shall be given.
(43) Provisions for pedestrian and other nonvehicular circulation
throughout the tract.
(44) Typical street cross-section drawing(s) of each proposed street,
including construction details of streets, shoulders, curbs and
sidewalks, cross-slopes of streets, shoulders, sidewalks and
§ 195-17 SOLID WASTE § 195-17
185:521
planting strips and typical location, size and depth of any
underground utilities.
(45) Tentative profiles along the center line of each proposed street.
Such profiles shall show existing and finished grades at one of the
following sets of scales or any combination thereof. For streets
which have an existing elevation difference of five feet or more
across the width of the right-of-way, profiles of both existing rightof-
way grades shall also be shown. Station numbers; length and
P.V.I. data for all vertical curves; existing and proposed sanitary
sewer mains and manholes with invert elevation data; existing and
proposed storm sewers, inlets, manholes and culverts with invert
elevation data; and existing and proposed water mains where they
cross other utilities shall be indicated.
(a) One inch equals 10 feet horizontal and one inch equals one foot
vertical;
(b) One inch equals 20 feet horizontal and one inch equals two feet
vertical;
(c) One inch equals 40 feet horizontal and one inch equals four
feet vertical; or
(d) One inch equals 50 feet horizontal and one inch equals five feet
vertical.
(46) A plan for the surface drainage of the tract, including stormwater
runoff calculations and the proposed method of accommodating the
anticipated runoff. Stormwater calculations shall be provided and
drainage facilities designed in accordance with Article VI and
Appendix V of this chapter.
(47) Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts. Such designs shall
meet all applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources. Capacity/loading calculations shall be
submitted.
(48) The proposed location of all townhouses and parking facilities to
serve the townhouses.
(49) In the case of land development plans, the following additional
information shall be shown:
(a) The location and use of all buildings.
(b) The location and grade of all parking areas and access drives,
the size and number of parking spaces and the width of aisles
and access drives.
(c) The location, number and dimensions of off-street loading
areas.
§ 195-17 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-17
185:522
(d) Provisions for landscaping of the tract.
(e) Provisions for lighting of the tract.
(f) Provisions for traffic control.
(g) The location of refuse collection areas.
(h) A table showing extent of compliance with the area, yard and
height regulations of Chapter 225, Zoning.
(50) Location of school bus stop shelters or pads.
(51) Proposed restrictive covenants.
(52) Design speed of all proposed streets.
(53) Sight distance calculations for vertical curves in streets (see
§ 195-20G).
(54) Sight distance calculations at street intersections (see § 195-20I).
(55) Horizontal curve radii of cartway and right-of-way lines at street
intersections. The proposed cartway tie-in to existing street
cartways shall be indicated.
(56)On the subdivision or land development plan or a plan view
drawing of streets, station numbers corresponding to the street
profiles.
(57) Guide rail locations and construction detail.
(58) Clear sight triangles at street intersections.
(59) Proposed ownership and maintenance of storm drainage facilities.
(60) A typical treatment of the construction of driveways and the
handling of storm drainage where driveways will intersect streets.
The borough may require driveway culverts to be sized and such
size noted on the plan.
(61) The proposed location and type of traffic control devices.
(62) Areas of fifteen- to twenty-five-percent slope and areas of over
twenty-five-percent slope.
(63) Areas of carbonate geology.
(64) The disposition of solid waste generated within the subdivision or
land development.
(65) Drafts of proposed condominium declarations.
F. The following additional information shall be submitted with the
preliminary plan:
§ 195-17 SOLID WASTE § 195-17
185:523
(1) Where a preliminary plan shows the proposed subdivision or land
development of only a portion of the developer's total property, the
preliminary plan shall be accompanied by a drawing showing the
entire contiguous land holdings of the developer and indicating the
area of ultimate proposed subdivision or land development. (This
drawing shall be shown on a separate sheet from the preliminary
plan.) The proposed street system for the remainder of the property
proposed for ultimate subdivision or land development shall be
shown so that the street system in the submitted portion can be
considered in relation to future connections with the unsubmitted
portion. In the case of extremely large properties, the Borough
Planning Commission may delimit the area for which a prospective
street system on adjacent property must be shown. The developer
shall also include a statement indicating proposed future land use
for the unsubmitted portion of his property.
(2) A review from the Fire Chief regarding the location, number and
type of fire hydrants and the feasibility of access to, maneuvering
within and providing protection to the site of fire-fighting
equipment.
(3) In the case of a proposed revision of a FEMA-mapped floodplain, a
letter of approval of such revision from FEMA.
(4) A traffic study when required by § 195-36 of this chapter.
(5) Habitats of threatened and endangered species of special concern
in Pennsylvania within the tract, as established by the Pennsylvania
Biological Survey and/or Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory.
If such habitats exist on the tract, the measures proposed to protect
the habitats shall be indicated.
(6) All historic and archaeological resources which have been
identified and/or inventoried by the borough, the county the Berks
County Planning Commission, and/or the Pennsylvania Historical
and Museum Commission located within the tract or within 50 feet
of the tract.
(7) Where the subdivider proposes to locate a street, driveway or other
improvement within a portion of a utility right-of-way, or to relocate
an existing utility line, a letter from the appropriate utility company
giving permission to locate within the right-of-way or relocate the
existing line.
(8) A plan for the preservation of existing natural features on the site
(see § 195-27).
(9) In the case of subdivision or land development plans proposed to be
submitted in stages at final plan, a drawing delineating the
proposed stages and indicating the order of submittal and schedule
of submittal of the stages. Staging of sanitary sewer, water and
§ 195-17 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-17
185:524
§ 195-18. Final plans.
storm drainage facilities and the location of any temporary street
turnarounds shall also be indicated.
(10) Schematic architectural drawings of proposed townhouses,
apartment buildings and commercial and industrial buildings,
including building orientation.
(11) Proposed driveway locations and evidence that the standards for
driveways established in this chapter (§ 195-23E) can be met.
(12) A preliminary center line stakeout of proposed streets so that an
on-site street alignment evaluation may be conducted.
(13) The results of soils tests at proposed street locations which shall
indicate the suitability of the sites for street construction.
(14) Impact studies as required by § 195-36.
(15) Location of retaining walls, construction details and design
calculations.
(16) When required to submit an information form to the Pennsylvania
Historical and Museum Commission (PHMC), a copy of the
information form and the response of the PHMC. A copy of any site
survey investigation prepared shall also be submitted along with
the PHMC review of the survey report. Any plan the applicant
prepares to avoid the impact on the area or, if the site cannot be
avoided, mitigated impacts to the resource through data collection
or information recovery at the site shall be submitted. The PHMC's
comments and decision regarding the mitigation/avoidance plan
shall also be submitted.
(17) If there is evidence of dumping of waste on the site, a
preacquisition site assessment and detailed environmental
screenings and site investigations as required by the borough.
(18) In the case of nonresidential subdivisions and land developments,
proposed electrical requirements shall be indicated. This shall
include but not be limited to phase, voltage and kilowatt demand.
A. The final plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of one inch
equals 20 feet or one inch equals 50 feet with all dimensions shown in
feet and hundredths of a foot, except that if the average size of the
proposed lots is two acres or larger, the plan may be drawn to a scale of
one inch equals 100 feet
B. The final plan shall be made on sheets no smaller than eighteen by
twenty-four (18 x 24) inches and no larger than thirty-six by forty-eight
(36 x 48) inches.
§ 195-17 SOLID WASTE § 195-18
185:525
C. If the final plan requires more than one sheet, a key diagram showing
the relative location of all the sheets shall be drawn on each sheet. In
addition, a match line shall be drawn on each sheet, and the developer
shall indicate along each match line what sheet is adjoined at that
match line.
D. A plan index, listing the title of each sheet included in the submission,
shall be included on the plans intended for eventual recording.
E. The final plan shall show:
(1) The name of the proposed subdivision or land development, which
shall be other than just the name of the subdivider or landowner.
(2) The name of the borough.
(3) Plan status.
(4) North point.
(5) Graphic scale.
(6) Written scale.
(7) The date of plan, including the month, day and year that the
original drawing was completed and, in the case of revised
drawings, the month, day and year that the original drawing was
revised, and a description of each revision.
(8) The name and address of the record owner.
(9) The name and address of the developer.
(10) Source of title to the tract.
(11) A copy of the deed(s) for the tract.
(12) The name, address and seal of the engineer or surveyor responsible
for the plan.
(13) The names of any abutting subdivisions and land developments and
the book and page numbers where recorded.
(14) The names of any adjacent unplatted land and the book and page
numbers where recorded.
(15) A location map for the purpose of locating the property being
subdivided or developed, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 800
feet, showing the relation of the property, differentiated by tone or
pattern, to adjoining property and to all roads, municipal
boundaries, recorded subdivision and land development plans and
recorded but unconstructed streets within 1,000 feet of the
subdivision or land development. A scale, north point and the
proposed street system within the subdivision or land development
shall be shown.
§ 195-18 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-18
185:526
(16) The total tract boundary lines of the area being subdivided or
developed, based on field survey, with accurate distances to
hundredths of a foot and bearings to one-fourth (1/4) of a minute.
These boundaries shall be balanced and closed with an error or
closure not to exceed one foot in 10,000 feet; provided however,
that the boundary(ies) adjoining additional unplatted land of the
developer (for example, between separately-submitted final plan
sections) are not required to be based upon field survey and may be
calculated.
(a) The proposed location and elevation (if the elevation is
established) of all boundary line (perimeter) monuments shall
be indicated, along with a statement of the total area of the
property being subdivided or developed. The Borough Council
may require perimeter monuments to be set and elevation
established prior to approval of the final plan.
(b) The surveyor and/or engineer responsible for the plan shall
certify as to the accuracy of the survey and the drawn plan in
accordance with Appendix II. The certification shall not
predate the latest plan revision date. Plans and surveys shall
be prepared in accordance with the Professional Engineers
Registration Law. 151
(c) If the developer is going to retain a single parcel with an area
in excess of 10 acres and that parcel will not be improved
beyond its current level of improvement, that parcel may be
considered residue and may be identified by deed plotting. If
the retained parcel has an area of 10 acres or less, it shall be
considered a lot within the subdivision and described to the
accuracy requirements of this chapter.
(17) The total acreage of the tract.
(18) Zoning district lines within the subdivision or land development
and zoning district designations and area, yard and height
requirements applicable to the subdivision or land development.
(19) The location and elevation of the datum to which elevations refer.
Datum used shall be a known, established bench mark. Sanitary
sewer manholes shall not be used as a datum base.
(20) The following information if a preliminary plan was not submitted:
(a) Contour lines at vertical intervals of not more than two feet for
land with average natural slope of 4% or less and at intervals of
not more than five feet for land with average natural slope
exceeding 4%. Contour lines shall be from aerial or field
survey.
151. Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 148 et seq.
§ 195-18 SOLID WASTE § 195-18
185:527
(b) All existing buildings, sanitary sewer lines, on-site sewage
disposal systems, water lines, wells, fire hydrants, utility lines,
storm drainage facilities, bridges, railroad tracks and other
significant man-made features within the proposed subdivision
or land development and within 50 feet of the boundaries of
the proposed subdivision or land development.
(c) All existing soils types boundaries.
(d) Soils characteristics for detention and retention pond areas.
(e) Natural drainage channels, watercourses and water bodies.
(f) Tree masses and isolated live trees over one foot in diameter.
(g) Quarries and rock outcroppings.
(h) Areas of fifteen- to twenty-five-percent slope and areas of over
twenty-five-percent slope.
(i) Areas of carbonate geology.
(21)Wetlands.
(22) One-hundred-year floodplains, including delineation of floodway
and flood fringe, established by study of FEMA, with base flood
elevations for the one-hundred-year storm. For those watercourses
for which studies have not been performed by FEMA-calculated
one-hundred-year floodplains shall be established by the developer
in accordance with Appendix IV of this chapter.
(a) When a subdivision or land development contains a floodplain,
the proposed elevation of roads, building sites and public
utilities in the vicinity of the floodplain shall be given.
(b) All plans for mobile home parks to be located within areas of
the one-hundred-year flood as delineated on the Official Zoning
Map of the Borough of Kutztown 152 shall contain an evacuation
plan indicating alternate vehicular access and escape routes.
(23) All existing streets and streets recorded but not constructed on or
abutting the tract, including names, existing and ultimate right-ofway
widths and lines, and cartway widths and lines.
(24) All existing easements and the purposes for which they have been
established, deed restrictions and covenants.
(25) All proposed streets, their location, suggested name, right-of-way
and cartway widths and lines, center line radii of horizontal curves,
intended ownership and a statement of any conditions governing
their use. Streets to be dedicated shall be indicated. For streets
152. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included at the end of this volume.
§ 195-18 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-18
185:528
which will not be dedicated, the arrangements to be made for the
ownership and maintenance of those streets shall be given.
(26) For the cartway edges or curblines and right-of-way lines of all
recorded (except those which are to be vacated) and proposed
streets, and for the existing and ultimate right-of-way lines of all
existing streets within or abutting the property to be subdivided,
the length, in feet to the second decimal point, of all straight lines
and the length of arc, radius, delta angle (in degrees, minutes and
seconds) of all curved lines.
(27) Location, width and purpose of all proposed easements. Bearings
and distances shall be provided for easements when not parallel to
lot or street lines.
(28) Building setback lines along each street, lot line and utility line.
(29) All lot lines shall be shown and shall be completely dimensioned in
feet to the second decimal point, if straight, and if curved, with
central angle in degrees, minutes and seconds and length of arc
and radius. Lot line distances to street right-of-way lines shall be
given. Bearings to one-fourth (1/4) of a minute shall be shown for
all lot lines, and each lot shall be balanced to an accuracy of one
foot in 10,000 feet. As an alternative to bearings for each lot line,
angles at the intersection of all lot lines may be given.
(30) The area of each lot in square feet or acres, exclusive of street
rights-of-way.
(31) Lot numbers, numbered consecutively.
(32) A statement of the total number of lots and parcels.
(33) Intended use of lots.
(34) The location, size and material of all water mains, with connections
to existing facilities; fire hydrants; blowoffs; valves; storage tanks;
and water sources.
(35) The location, size, material, pipe length, invert elevation and grade
of all sanitary sewers, with connections to existing facilities;
location and construction details of all manholes; design of
pumping stations, force mains and sewage treatment plants, with
electrical requirements, type and degree of treatment proposed
and size and capacity of treatment facilities.
(36) The location, size, material, pipe length, invert elevation and grade
of all storm drainage facilities, with connections to existing
facilities; location, slope, velocity within, cross sections and profiles
when required by the borough for all drainage swales; the location
and construction details of all manholes, inlets, endwalls,
headwalls, culverts and junction boxes; the location and design of
all detention facilities and other drainage facilities; the size, depth,
§ 195-18 SOLID WASTE § 195-18
185:529
length and width of riprap aprons, with design calculations; the
location of roof drains and collectors.
(37) The location, size and proposed use and design of all parks,
playgrounds, recreation areas, public buildings and other public
uses. Areas to be dedicated to the borough shall be noted. Areas to
be reserved for public use but not be dedicated shall be noted, any
conditions governing such areas shall be listed and the
arrangements to be made for the ownership, administration and
maintenance of these areas shall be given.
(38) Provisions for pedestrian and other nonvehicular circulation
throughout the tract.
(39) Typical street cross-section drawing(s) of each proposed street,
including right-of-way and cartway widths, construction details of
streets, shoulders, curbs and sidewalks and cross-slopes of streets,
shoulders, sidewalks and planting strips. The typical location, size
and depth of any underground utilities shall be indicated.
(40) Profiles.
(a) Profiles along the center line of each proposed street, at one of
the following sets of scales or any combination thereof:
[1] One inch equals 10 feet horizontal and one inch equals one
foot vertical;
[2] One inch equals 20 feet horizontal and one inch equals two
feet vertical;
[3] One inch equals 40 feet horizontal and one inch equals
four feet vertical; or
[4] One inch equals 50 feet horizontal and one inch equals five
feet vertical.
(b) Such profiles shall show at least the following information,
properly labeled:
[1] Existing profile along both cartway edges or at the top of
curbs. For streets which have an existing elevation
difference of five feet or more across the right-of-way,
profiles of both existing right-of-way grades shall also be
shown.
[2] Proposed finished grade at the top of both curbs or along
both cartway edges.
[3] The length and P.V.I. data for all vertical curves.
[4] Existing and proposed sanitary sewer mains and
manholes, with top and invert elevation data.
§ 195-18 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-18
185:530
[5] Existing and proposed storm sewer mains, inlets,
manholes and culverts, with top and invert elevation data.
[6] Existing and proposed water mains where they cross other
utilities.
[7] Station numbers for all horizontal and vertical curves,
street intersections, sanitary and storm sewer manholes,
inlets, junction boxes, etc.
(41) A plan for the surface drainage of the tract, including stormwater
runoff calculations and the proposed method of accommodating the
anticipated runoff. Stormwater calculations shall be provided and
drainage facilities designed in accordance with Article VI and
Appendix V of this chapter.
(42) Designs of all bridges or culverts. Such designs shall meet all
applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources. Capacity/loading calculations shall be submitted.
(43) The location of all townhouses and parking facilities to serve the
townhouses.
(44) A certificate of ownership, acknowledgment of plan and offer of
dedication shall be lettered on the plan, using the form specified in
Appendix I, and shall be signed by the owner(s) of the property and
be notarized. The certification shall not predate the latest plan
revision date.
(45) A certificate for approval of the plan by the Borough Planning
Commission.
(46) A certificate for approval of the plan by the Borough Council.
(47) A blank space in which the appropriate stamp and notation of the
County Planning Commission may be applied.
(48) A blank space in order that the Recorder of Deeds may
acknowledge receipt and recording of the plan when it is
presented.
(49) In the case of land development plans, the following additional
information shall be shown:
(a) The location and use of all buildings.
(b) The location and grade of all common parking areas and access
drives, the size and number of parking spaces and the width of
aisles and access drives.
(c) The location, number and dimensions of off-street loading
areas.
§ 195-18 SOLID WASTE § 195-18
185:531
(d) Provisions for landscaping of the tract.
(e) Provisions for lighting of the tract.
(f) Provisions for traffic control.
(g) The location of solid waste collection areas and provisions to
be made for solid waste collection.
(h) A table showing the extent of compliance with the area, yard,
and height regulations of Chapter 225, Zoning.
(i) A grading plan for the tract showing existing and proposed
contour lines at the interval required by Subsection E(20)(a)
and lowest floor elevations for proposed buildings.
(50) The location of school bus stop shelters or pads.
(51) Restrictive covenants and deed restrictions applicable to the
development, whether proposed or previously existing.
(52) Design speed of all proposed streets.
(53) Sight distance calculations for vertical curves in streets (see
§ 195-20G).
(54) Sight distance calculations at street intersections (see § 195-20I).
(55) Horizontal curve radii of cartway and right-of-way lines at street
intersections. The cartway tie-in to existing street cartways shall be
indicated.
(56)On the subdivision plan or a plan view drawing of streets, station
numbers corresponding to the street profiles.
(57) Guide rail locations and construction detail.
(58) Clear sight triangles at street intersections.
(59) Proposed ownership and maintenance of storm drainage facilities.
(60) A typical treatment of the construction of driveways and the
handling of storm drainage where driveways will intersect streets.
The borough may require driveway culverts to be sized and such
size noted on the plan.
(61) The location and type of traffic control devices.
(62) Whenever a developer proposes to establish a street which is not
offered for dedication to public use, the Borough Council may
require the developer to submit, and also to record with the plan, a
copy of an agreement made with the borough on behalf of his heirs
and assigns, which shall establish the conditions, including the
provision of curb and sidewalk, under which the street may later be
offered for dedication.
§ 195-18 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-18
185:532
(63) If the subdivision or land development proposes a new street or
driveway intersection with a state route, a copy of the Highway
Occupancy Permit for such intersection; in lieu of a permit for a
driveway intersection, the Borough Council may permit the
following note to be placed on the plan:
A Highway Occupancy Permit is required pursuant to Section 420
of the Act of June 1,1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the "State
Highway Law," _ before a driveway access to a state highway is
permitted. Access to the state highway shall only be as authorized
by a Highway Occupancy Permit.
The approval of this subdivision/land development plan shall in no
way imply that a state highway permit can be acquired or that
the borough will support, encourage or not oppose the granting
of such a permit. It is possible that access to the property from
a state highway will not be permitted by the Commonwealth and
the property therefore cannot be used for the purpose intended
by any purchaser. Purchasers are accordingly warned and should
govern themselves accordingly, acquiring state and local Highway
Occupancy Permits before purchasing any premises.
Any conditions listed in a Permit shall be noted on the plan.
(64) A copy of all permits required from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources for affecting water courses, bodies of
water, water obstructions or earth disturbances.
(65) An erosion and sediment control plan for the tract, in accordance
with § 195-26.
(66) A landscape plan showing the number, location, size and species of
all trees and shrubs that will be planted within the subdivision or
land development. Utility easements shall be shown on this plan.
(67) A final grading plan showing existing and proposed contour lines at
the interval required by Subsection E(20)(a) shall be submitted.
Additional contours may be required by the borough to ensure
proper grading during construction. Lowest floor elevations for
proposed buildings shall be indicated.
(68) A lighting plan showing the location of poles, the type and height of
poles and the type and brightness of lighting fixtures. The fixture to
be placed at each location shall be noted. An illuminance grid
indicating footcandle levels throughout the site shall be submitted.
(69) All information required pursuant to § 195-20A(10)(a) of this
chapter.
(70) All information required pursuant to § 195-23B(3) of this chapter,
regarding access from adjoining municipalities.
§ 195-18 SOLID WASTE § 195-18
185:533
(71) When the tract contains wetlands, a copy of all required permits or
permit waivers from the PaDER and/or Army Corps of Engineers.
(72) Copies of approvals required by any other governmental regulatory
agencies concerning matters under their jurisdiction.
(73) A copy of any agreements incident to the construction, operation,
maintenance and/or dedication of facilities for public use.
(74) A note to be placed on the plan indicating any area that is to be
offered for dedication, if applicable, and that the conveyance of
land constituting all or part of such offered land shall not constitute
the revocation of the offer, and all conveyances shall be under and
subject to said offer.
(75) A review from the Fire Chief regarding the location, number and
type of fire hydrants and the feasibility of access to, maneuvering
within and providing protection to the site for fire-fighting
equipment.
(76) A plan for the preservation of existing natural features on the site
(see § 195-27).
(77) Proposed driveway locations and evidence that the standards for
driveways established in this chapter (§ 195-23E) can be met.
(78) The following additional information shall be submitted with the
final plan if a preliminary plan is not submitted:
(a) In the case of a proposed revision of a FEMA-mapped
floodplain, a letter of approval of such revision from FEMA.
(b) A traffic study when required by § 195-36 of this chapter.
(c) Habitats of threatened and endangered species of special
concern in Pennsylvania within the tract, as established by the
Pennsylvania Biological Survey and/or Pennsylvania Natural
Diversity Inventory.
(d) If such habitats exist on the tract, the measures proposed to
protect the habitats shall be indicated.
(e) All historic and archaeological resources which have been
identified and/or inventoried by the borough, the county, the
County Planning Commission and/or the Pennsylvania
Historical and Museum Commission located within the tract or
within 50 feet of the tract.
(f) Where the developer proposes to locate a street, driveway or
other improvement within a portion of a utility easement, or to
relocate an existing utility line, a letter from the appropriate
utility company giving permission to locate within the
easement or relocate the existing line.
§ 195-18 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-18
185:534
(g) Schematic architectural drawings of proposed townhouses,
apartment buildings and commercial and industrial buildings,
including building orientation.
(h) Impact studies as required by § 195-36.
(i) The disposition of solid waste generated within the proposed
subdivision or land development.
(j) The location of retaining walls, construction details and design
calculations.
(k) When required to submit an information form to the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission (PHMC), a
copy of the information form and the response of the PHMC. A
copy of any site survey investigation prepared shall also be
submitted along with the PHMC review of the survey report.
Any plan the applicant prepares to avoid the impact on the
area, or if the site cannot be avoided, mitigated impacts to the
resource through data collection or information recovery at the
site shall be submitted. The PHMC's comments and decision
regarding the mitigation/avoidance plan shall also be
submitted.
(l) If there is evidence of dumping of waste on the site, a
preacquisition site assessment and detailed environmental
screenings and site investigations as required by the borough.
(79) Final drafts of proposed condominium declarations.
(80) The location and type of utility lines.
§ 195-18 SOLID WASTE § 195-18
185:535

ARTICLE VI
Design Standards
§ 195-19. Application and general standards.
§ 195-20. Streets.
A. The standards and requirements contained in Articles VI and VII are
intended as the minimum for the promotion of the public health, safety
and general welfare and shall be applied as such by the Borough
Planning Commission and Borough Council in reviewing all subdivision
and land development plans.
B. Whenever other borough regulations impose more restrictive standards
and requirements than those contained herein, such other regulations
shall prevail; otherwise, the standards and requirements of this chapter
shall apply.
C. The layout or arrangement of the subdivision or land development shall
conform to the Comprehensive Plan, any regulations or maps adopted
in furtherance thereof and any other official plans of the borough which
have been adopted.
D. The plan of the proposed subdivision or land development shall be
coordinated with existing adjacent development in order to provide for
harmonious development of the area as a whole.
E. Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided or
developed. Lands subject to hazards to life, health or property such as
may result from fire, flood, disease or other causes shall either be made
safe for the purpose for which such land is proposed to be used, or such
land shall be set aside for uses which shall not endanger life or property
or further aggravate or increase the existing menace.
F. All subdivisions and land developments shall be reviewed to assure that
all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage, that all utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage and that adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
G. All subdivisions and land developments shall comply with the Borough
Electric Ordinance, Ordinance No. 7 of 1977, as from time to time
amended and supplemented.153
A. General Standards.
(1) All design elements of all streets, including horizontal and vertical
alignment, sight distance and superelevation, are subject to review
and approval by the Borough Council. When reviewing the design
153. Editor's Note: See Ch. 107, Electrical Standards.
§ 195-19 SOLID WASTE § 195-20
185:537
of streets, in addition to the standards in this chapter, the Rural
Design Criteria in the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Design Manual Part 2, Highway Design, January 1990 edition, and
A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, AASHTO,
1984 edition, as from time to time amended and supplemented,
shall be consulted to assure that the road design is in accordance
with acceptable engineering practice.
(2) For certain aspects of vertical and horizontal alignment discussed
below, standards are determined by design speed of the street
involved. For all proposed streets, the developer shall indicate the
proposed design speed. The designated design speed is subject to
the approval of the Borough Council. In general, the design speed
on Arterial streets shall be considered as 55 miles per hour (mph)
(to be determined in each individual case), on collector streets a
minimum of 35 mph (to be determined in each individual case) and
on minor streets 35 mph unless a lesser design speed is permitted
by the Borough Council.
(3) The speed limit proposed to be posted for streets shall not exceed
the design speed.
(4) Streets in and bordering a subdivision or land development shall be
coordinated and be of such widths and grades and in such locations
as deemed necessary to accommodate prospective traffic and
facilitate fire protection.
(5) The location and width of all proposed streets shall conform to the
official plans which have been adopted by the borough and shall be
properly related to all existing streets, recorded streets and official
plans which have been adopted or approved by the borough, county
or state.
(6) Streets within the subdivision or land development and adjacent
roads which will receive traffic from and distribute traffic to the
subdivision or land development shall be adequate in construction,
grade, width and capacity to accommodate traffic generated by the
subdivision or land development.
(7) The proposed street system shall extend existing or recorded
streets at the same width as the existing or recorded streets if
these streets meet or exceed the standards of § 195-20C(1). If the
existing or recorded streets do not meet or exceed the standards of
§ 195-20C(1), the proposed street extensions shall meet the
standards of § 195-20C(1).
(8) Where, in the opinion of the Borough Council, it is desirable to
provide for street access to adjoining property, streets shall be
extended by dedication to the boundary of such property. The
location and number of access points to adjoining properties are
subject to Borough Council approval.
§ 195-20 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-20
185:538
(9) When streets will be extended to the boundaries of the subdivision
or land development to provide for access to potentially
developable tracts and sanitary sewer and/or water lines will be
constructed in the streets within the developer's tract, the Borough
Council may require extension of the sanitary sewer and/or water
lines to the tract boundary in order to facilitate future extensions to
abutting land.
(10) If a subdivision proposes lots, all of which front on existing public
streets, the Borough Council may require the developer to reserve
land adequate to provide for future street access from the public
streets on which the lots front to the land to the rear of the
proposed lots. Such reserved areas shall be of such dimensions to
permit the construction of streets meeting the standards of this
chapter.
(a) When reservations for future streets will adjoin lots to be
developed prior to the construction of the streets, the
developer shall establish the proposed grades of the future
streets and the extent of the area necessary for the
construction of those streets. If the area necessary for the
construction of the streets extends beyond the proposed street
right-of-way lines, all excavation and grading necessary for the
streets beyond the right-of-way lines shall be done as required
improvements in conjunction with the subdivision which
contains the adjoining lots, or else construction easements
shall be provided on the adjoining lots, sufficient to permit
construction of the future street.
(b) Where reservations for future streets intersect existing streets,
radii shall be provided for the reservations such that the
requirements of § 195-20H(6) and (7) of this chapter could be
met for a street to be constructed in the future.
(11) If lots or parcels in the subdivision are large enough for
resubdivision, or if a portion of the developer's property is not
proposed to be subdivided but could be subdivided in the future,
the Borough Council may require the reservation of land adequate
to provide for future street access to land which could be
resubdivided or subdivided in the future and require that the
location of land reserved for future streets be coordinated with the
street system shown on the subdivision plan.
(12) Connections shall be provided between streets within the
subdivision or land development to provide adequate access for
emergency vehicles, other vehicles and pedestrians.
(13)New minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through
traffic, but the developer shall provide for the extension and
continuation of arterial and collector streets into and from
adjoining properties when required by the Borough Council. Minor
§ 195-20 SOLID WASTE § 195-20
185:539
streets shall be extended and continued into and from adjoining
properties when necessary for the proper development of and
traffic circulation in the borough.
(14) Where a subdivision or land development abuts an existing street
which does not meet the standards of this chapter, the Borough
Council may require the dedication of land sufficient to widen the
street to meet the standards of this chapter.
(15) Where a subdivision or land development fronts on and will provide
for vehicular access to and from an existing borough street which
does not meet the minimum cartway width requirements of this
chapter, the Borough Council may require the developer to improve
at his expense the borough street cartway to meet those
requirements. Pavement shall be constructed in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter. In addition, provision shall be
made for adequate drainage along the sides of the streets. Such
drainage provisions shall be approved by the Borough Council.
(16) Private streets (streets not to be offered for dedication) shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter and other borough regulations, including Ordinance
No. 4-1974, 154 as from time to time amended and supplemented,
except as follows:
(a) Private streets need not conform in width to the requirements
of § 195-20C(1) of this chapter; provided, however, that private
streets shall have a cartway of not less than 24 feet unless a
greater width is required by Chapter 225, Zoning; and
provided further that no parking shall be permitted on any
private street that does not contain the width requirements of
§ 195-20C(1) of this chapter.
(b) Private streets shall only be permitted in those subdivisions or
land developments intended to remain under single ownership.
(17) Where streets and other public improvements continue into
adjoining municipalities, evidence of compatibility of design,
particularly with regard to street widths, shall be submitted. The
applicant shall coordinate such design with both municipalities to
avoid abrupt changes in cartway width or in improvements
provided.
(18) The street system shall be designed with regard to:
(a) Consideration of existing topographical considerations.
(b) Providing buildable lots, or in the case of a mobile home park,
lots on which a mobile home can be placed in accordance with
all applicable requirements of Chapter 225, Zoning.
154. Editor's Note: See Ch. 192, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. II.
§ 195-20 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-20
185:540
(c) Minimizing the number of street intersections, through
encouraging the use of three-way rather than four-way
intersections when intersections of minor streets are involved.
(d) Avoiding excessive lineal footage of street.
(19) All drives within multiple-family and nonresidential developments
which are intended for circulation within the development shall be
designed to the horizontal and vertical alignment standards for
streets contained within this chapter.
B. Partial and half streets. New half or partial streets will not be
permitted, but wherever a tract to be subdivided borders an existing
recorded half or partial street, the Borough Council may require the
developer to provide adjacent to such half or partial street a reservation
of land adequate to allow the construction of a street meeting the
standards of this chapter.
C. Street widths.
(1) Minimum street right-of-way and cartway (pavement) widths shall
be as follows:
Street Type
Required Widths
(in feet)
Minor streets and permanent
culs-de-sac
Right-of-way 56
Cartway 36
Collector street
Right-of-way 60
Cartway 40
Arterial street
Right-of-way
Cartway
As specified in the official plans
or as determined after
consultation with the borough
and PennDOT
Marginal access street
Right-of-way As determined after consultation
with the borough and PennDOT,
but not less than 33
Cartway 24
Service street
Right-of-way 24
Cartway 24
§ 195-20 SOLID WASTE § 195-20
185:541
(2) Additional right-of-way widths may be required by the Borough
Council for the purpose of promoting the public safety and
convenience and for providing for proposed traffic volumes.
(3) The designation of streets as "minor," "collector" and "arterial" is
subject to Borough Council approval. The Borough Council may
prohibit parking along collector streets.
D. Restriction of access.
(1) Whenever a subdivision or land development abuts or contains an
existing or proposed arterial or collector street, the Borough
Council may require restriction of access to the street by:
(a) Provision of reverse frontage lots;
(b) Provision of service streets along the rear of the abutting lots,
together with prohibition of private driveways intersecting the
arterial or collector street;
(c) Provision of marginal access streets, provided that the reserve
strips establishing such marginal access streets shall be placed
within the jurisdiction of the borough under an agreement
meeting the approval of the borough; or
(d) Provision of a system of minor streets which intersect the
arterial or collector street and on which lots would front.
(2) Except as specified by Subsection D(1)(c), reserve strips shall be
prohibited.
E. Street grades.
(1) There shall be a minimum center line grade of seventy-five
hundredths percent (.75%).
(2) Center line grades shall not exceed the following:
(a) Minor street or service street: 10%.
(b) Collector street: 6%.
(c) Arterial street: 6%.
(d) Street intersection: 5%.
(3) Grades up to 12% may be permitted by the Borough Council on
minor streets, except culs-de-sac, if the Council at its discretion
deems that unsafe conditions will not result from the increase in
grade.
F. Horizontal curves.
(1) Whenever street lines are deflected in excess of five degrees,
connection shall be made by horizontal curves.
§ 195-20 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-20
185:542
(2) Minimum center line radii for horizontal curves shall be as follows:
Design Speed
(miles per hour)
Minimum Center Line Radius
(feet)
20 100
25 150
30 230
35 310
40 430
45 550
50 700
55 850
(3) A straight section of road of at least 100 feet shall be provided
between all horizontal curves on collector streets. A straight
section of road of at least 200 feet shall be provided between all
horizontal curves on arterial streets.
(4) Combinations of the minimum radius and maximum grade are
prohibited.
G. Vertical curves. At all changes in street grades where the algebraic
difference in grade exceeds 1%, vertical curves shall be provided. The
minimum sight distance provided shall be as follows for both crest and
sag vertical curves.
Design Speed
(miles per hour)
Minimum Sight Distance
(feet)
20 125
25 150
30 200
35 250
40 325
45 400
50 475
55 550
H. Intersections.
(1) Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no
street shall intersect another at an angle of less than 75 degrees
(measured at the intersection of the street center lines) nor more
than 105 degrees. The angle of intersection with an arterial street
shall be 90 degrees.
§ 195-20 SOLID WASTE § 195-20
185:543
(2) No more than two streets geometrically shall intersect at the same
point.
(3) Streets intersecting another street shall either intersect directly
opposite to each other or be separated by at least 150 feet between
center lines, measured along the center line of the street being
intersected.
(4) Intersections shall be approached on all sides by a straight area at
least 50 feet in length, the grade of which shall not exceed 5%
within 50 feet of the intersection of the nearest right-of-way lines.
(5) Intersections with arterial streets shall be located not less than 500
feet apart, measured from center line to center line along the
center line of the arterial streets.
(6) Street curb intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with
a minimum radius of:
(a) Twenty feet for all intersections involving only minor streets or
service streets;
(b) Thirty feet for all intersections involving a collector street;
(c) Forty feet for all intersections involving an arterial street.
(7) Street right-of-way lines shall be parallel to (concentric with) curb
arcs at intersections.
I. Sight distances at intersections.
(1) Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all street intersections,
shall be reserved as such and shall be drawn on the plan. Within
such triangles, no vision-obstructing object shall be permitted
which obscures vision above the height of 30 inches and below the
height of 10 feet, measured from the center line grade of
intersecting streets. Such triangles shall be established, at a
minimum, from a distance of:
(a) Seventy-five feet from the point of intersection of the center
lines, except that
(b) Clear sight triangles of 100 feet shall be provided for all
intersections involving collector streets, and
(c) Clear sight triangles of 150 feet shall be provided for all
intersections involving arterial streets.
(2) Whenever a portion of the line of such clear sight triangles occurs
behind the required building setback line, such portion shall be
considered a building setback line.
§ 195-20 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-20
185:544
(3) Sight distance at street intersections shall be such to provide the
following minimum stopping distance for a vehicle traveling on an
approaching street which has no stop or signal control:
Design Speed of
Approaching
Street With No
Stop or Signal
Control
(miles per hour)
Minimum Stopping
Distance (feet)
Required Unless
Alternative
Permitted by
Borough Council
Alternative
Stopping Distance
(feet) Permissible
at Discretion of
Borough Council
Only on Lightly
Traveled Highways
Where the Removal
of Sight
Obstructions Would
Be Costly
20 125 90
25 150 110
30 200 130
35 250 155
40 325 180
45 400 200
50 475 220
55 550 240
(4) Street intersections shall be located and designed to provide the
following minimum sight distance for a vehicle traveling on an
approaching street which has a stop control:
Design Speed of Street
Being Approached by
Vehicle on Stop Control
Street
(miles per hour)
Minimum Sight Distance
Required
(feet)
20 200
25 250
30 300
35 350
40 400
45 450
50 500
55 550
(5) For calculating sight distance, refer to A Policy on Geometric
Design of Highways and Streets, AASHTO, 1984 edition.
§ 195-20 SOLID WASTE § 195-20
185:545
J. Cul-de-sac streets.
(1) Dead-end streets are prohibited unless designed as cul-de-sac
streets, provided that in the case of streets which are planned for
future extension into adjoining tracts and will not be the primary
means of access to any lot or dwelling unit, a turnaround is not
required.
(2) Except as provided in Subsection J(1), any street dead-ended for
access to an adjoining property or because of authorized stage
development shall be provided with a turnaround within the
subdivision or land development, and the use of such turnaround
shall be guaranteed to the public until such time as the street is
extended.
(a) If a cul-de-sac turnaround is offset, it shall not be offset to the
right.
(b) Should a temporary cul-de-sac be proposed, arrangements
satisfactory to the Borough Council and Borough Solicitor shall
be made for construction and installation responsibilities of all
improvements when the temporary cul-de-sac is abandoned
and the street is extended.
(c) In the event that the Borough Council shall not consider
development of adjoining property to be imminent, the Council
may require that a permanent curbed cul-de-sac be
constructed.
(3) Cul-de-sac streets shall be at least 250 feet from the right-of-way of
the street intersected to the end of the turnaround. Cul-de-sac
streets shall not exceed 500 feet in length as defined in this chapter
and shall not furnish access to more than 20 dwelling units. The
Borough Council may permit temporary culs-de-sac longer than
500 feet at its discretion if future extension of the cul-de-sac is
likely In the opinion of the Council. At its discretion, the Council
may permit culs-de-sac to serve more than 20 dwelling units when
it believes adequate provision will be made for vehicular circulation
and parking.
(4) Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the
turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to the tract
boundary with sufficient additional right-of-way width provided
along the boundary line to permit extension of the street at full
width.
(5) All cul-de-sac streets, whether permanently or temporarily
designed as such, shall be provided at the closed end with a fully
paved turnaround. Minimum radius to the pavement edge or
curbline shall be 50 feet, and minimum radius to the right-of-way
line shall be 60 feet.
§ 195-20 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-20
185:546
§ 195-21. Guide rail.
(6) Drainage of cul-de-sac streets shall preferably be toward the open
end. If drainage is toward the closed end, water shall be conducted
away in an underground storm sewer or by other means approved
by the Borough Council.
(7) The center line grade on a cul-de-sac street shall not exceed 10%,
and the grade and cross-slope of the turnaround shall not exceed
5%.
K. Street names.
(1) Proposed streets which are in alignment with others already
existing and named shall bear the names of the existing streets.
(2) In no case shall the name of a proposed street duplicate an existing
street name in the borough, irrespective of the use of the suffix
street, road, avenue, boulevard, drive, way, place, court, lane, etc.
(3) All street names shall be subject to the approval of the Borough
Council.
L. Service street (alleys).
(1) Service streets are prohibited in residential subdivisions except
where required by the Borough Council to avoid direct driveway
access to arterial or collector streets.
(2) Service streets may be permitted by the Borough Council in other
types of development, provided that the developer produces
evidence satisfactory to the Council of the need for such service
streets and provided that the service streets are not the primary
means of access.
(3) Dead-end service streets are prohibited unless permitted at the
discretion of the Borough Council. Dead-end service streets shall
be terminated with a paved circular turnaround with a minimum
radius to the outer pavement edge (curbline) of 50 feet.
(4) Parking is prohibited along service streets.
A. Streets shall be designed to preclude or minimize the need for guide
rail. The Borough Council may require guide rail to be placed for
protection on embankments when a barrier is required in Design
Manual Part 2, Highway Design, by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, January 1990 edition.
B. Fixed obstructions along streets which would require guide rail shall be
precluded or minimized. The Borough Council may require guide rail to
be placed when a barrier is required for fixed objects in Design Manual
Part 2, Highway Design, by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, January 1990 edition.
§ 195-20 SOLID WASTE § 195-21
185:547
§ 195-22. Blocks.
§ 195-23. Lots and parcels.
C. The design and selection of guide rail shall be in accordance with the
standards in Design Manual Part 2, Highway Design, January 1990
edition; however, the Borough Council shall approve all guide rail
systems.
A. Layout. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with
due regard to the provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type
proposed, zoning requirements, topography and requirements for safe
and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including the
reduction of intersections with arterial and collector streets.
B. Length.
(1) Blocks shall have a maximum length of 1,600 feet and a minimum
length of 500 feet. The Borough Council may decrease the
permitted maximum and/or minimum lengths of blocks if the
topography of land, proposed lot sizes or surface water drainage
conditions warrant such a decrease.
(2) Blocks along arterial streets shall not be less than 1,000 feet.
C. Depth. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate
two tiers of lots, except where reverse frontage lots are required or
where prevented by the size, topographical conditions or other inherent
conditions of the property.
D. Nonresidential blocks. Blocks in nonresidential areas may vary from the
elements of design detailed above if required by the nature of the use.
In all cases, however, adequate provisions shall be made for off-street
parking and loading areas and pedestrian and vehicular circulation.
E. Crosswalks. Crosswalks may be required by the Borough Council
whenever necessary to facilitate pedestrian circulation and to give
access to community facilities. Such crosswalks shall have a minimum
width of 10 feet and contain a walkway, constructed of a material
approved by the Borough Council, with a minimum width of four feet.
A. General standards.
(1) The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the
type of development and use contemplated and be in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 225, Zoning. Lots shall be capable of
being built upon, or in the case of a mobile home park, on which a
mobile home can be placed, in accordance with all applicable
requirements of Chapter 225, Zoning.
§ 195-21 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-23
185:548
(2) Side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines and
radial to curved street lines. Lot lines shall follow municipal
boundaries rather than cross them.
(3) The depth of lots for single-family detached dwellings shall not be
less than one nor more than three times their width at the street
line.
(4) Depth and width of parcels intended for nonresidential uses shall
be adequate for the use proposed and sufficient to provide
satisfactory space for on-site parking, loading and unloading,
setbacks, buffer yards and landscaping, etc.
(5) Subdivisions shall be designed to avoid the creation of remnants of
land. If remnants of land would result after subdividing, adequate
provision, which shall be approved by the borough, shall be made
for the disposition and maintenance of those remnants.
(6) Flag lots are prohibited, unless permission is granted by the
Borough Council upon recommendation of the Borough Planning
Commission. The Council may grant permission to utilize flag lots
when it deems flag lots appropriate because of topographical or
other conditions unique to the site. The access strip portions of a
flag lot must be wide enough to permit the construction of a street
with a right-of-way meeting the requirements of this chapter and
shall not be used for building purposes. In granting permission to
use flag lots, the Borough Council shall find:
(a) That the use of flag lots will not result in conditions which will
cause increased interruptions to traffic flow, accident hazards
and sedimentation and runoff problems onto public streets.
(b) That the use of an internal street system or marginal access
streets on which lots would front will not be more appropriate
for development of the tract than the use of flag lots.
(c) That the use of flag lots is necessary to permit utilization of a
tract of ground otherwise not feasible to utilize under the
applicable standards for lots found in this chapter.
(d) No more than one flag lot shall be created from the original
tract of land for each 10 lots created from the original tract of
land which meet the requirements of this chapter for lot
configuration.
(e) Should a flag lot be divided into two or more lots, the access
strip shall be constructed into a street complying with the
specifications of this chapter.
(f) All structures shall be located on the flag lot so as to provide
the required setback should the access strip be used for
construction of a street.
§ 195-23 SOLID WASTE § 195-23
185:549
(7) Where an ultimate right-of-way line has been provided, all setbacks
and lot areas shall be measured from such ultimate right-of-way
line.
(8) Wherever feasible, lots shall be designed so that buildings can be
constructed above street grade. Where this is not possible, the
developer shall indicate what measures are to be taken to assure
proper drainage away from the buildings.
(9) When only a portion of a tract is designed at a time and there exists
the potential for development of the remainder of the tract, lots
shall be designed such that they do not restrict access to the
remainder of the tract, do not unduly restrict the potential
development of the remainder of the tract, nor result in the
creation of awkward of difficult-to-develop parcels in the remainder
of the tract.
(10) The maximum slope utilized when grading lots or streets along an
adjoining tract of land not owned by the developer shall be a three
to one (3:1) slope ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.
B. Lot frontage and access.
(1) All lots shall abut and have direct driveway access to an existing or
proposed public street or private street meeting the requirements
of this chapter.
(2) Reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where required by
the Borough Council to restrict access to existing streets or to
overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation. All
residential reverse frontage lots shall contain a landscape screen,
fence, earth mounding or similar screening device and barrier to
vehicular access subject to Borough Council approval within the
rear yard.
(3) Where access to land within a subdivision or land development will
be solely by proposed roads within an adjoining municipality, the
Borough Council may require assurance from the adjoining
municipality that adequate provisions have been made to ensure
construction of the proposed access roads.
(4) When the rear wall of a building will face a public street, the
Borough Council may require a landscape screen, fence, earth
mounding or similar screening device subject to Borough Council
approval between the building and the public street.
(5) After consideration of street speeds, traffic volumes, projected
traffic generated at a proposed land use and the location and
arrangement of existing and proposed driveways and intersections,
the Borough Council may require the developer to install at his
expense an acceleration or deceleration lane, or both, to serve a
proposed driveway or street. If additional street right-of-way is
§ 195-23 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-23
185:550
required to construct the acceleration or deceleration lane, the
additional right-of-way shall be provided by the developer. When
required by the Borough Council, the developer shall furnish a
study to the borough which will provide the information necessary
to permit the determination as to whether an acceleration or
deceleration lane is required.
C. Lot size. The minimum lot size and width requirements set forth in
Chapter 225, Zoning, shall be met.
D. Off-street parking.
(1) Each proposed dwelling unit in a subdivision or land development
shall meet the off-street parking requirements of Chapter 225,
Zoning.
(a) In the case of single-family or two-family dwellings and
townhouses with on-lot parking, such off-street parking spaces
shall be provided behind the street right-of-way line and may
be provided in an attached or separate garage, carport or
driveway. The spaces shall not be located within any clear sight
triangle required by this chapter.
(b) In the case of multiple-family dwellings, such off-street parking
spaces shall be provided in common parking areas located
adjacent to, within or near the multiple-family dwellings.
Spaces shall not be located within a street right-of-way nor
within any clear sight triangle required by this chapter. The
size of parking spaces and the width of aisles shall be in
accordance with Chapter 225, Zoning. The grade of areas used
for parking shall not exceed 6%. The grade of areas used only
for access shall not exceed 10%.
(2) Nonresidential development shall meet the off-street parking
requirements of Chapter 225, Zoning.
E. Driveways.
(1) Subdivisions and land developments shall be provided with internal
streets to which the lots will have driveway access in order to
minimize the number of driveway intersections with existing public
streets. This reduction in driveway intersections will lessen
interruptions to traffic flow and accident hazards and minimize
sedimentation and runoff problems onto existing public streets.
The Borough Council may require the use of common driveways for
abutting lots.
(2) All driveways which provide access to arterial and collector streets,
if such driveways are permitted by the Borough Council, shall be
designed with turnaround areas so that cars will not back onto the
arterial and collector streets.
§ 195-23 SOLID WASTE § 195-23
185:551
(3) Provision shall be made at all intersections of driveways with
streets to ensure adequate stormwater drainage and erosion and
sediment control. The Borough Council may require subdivision
and land development plans to show a typical treatment of the
construction of driveways and handling of storm drainage where
the driveways intersect a street. The Council may require as a
condition to approval of a plan that prior to the issuance of zoning
or building permits the specific proposals for the construction of a
driveway and treatment of storm drainage and erosion and
sediment control for that driveway be submitted to the borough for
approval.
(4) Driveways shall be placed at locations at which sight distance is
adequate to safely allow each permitted movement to be made into
or out of the driveways; such that the free movement of normal
street traffic is not impaired; such that the driveways will not
create a hazard; and such that the driveways will not create an area
of undue traffic congestion on streets. Applicable safe sight
distance as established in the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation shall be provided.
(a) The Borough Council may require the driveway to a lot which
abuts two or more streets to be restricted to that street which
can more safely accommodate its traffic. The Borough Council
may also require a driveway to be located directly across from
a street or driveway on the opposite side of the street the
driveway intersects if the Council judges that offset driveways
will create a safety hazard.
(b) The Borough Council may require the permissible location of a
driveway for a lot to be shown on the subdivision or land
development plan, and further require that driveway locations
be subject to approval of the Council.
(c) At driveway intersections with streets, an isosceles triangle
shall be established for a distance of 20 feet at each side of the
point of intersection of the cartway lines. Within such clear
sight triangles, no vision-obstructing object shall be permitted
which obscures vision above the height of 30 inches and below
the height of 10 feet, measured from the center line grades of
the intersecting driveway and street.
(5) Entrances to private driveways serving multiple-family dwellings
shall be rounded at a minimum radius of 10 feet. The maximum
radius shall be 30 feet.
(a) Entrances to private driveways serving one- and two-family
dwellings shall be rounded at a maximum radius of four feet
eight inches; however, depressed curb may be used as
provided for in borough regulations, including Ordinance No.
§ 195-23 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-23
185:552
14-1972, as amended by Ordinance No. 13-1974, and all
subsequent amendments thereto.155
(b) For nonresidential driveways, the width, excluding radii, of
driveways shall conform to the following:
Width in Feet
Minimum Maximum
One-way 12 24
Two-way 24 36
(c) Each lane provided shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width.
(d) The radius of the edge of the driveway apron shall be at least
15 feet and no more than 35 feet; however, depressed curb may
be used as provided for in borough regulations, including
Ordinance No. 14-1972, as amended by Ordinance No.
13-1974, and all subsequent amendments thereto.156
(6) The angle of a driveway as it intersects a street shall be such that a
vehicle entering the driveway may do so in an orderly and safe
manner with a minimum of interference to through street traffic
and such that a vehicle leaving the driveway may enter safely into
the lane of traffic moving in the desired direction. Driveways shall
intersect streets as nearly as possible at right angles, and in no
case at an angle of less than 75 degrees or more than 105 degrees;
provided, however, that the Borough Council may permit the use of
one-way driveways on a property, and such one-way driveways may
intersect streets at an angle of not less than 45°.
(7) Private driveways shall have such grades as to furnish safe and
convenient parking spaces and to provide a safe and convenient
means of access. The grades and construction materials of
driveways shall be such that the materials of the driveway will not
wash onto public streets. The maximum permissible grade shall be
7% on all driveways, except that driveway grades shall not exceed
5% within 20 feet of street cartway lines. The area between the
right-of-way line of the street and the cartway shall be paved. The
Borough Council may require the developer to submit with his
subdivision or land development plans evidence that the above, and
the other standards for driveways established in this section, can
be met for each lot where doubt exists as to the feasibility of
meeting the standards.
(8) The center line of entrances to private driveways serving one- and
two-family dwellings shall be located at least 40 feet from the point
155. Editor's Note: These ordinances were superseded by Ord. No. 3-1992; see Ch. 192, Streets
and Sidewalks, Art. IV.
156. Editor's Note: These ordinances were superseded by Ord. No. 3-1992; see Ch. 192, Streets
and Sidewalks, Art. IV.
§ 195-23 SOLID WASTE § 195-23
185:553
§ 195-24. Sanitary sewage disposal.
§ 195-25. Water supply.
of intersection of the nearest street cartway lines if only minor
streets are involved, at least 80 feet if a collector street is involved
and at least 120 feet if an arterial street is involved. The center line
of entrances to private driveways serving multiple-family dwellings
or nonresidential buildings shall be located at least 60 feet from
the point of intersection of the nearest street cartway lines if only
minor streets are involved, at least 120 feet if a collector street is
involved and at least 160 feet if an arterial street is involved.
(9) The standards for driveway widths shall be as established in this
chapter unless a more restrictive standard is established by other
borough regulations, in which case the more restrictive standard
shall apply.
A. Each property shall connect to a public sanitary sewer system.
B. All sanitary sewer facilities shall conform in all respects to the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources and the borough.
C. Whenever approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources is required for the sanitary sewer system for a proposed
subdivision or land development, the developer shall submit a copy of
such approval to the borough prior to approval of the final plan.
D. New and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
A. New subdivisions and land developments shall incorporate adequate
provisions for a reliable, safe and adequate water supply to support
intended uses within the capacity of available resources.
B. Each property shall connect to a public water supply.
C. All water supply and distribution facilities shall be constructed in full
compliance with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources
specifications and all ordinances, rules and regulations of the borough.
Minimum water supply recognized by the Insurance Services Office
shall be provided.
D. Applicants shall present evidence to the Borough Council at preliminary
plan stage that the subdivision or land development is to be supplied by
the Borough Water Department.
E. Whenever approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources is required for the water supply and distribution system for a
§ 195-23 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-25
185:554
§ 195-26. Stormwater management standards and design.
proposed subdivision or land development, the developer shall submit
a copy of such approval to the borough prior to approval of a final plan.
F. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
A. General principles for storm drainage systems. Storm sewers, culverts,
endwalls, inlets and related installations and improvements shall be
provided in order to:
(1) Permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses;
(2) Ensure adequate drainage of all streets;
(3) Intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals related to the
extent and grade of the area drained;
(4) Provide positive drainage away from on-site sewage disposal
facilities and buildings;
(5) Accommodate runoff so that there shall be no increase in rate of
stormwater peak discharge leaving the subdivision or land
development during or after construction based on the design
rainfall frequency established in this chapter. Pre- and postdevelopment
runoff shall be evaluated for all drainage areas
discharging from the site.
(6) Ensure adequate drainage at intersections of driveways with
streets.
(7) Provide that where existing storm sewers are reasonably
accessible and of adequate capacity, subdivisions and land
developments shall connect to the existing storm sewers.
(8) Provide that when no existing storm sewer system is accessible and
of adequate capacity, stormwater runoff shall discharge to an
existing watercourse with defined bed and barriers. Runoff shall
not be increased or concentrated onto adjacent properties, nor
shall the velocity of flow be increased beyond that existing prior to
subdivision or land development unless written approval is given by
the adjacent property owners to the proposed discharge of surface
runoff and the written agreements are approved by the Borough
Council.
(9) Provide that when storm drainage will be directed into an adjacent
municipality, all provisions for accommodating such storm drainage
shall be submitted to the governing body of that municipality for
review.
B. Design of storm drainage systems.
§ 195-25 SOLID WASTE § 195-26
185:555
(1) Complete stormwater calculations in accordance with the design
standards and Appendices of this chapter and all designs for
drainage facilities shall be submitted to the borough for review.
(2) Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by or
contains a pond, lake, watercourse, drainageway, channel, storm
drainage system or stream, there shall be provided a drainage
easement that conforms substantially with the line of such pond,
lake, watercourse, drainageway, channel, storm drainage system or
stream of such width as will be adequate to preserve the
unimpeded flow of drainage (one-hundred-year flow) and to provide
for widening, deepening, relocating, improving or protecting such
features or drainage facilities. Minimum easement width shall be
10 feet from each side of the watercourse, water body, stream,
pond, lake or drainage facility, but the borough may require a
greater easement when necessary. Bearings and distances shall be
provided for the boundaries of easements.
(3) Any changes in an existing drainageway shall be subject to the
approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources, the Army Corps of Engineers and/or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency when each or all have
jurisdiction. All permits and approvals shall be issued prior to
construction of storm drainage-related improvements.
(4) The developer shall properly grade and seed slopes, and fence open
ditches when a safety hazard can result. Areas within easements
shall be kept as lawn or in natural conditions to allow maintenance
and entrance.
(5) All drainage facilities shall be designed to adequately handle
surface runoff and carry it to suitable outlets and shall be designed
in accordance with the minimum design standards in the
Appendices of this chapter.
(a) Subsurface drainage systems shall have manholes spaced at
intervals not exceeding 400 feet and located wherever
branches are connected or sizes are changed and wherever
there is a change in alignment or grade. Inlets or other means
of interconnection may be used instead of manholes when
approved by the Borough Council.
(b) For drainage lines of thirty-six-inch diameter or greater,
manholes may be spaced at intervals greater than 400 feet
with the approval of the Borough Council.
(c) Storm sewer lines within street rights-of-way shall be placed
immediately in front of the curb when parallel to the right-ofway.
Locating storm sewers under curbs in curves or at street
intersections will not be permitted.
§ 195-26 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-26
185:556
(d) Drainage structures that are to be located within state highway
rights-of-way shall be approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, and a letter from that
Department indicating such approval shall be submitted to the
borough.
(e) Subsurface storm drainage systems shall have PennDOTapproved
inlets located as required by this chapter to intercept
runoff. Inlets shall be designed and located to prevent hazards
to vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians.
(f) PennDOT-approved endwalls or end sections shall be used in
lieu of inlets where feasible to minimize clogging of grates with
leaves, debris, etc.
(g) Reinforced concrete pipe shall be used for all storm sewer
lines, including retention/detention facilities. Alternate pipe
materials may be used with Borough Council approval;
however, alternate materials shall be backfilled with select
granular PennDOT (2-RC) material, solidly compacted in sixinch
lifts. All pipe materials shall meet PennDOT requirements
and shall have a minimum diameter of 15 inches.
(h) Provisions shall be made to minimize erosion within
watercourses and at points of discharge from storm drainage
facilities through the use of proper ground cover, riprap or
root-reinforcing systems.
(i) Where there is a change in pipe size through an inlet, the top
inside elevation of the outlet pipe shall be at or below the
elevations of all incoming pipes.
(6) Storm sewers, culverts, swales, channels and related facilities shall
be designed to accommodate and discharge all runoff from
adjacent upstream drainage areas, assuming the upstream area is
fully developed.
C. Standards for drainage of streets.
(1) All streets shall be designed to provide for the discharge of surface
water from their rights-of-way. The design storm shall be a ten-year
frequency for residential subdivisions with a gross density less than
six units per acre, and a twenty-five-year frequency for all other
subdivisions or land developments. The design storm shall be a
one-hundred-year frequency for sections conveying runoff directly
to detention facilities and in other instances when required by the
borough.
(2) The pavement cross slope on streets and the slope of sidewalk
areas shall be one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot.
§ 195-26 SOLID WASTE § 195-26
185:557
(3) Surface cross drainage at intersections or other roadway sections
will not be permitted.
(4) Inlets shall be spaced to limit the gutter flow spread into the travel
lanes to one-half (1/2) the lane width during the design storm.
(5) Inlet efficiency and bypass flows, per PennDOT design charts, shall
be considered in the design of storm sewer systems.
(6) To ensure adequate drainage at low points along the line of streets,
overflow swales shall be designed to convey the full one-hundredyear
storm flows away from all street low points. These swales shall
be located to prevent flooding of the downslope lots.
D. Design of retention and detention facilities.
(1) General requirements.
(a) Where retention (permanent pool) and detention (dry bottom)
basins are required by the Borough Council, adequate
assurances of maintenance, indemnification, liability insurance
and security shall be provided and approved by the Council.
(b) Retention and detention facilities shall be designed and located
so as to not present a hazard to the public health or safety.
Their design shall be approved by the Borough Council.
(c) Such facilities shall be designed so that no adverse effects will
result from backwater flooding.
(2) General design considerations.
(a) The number and location of retention/detention facilities are
subject to the approval of the Borough Council.
(b) For detention basins, a method of carrying low flow through
the basin area shall be provided, and the basin shall be
provided with a positive gravity outlet to a natural channel or
storm sewer of adequate capacity.
(c) If percolation of runoff is considered as a method of runoff
abatement, percolation tests shall be taken at the site of the
proposed detention facilities and the results submitted to the
borough for review. At the discretion of the Borough Council,
percolation facilities may be prohibited.
(d) The storage duration of stormwater runoff shall not exceed 24
hours after rainfall has ceased. The Borough Council may
require the fencing of retention/detention basins when deemed
necessary for the public safety.
(e) The pipe spillway outletting from the retention/detention basin
shall be designed on the basis of a rainfall frequency that is
consistent with the requirements of this chapter. Basin
§ 195-26 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-26
185:558
discharge velocities and quantities shall be consistent with
the need to protect the public health, safety and welfare and
to prevent turbulent conditions and erosive velocities in a
receiving watercourse.
(f) Minimum grades for turf areas inside detention basins shall be
1%, and maximum side slopes of retention/detention basins
shall be 33% (three units horizontally to one unit vertically).
Depending upon the location and the intended use of the
detention facilities during nonfunctioning times, a side slope of
less than 33% for one or both slopes may be required by the
Borough Council. Side slopes shall be kept as close to the
natural land contours as practical, but when a detention basin
is to be maintained by a future residential lot owner, the
maximum side slope shall be 25% (four units horizontally to
one unit vertically).
(g) Paved surfaces that are to serve as stormwater storage areas
shall have minimum grades of one-half percent (1/2%) and
shall be restricted to storage depths of six inches maximum.
(h) If a portion of an area within a stormwater storage area is to be
paved for parking or recreational purposes, the paved surface
shall be placed at the highest elevation possible within the
storage area.
(i) The following additional conditions shall be complied with for
retention basins:
[1] Water surface area shall not exceed one-tenth (1/10) of the
tributary drainage area.
[2] Shoreline protection shall be provided to prevent erosion
from wave action.
[3] Facilities shall be provided to allow the pond level to be
lowered by gravity flow for cleaning purposes and
shoreline maintenance.
[4] Aeration facilities as may be required to prevent pond
stagnation shall be provided. Design calculations to
substantiate the effectiveness of these aeration facilities
shall be submitted with final engineering plans.
Agreements for the perpetual operation and maintenance
of aeration facilities shall be prepared to the satisfaction of
the Borough Council.
(3) Specific design considerations for retention/detention basins.
[Amended 6-17-2008 by Ord. No. 7-2008]
§ 195-26 SOLID WASTE § 195-26
185:559
(a) Retention/detention basins shall be designed in accordance
with Chapter 189 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown
entitled “Stormwater Management.”
(b) Retention/detention basins which are designed as earth fill
dams shall incorporate the following minimum standards:
[1] The height of the dam shall not exceed 15 feet, unless
approved by the Borough Council and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources.
[2] The minimum top width of dams up to 15 feet in height
shall be equal to 3/4 of the dam height, but in no case shall
the top width be less than eight feet.
[3] The side slopes of the settled earth fill shall not be steeper
than three horizontal to one vertical.
[4] A key trench at least two feet deep, or extending down to
stable subgrade, whichever is deeper, of compacted
relatively impervious material (Unified Soil Classification
CL or ML). Minimum bottom width for the key trench shall
be four feet. Maximum side slopes for the key trench shall
be one horizontal to one vertical. A compacted impervious
core at least eight feet wide at the top, having a maximum
side slope of one horizontal to one vertical, shall extend for
the full length of the embankment, and the top elevation
shall be set at the twenty-five-year design water surface
elevation.
[5] All pipes and culverts through dams shall have properly
spaced concrete antiseep collars (minimum six inches
thick). Design calculations shall be submitted for review.
[6] The top of berm shall be constructed at least six inches
above the design elevations to allow for settlement of the
embankment.
[7] The emergency spillway shall be constructed in
undisturbed earth, or be of concrete construction along its
bottom and sides.
[8] Whenever a basin will be located in an area underlain by
limestone, a geological evaluation of the proposed location
shall be conducted to determine susceptibility to sinkhole
formations. The design of all facilities over limestone
formations shall include measures to prevent groundwater
contamination and, where necessary, sinkhole formation.
Soils used for the construction of basins shall have lowerodibility
factors ("K" factors). The Borough may require
the installation of an impermeable liner in detention
basins.
§ 195-26 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-26
185:560
E. Design submission requirements. The following stormwater
management data are required submittals:
(1) All calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the design of
stormwater management facilities and in the establishment of the
calculated predevelopment and post-development peak discharge.
(2) All plans and profiles (including cross-country systems) of proposed
stormwater management facilities (storm sewers, swales, etc.)
including horizontal and vertical location, size and type of material.
This information shall provide sufficient information required for
the construction of all facilities.
(3) A map(s) clearly delineating and labeling all drainage areas used in
the design of stormwater management facilities.
(4) For all retention/detention basins, a plotting or tabulation of
storage volumes with corresponding water surface elevations and
outflow rates for those water surfaces.
(5) For all retention/detention basins, the design inflow and outflow
hydrographs and routing calculations to determine the function of
the basin. The storage-indication routing method shall be used.
(6) For all retention basins which hold two and one-half (2-1/2) acre -
feet or more of water during the twenty-five-year design storm and
have an embankment that is 10 feet or more in height, soil
structures and characteristics shall be investigated. Plans and data
prepared by a registered professional, experienced and educated in
soil mechanics shall be submitted.
(7) A map(s) clearly delineating any existing wetlands as classified by a
qualified environmental scientist experienced in wetland
determination. Wetland determination shall be performed in
accordance with the Federal Manual for Identifying and
Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands (Manual) by the Federal
Interagency Committee for Wetland Delineation. No construction
or development shall be permitted in wetlands without approval
from the United States Army Corps of Engineers and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, Bureau of
Dams and Waterway Management.
F. Maintenance of stormwater management facilities. Proposals for the
ownership and maintenance responsibilities for all proposed storm
drainage facilities shall be submitted to the borough for review and
approval at preliminary plan stage. The Borough Council shall be
satisfied that sufficient provision has been made for adequate and
perpetual maintenance of all such facilities. All drainage facilities to be
owned by the developer or his assigns shall be maintained to retain
their design capacity.
§ 195-26 SOLID WASTE § 195-26
185:561
G. Groundwater recharge. The ability to retain and maximize the
groundwater recharge capacity of the area being developed is
encouraged. Design of the stormwater management facilities shall give
consideration to providing groundwater recharge to compensate for the
reduction in the percolation that occurs when the ground surface is
paved and roofed over. A detailed geologic evaluation of the project site
shall be performed to determine the suitability of recharge facilities.
The evaluation shall be performed by a qualified geologist and/or soil
scientist and at a minimum, address soil permeability, depth to bedrock,
susceptibility to sinkhole formation and subgrade stability. Where
pervious pavement is permitted for parking lots, recreational facilities,
nondedicated streets or other areas, pavement construction
specifications shall be noted on the plan.
H. Erosion and sediment controls and plan requirements.
(1) Land shall not be developed or changed by grading, excavation or
the removal or destruction of natural topsoil, trees or other
vegetative cover unless adequate provisions for minimizing erosion
and sedimentation are provided.
(2) A plan for erosion and sediment control shall be prepared and
submitted to the borough as required by this section. The plan shall
meet all requirements and be approved by the County Conservation
District, the borough and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources (Chapter 102 of Title 25, latest revision),
when applicable.
(3) The erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted at final
plan submission for a subdivision or land development. The plan
shall contain two parts: a map(s) describing the topography of the
area within the subdivision or land development, the proposed
alterations of the area and the erosion and sediment control
measures and facilities which are proposed; and a narrative report
describing the project and giving the purpose, engineering
assumptions and calculations for control measures and facilities.
(4) The map(s) shall show:
(a) The types, depth, slope and areal extent of the soils on the site.
(b) The proposed alteration to the area, including:
[1] Arrows indicating existing and proposed runoff flow
direction when contours do not adequately describe flow
paths.
[2] Areas of cuts and fills exceeding five feet in vertical
difference.
[3] Structures, roads, paved areas, buildings.
[4] Stormwater and erosion and sediment control facilities.
§ 195-26 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-26
185:562
[5] Existing contours on the site (including individual lots) at
intervals required by this chapter and finished contours at
the same interval.
(c) The following certification statements:
[1] "I certify that the plan of development and the plan for soil
erosion and sediment control meet the requirements,
standards and specifications of the County Conservation
District."
Engineer for developer
Date
[2] "I certify that all construction and/or development will be
done as described by this plan of development and the plan
for soil erosion and sediment control, including the
narrative report."
Developer
Date
(5) The narrative report shall contain:
(a) A general statement of the project which shall contain:
[1] A general description of the project.
[2] A general description of stormwater control methods.
[3] A general description of accelerated erosion control.
[4] A general description of sedimentation control.
(b) The staging of earthmoving activities, including cover removal,
control facility installation, installation of improvements and
program of operations.
(c) A maintenance program for the control facilities, including:
[1] Frequency of inspection of control facilities.
[2] Method of disposal of materials removed from the control
facilities of the project area.
[3] The methods, frequency and ultimate disposal site for solid
waste material. Construction waste shall be removed from
the site and disposed of in an approved landfill.
Construction waste shall not be buried on the site.
(d) A specification for both temporary and permanent seeding,
including preparation of the seed bed. Application rates for
seed, fertilizer and mulch shall be provided and shall comply
§ 195-26 SOLID WASTE § 195-26
185:563
with the specifications and standards established by the
County Conservation District.
(6) The following items shall be shown on a map and also described in
the narrative report:
(a) Temporary control measures and facilities for use during
earthmoving, including:
[1] Purpose.
[2] Types of measures and facilities.
[3] The location of measures and facilities.
[4] Dimensioned construction details of the facilities.
(b) Permanent control measures and facilities for site restoration
and long-term protection, including:
[1] Purpose.
[2] Types of measures and facilities.
[3] The location of measures and facilities.
[4] Dimensioned construction details of the facilities.
[5] Design considerations and calculations.
(7) All erosion and sediment control facilities shall be periodically
inspected and checked for adequacy and compliance with the
approved erosion and sediment control plan by the borough. The
approved erosion and sediment control plan shall be maintained at
the site of earthmoving at all times.
(8) All control facilities shall be maintained for their designed
operation to ensure adequate performance.
(9) The following guidelines shall be followed as needed in developing
erosion and sediment control measures:
(a) Stripping of vegetation, grading, filling, excavating or other
alteration of the landscape shall be kept to a minimum and
shall be done in such a way that will minimize erosion.
(b) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained,
protected and supplemented.
(c) The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall not
exceed 20 days, except in the case of building construction.
(d) Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
(e) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
exposed critical areas during development.
§ 195-26 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-26
185:564
(f) Erosion control and drainage measures shall be installed prior
to earthmoving activities.
(g) Both permanent and temporary provisions shall be made to
effectively accommodate the increased runoff caused by
changed soil and surface conditions during and after
development. Where necessary, the rate of surface water
runoff shall be mechanically retarded.
(h) Until disturbed areas are stabilized, sediment in runoff water
shall be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins,
silt traps or other similar approved measures.
(i) Provision shall be made to protect existing water supplies and
geologic structures with water supply potential from
contamination.
(j) The following guidelines shall be applied as needed in
excavation and fills as part of erosion and sediment controls:
[1] All lots, tracts or parcels shall be graded to provide
positive drainage away from buildings, without ponding.
[2] Grading and cut-fill operations shall be kept to a minimum
to ensure conformity with the natural topography, to
minimize the erosion hazard and to adequately handle
surface runoff.
[3] Natural drainage patterns shall be preserved wherever
possible and desirable.
[4] Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface
water from damaging the cut face of excavations and the
sloping surfaces of fills.
[5] Cut and fills shall not endanger adjoining property.
[6] Fill shall be placed and mechanically compacted to
minimize sliding and erosion of the soil.
[7] Fills shall not encroach on natural watercourses,
floodplains or constructed channels.
[8] During grading operations, necessary measures for dust
control shall be exercised.
[9] Grading equipment shall not cross live streams. Provisions
must be made for the installation of culverts or bridges.
(k) Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation,
regrading or other development or earthmoving, it shall be the
responsibility of the person, corporation or other entity
causing such sedimentation, at his expense, to remove it from
all adjoining surfaces, drainage systems and watercourses and
§ 195-26 SOLID WASTE § 195-26
185:565
§ 195-27. Natural features.
§ 195-28. Floodplains.
to repair any damage which was caused within 72 hours of
such sedimentation or damage. The Borough Council may
require a note to this effect to be placed on the final plan.
A. Subdivisions and land developments shall be designed to preserve
natural features such as trees greater than one foot in diameter,
watercourses, rock outcroppings, wooded areas, natural watercourses
and bodies of water.
B. Topsoil shall not be removed from the subdivision site nor used as
structural fill without the permission of the Borough Council. Topsoil
may be removed from areas of earthmoving activity, but shall be stored
elsewhere within the subdivision or land development and stabilized to
minimize erosion. Upon completion of construction, the topsoil shall be
redistributed on the site.
C. Street and lot designs of tracts shall be such to minimize alterations of
the natural landscape.
A. Floodplains shall be calculated using the method established in
Appendix IV of this chapter and shown on all subdivision and land
development plans. The floodplain controls established within borough
ordinances shall be applied to those floodplains.
B. The Borough Council may require that vehicular access be provided to
each dwelling unit within a subdivision or land development over a
street or other approved means of access which is elevated above the
level of the one-hundred-year flood.
C. The following controls shall apply to the floodplains:
(1) No watercourse shall be altered or relocated unless approved by
the Borough Council and, where applicable, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources, Bureau of Dams and
Waterway Management and FEMA.
(2) No watercourse shall be altered or relocated unless the person
proposing the alteration or relocation submits calculations
assuring that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse shall be designed to be not
less than the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse prior to the
proposed alteration or relocation.
(3) No encroachment shall be made on a floodplain or watercourse
which will increase flood levels within the borough during the
occurrence of the one-hundred-year flood discharge. With any
proposal for an encroachment, calculations which will indicate
compliance with this requirement shall be submitted to the
§ 195-26 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-28
185:566
§ 195-29. Utilities and easements.
borough. All encroachments are subject to Borough Council
approval. Encroachments into the one-hundred-year floodway must
be reviewed and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources and FEMA.
(4) The placement of a mobile home within the floodway as shown on
the Official Zoning Map of the Borough of Kutztown 157 is
prohibited.
(5) No construction or development shall be permitted within the
floodplain without approval from the United States Army Corps of
Engineers and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources.
A. Easements shall be provided for electric, telephone and television
cables, wires and conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, drainage swales,
gas, water and heat mains and other utility lines. No structures shall be
placed within such easements. No trees or shrubs shall be placed within
easements unless approved by the Borough Council. The borough and
local utility companies shall be consulted when locating utilities and
easements, and all utilities and easements shall be located in
accordance with their standards.
B. Easements abutting street rights-of-way shall be a minimum of 10 feet
in width. Other easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width.
C. There shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet, measured in the shortest
distance, between any proposed dwelling unit and any petroleum
products or natural gas transmission line which traverses the
subdivision or land development.
D. Where gas or petroleum transmission lines are a part of the proposed
development, either proposed or requiring relocation, construction of
the transmission line shall occur within an easement of 50 feet
minimum and shall comply with the applicable requirements of the
Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission.
E. When possible and feasible, all utilities shall be underground and
installed under the supervision of the Borough Engineer or the Borough
Manager.
F. Underground electric distribution lines shall be installed in all new
subdivisions and land developments of more than three dwelling units.
In existing subdivisions with four or more unimproved lots, any
extensions of the electric distribution lines shall be placed
underground.
157. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included at the end of this volume.
§ 195-28 SOLID WASTE § 195-29
185:567
§ 195-30. Compliance with zoning requirements.
All subdivisions and land developments shall be designed to meet the
requirements of Chapter 225, Zoning, except as may be otherwise provided
in this chapter.
§ 195-31. Access to the subdivision or land development.
§ 195-32. Recreation facilities.
G. All telephone and television distribution lines shall be placed
underground when electric distribution lines are placed underground.
H. When required by the Borough Council, the location of utility
easements shall be marked in the field.
A. The location and number of access points to a subdivision or land
development shall be adequate for and appropriate to the size and
nature of the development and surrounding roads and land uses.
B. All subdivisions and land developments containing more than 20
dwelling units shall have at least two means of ingress and egress via
streets or access drives meeting the design and construction standards
of the borough.
C. For all subdivisions and land developments for which only one means of
ingress and egress is proposed, the Borough Council may require,
where deemed necessary in the public interest and for the public safety,
the provision of additional street or access drive meeting borough
standards or the provision of an alternate means of ingress and egress
meeting borough standards which could be used by emergency vehicles
if the primary means of ingress and egress were rendered unusable.
Such alternate means of ingress and egress shall be of such width and
improved to such an extent to be usable by emergency vehicles and
shall not be used for structures, trees or similar obstructions.
A. Purpose. All residential subdivisions and land developments shall
provide for suitable and adequate recreation in order to ensure
adequate recreational areas and facilities to serve the future residents
of the subdivision or land development and ensure that all future
borough residents have the opportunity to engage in a variety of
recreational activities.
B. Requirements for reservation of recreation areas.
(1) The developer shall reserve recreation areas within the subdivision
or land development or at some other nearby location if approved
by the Borough Council. The developer shall provide the recreation
areas pursuant to a plan approved by the Borough Council, in
accordance with the schedule below.
§ 195-29 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-32
185:568
Gross Density of Tract in
Dwelling Units Per Acre
Percentage of Total Area of
Subdivision or Land Development
to be Reserved for Recreation
Areas
Up to 1.0 5
1.01 to 2.0 8
2.01 to 3.0 12
3.01 to 4.0 15
4.01 to 5.0 20
5.01 and greater 25
(2) In lieu of reserving areas for recreation and upon agreement
between the Borough Council and the developer, the developer
shall pay the borough an amount as determined from time to time
by resolution of Borough Council for each lot and/or dwelling unit.
C. General standards for recreation areas reserved by the developer.
(1) Land shall be suitable to serve the purpose of active recreation by
reason of its size, shape, location and topography and shall be
subject to the approval of the Borough Council. Examples of active
recreation areas are athletic fields and hard-surfaced courts, pools,
open turf areas and apparatus areas.
(2) Land shall be easily and safely accessible from all areas of the
development to be served and have suitable ingress and egress
from a public roadway for maintenance equipment. However, no
public roadways shall traverse the site(s).
(3) Land shall be contiguous and regular in shape.
(4) Land shall have suitable topography and soil conditions for use and
development as a recreation area.
(5) At least 75% of the reserved area shall have a slope of 7% or less.
(6) No more than 25% of the reserved area may be within floodplain or
wetland areas.
(7) Land shall be easily accessible to all essential utilities.
(8) Land shall be suitable for development as a particular type of active
recreation facility, as categorized by the National Recreation and
Park Association's National Park, Recreation and Open Space
Standards and Guidelines, 1983, as amended.
(9) Land shall be designed and developed according to the standards
established by the National Recreation and Park Association upon
agreement between the Borough Council and the developer.
D. Schedule for completion of recreation areas.
§ 195-32 SOLID WASTE § 195-32
185:569
§ 195-33. Solid waste management.
§ 195-34. Considerations for solar access.
(1) All recreation areas shall be completely developed in accordance
with a schedule approved by the Borough Council, but in all cases
before occupancy of 50% of the proposed number of dwellings has
been reached in the applicable subdivision or land development.
(2) Recreation areas shall be improved and equipped to a usable state
in accordance with plans to be approved by the Borough Council.
Such improvement and equipping shall be guaranteed through the
subdivision improvements agreement.
E. Development of recreation facilities.
(1) Developers shall develop the recreation areas, according to the
National Park, Recreation and Open Space Standards and
Guidelines published by the National Recreation and Park
Association in 1983 and any succeeding updates or revisions.
(2) Specific facilities to be constructed shall conform to the previouslyreferenced
standards.
(3) Designs of recreation areas shall be reviewed by the Borough
Planning Commission and Borough Recreation and Park Board and
approved by the Borough Council.
(4) The size, surface conditions, shape, topography and location of the
land shall be suitable for the intended recreational purpose and be
such that recreational use is feasible.
A. Provision shall be made in developments containing apartments and
townhouses and in nonresidential developments to adequately store
within containers all solid waste generated between collections.
B. All storage containers shall be located to permit efficient depositing of
wastes in the containers and efficient collection from the containers.
C. Debris, rubbish or other waste material resulting from grading or
construction activities on the lot shall be removed from the lot prior to
the issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy for the lot. No debris,
rubbish or waste material shall remain within the area of an
improvement covered by a performance guaranty upon expiration of
the guaranty or completion of the improvements, whichever is sooner.
A. When maximal provision is to be made for the use of solar energy by
structures, in general streets toward which buildings are to be oriented
should run in an east-west direction.
B. Section 195-23A(2) indicates that side lot lines shall be at right angles
to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines. The Borough
Council may allow variation from this requirement where provision is to
§ 195-32 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-34
185:570
§ 195-35. Carbonate areas.
be made for maximal use of solar energy, in which case side lot lines
generally may run from due north to due south or with slight variation
east or west of this axis.
(1) When lot lines will not be provided, consideration should be given
to orienting buildings to maximize solar access. Generally,
buildings should be located with their long axes running east to
west, though in some high-density or townhouse developments a
north-south orientation for the long axes may be desirable.
(2) Consideration should be given to locating structures and open
spaces such that buildings will not cast shadows on other buildings.
C. Consideration should be given to reserving solar easements within lots
for protection of solar access.
A. Designation of area.
(1) Areas subject to this section shall include all areas of Duffield (DfA
and DfB2), Duffield and Hagerstown (DhC3 and DhE3), Fogelsville
(FoA and FoB2), Hagerstown (HaB2 and HaC2) and Washington
(WaA2 and WaB2) soils.
(2) In carbonate areas, alteration and development of land may be
hazardous with respect to foundation safety of structures, the
creation of unstable land as a result of changes in drainage and the
contamination of ground and surface waters. Within the limitations
of the information available at the time of review of individual
applications, the borough shall attempt to make reasonable
judgments as to the applicant's compliance with the standards of
§ 195-35B. Under no circumstances shall the borough or any officer
or employee of the borough assume any liability for any damages
that may result from an applicant's or any interested party's
reliance upon the regulations of § 195-35B or any decisions made
by the borough in the administration of such regulations.
B. Standards.
(1) Land grading or construction of buildings or other site
improvements shall not directly or indirectly diminish the flow of
natural springs or contaminate existing or potential water supplies.
If warranted, as determined by the Borough Council, water table
data from observation wells shall be provided by the applicant.
(2) All buildings, structures, roads and other impervious surfaces and
storm drainage facilities and other utilities shall be so situated,
designed and constructed as to minimize the risk of structural
damage from existing or future sinkholes. A recognized
professional with competence in the field shall demonstrate that a
minimal risk of structural damage due to sinkholes will exist or
§ 195-34 SOLID WASTE § 195-35
185:571
indicate mitigating measures to be taken to minimize the risk of
structural damage.
(3) Whenever a detention or retention basin for the control of
stormwater will be located in a carbonate area, a geological
evaluation of the proposed location shall be conducted to
determine susceptibility to sinkhole formation. The design of all
facilities over limestone formations shall include measures to
prevent groundwater contamination and, where necessary,
sinkhole formation. Soils used for the construction of basins shall
have low-erodibility factors ("K" factors). The borough may require
the installation of an impermeable liner in basins. All detention
facilities shall be above ground unless otherwise approved by the
Borough Council.
(4) The following guidelines shall be considered during construction
activities:
(a) Care should be taken to prevent collection and drainage of
surface water into excavated or low-lying areas of the site
during excavation and construction.
(b) Soft and wet conditions should be located wherever they may
exist or be encountered.
(c) Soft areas should be removed and replaced with suitable fill
compacted in accordance with recognized standards, such as
ASTM.
(d) The bottom of all excavations should be inspected for soft or
unusually moist conditions. A visual inspection of the
excavated bearing surface, together with soundings or probes
of the soil at regular intervals, should be done. Any soft or
unusually moist soil should be further excavated and a
determination made of the extent of the problem. Remedial
measures should be adopted as necessary.
(e) The low points of swales and outlet locations for drainage pipes
should be lined with impermeable liners instead of stone riprap
in order to prevent infiltration of runoff.
(f) Excavation should be kept to a practical minimum.
(g) Water from roof drains or other drainage systems should be
collected and conveyed away from structures to prevent
infiltration near foundations. If possible, roof drains should
discharge directly into a storm sewer system or the street
gutter. Watertight pipe connections should be used for storm
sewers.
§ 195-35 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-35
185:572
(h) Subsoil erosion/sinkholes that occur during the construction of
a project should be corrected as quickly as possible under the
supervision of a qualified geotechnical engineer.
(i) Blasting should be avoided.
(5) Should the Borough Council find that an applicant may create a
significant risk to the public's health or safety, in spite of taking all
reasonable actions to minimize such risks, or should the Council
determine that the applicant has not taken all reasonable actions to
minimize such risks, the Council may deny the application.
C. Submission requirements. The following information shall be
submitted:
(1) For areas proposed for grading, construction of buildings and other
improvements, the applicant shall indicate the presence of any of
the following carbonate features: depressions; fissures, lineaments,
faults or air photo fracture traces; "ghost lakes" occurring after
rainfall events; outcrops of bedrock; seasonal high water tables;
sinkholes; soil mottling, as defined by a soil scientist; springs; and
surface drainage entering the ground. Such information shall be
supported by an explanation of its source, including the
qualifications of the individuals directly responsible for preparing
such information.
(2) The applicant shall furnish a plan indicating existing and proposed
drainage conditions, existing and proposed grading, the locations
of existing private and public wells on adjoining properties and the
locations and extent of all proposed uses and improvements.
(3) An environmental assessment report containing the following
information:
(a) Description of existing conditions. This section shall present a
description of existing characteristics of the property with
respect to geology, topography, ground and surface water
hydrology, soils, vegetation and existing improvements and
uses.
(b) Description of the proposed action. This section shall describe
the proposed action, including: types, locations and phasing of
proposed site disturbances and construction, as well as
proposed future ownership and maintenance of the property
and the proposed improvements.
(c) Proposed measures to control potential adverse environmental
impacts. This section shall describe all measures proposed by
the applicant to control all adverse impacts which may occur as
a result of the proposed action.
§ 195-35 SOLID WASTE § 195-35
185:573
§ 195-36. Required studies.
(d) List and qualifications of preparers. The names, addresses,
telephone numbers and qualifications of persons directly
responsible for preparing the environmental assessment shall
be provided.
A. Traffic impact study.
(1) A traffic impact study shall be submitted in the following instances;
provided, however, that the Borough Council reserves the right to
require a traffic study for any subdivision or land development
other than a minor residential subdivision, lot annexation,
abbreviated residential subdivision and plan for revision to lot lines
when the Borough Council deems such a study necessary to
adequately review the impact of the subdivision or land
development on existing and proposed streets in accordance with
§ 195-20A(4) and (6):
(a) A residential subdivision or land development of 50 or more
lots and/or dwelling units.
(b) A nonresidential subdivision of five or more lots.
(c) A nonresidential land development containing 40,000 square
feet or more of gross floor area.
(d) Any nonresidential land development within one-fourth (1/4)
mile of an intersection involving an arterial street or two
collector streets.
(2) The traffic impact study shall be prepared by a qualified
professional traffic engineer or traffic planner with verifiable
experience in preparing such studies.
(3) The study area for the traffic study shall be based on engineering
judgment and an understanding of existing traffic conditions at the
site and represent the area which is likely to be affected by the
development. The study limits shall be initially agreed upon by the
developer, his engineer and the borough.
(4) The traffic impact study shall contain the following elements:
(a) The study area boundary and identification of the roadways
included within the study area.
(b) A general site description, including:
[1] Size, location, existing and proposed land uses and
dwelling types, construction staging and completion date
of the proposed development.
§ 195-35 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-36
185:574
[2] Existing land uses, approved and recorded subdivision and
land developments and subdivisions and land
developments proposed but not yet approved and recorded
in the study area that are agreed upon by the borough,
developer and traffic engineer as having bearing on the
development's likely impact shall be described and
considered.
[3] Within the study area, the applicant must describe existing
roadways and intersections (geometrics and traffic signal
control) as well as improvements contemplated by
government agencies or private parties.
(c) Analysis of existing conditions, including:
[1] Daily and peak hour(s) traffic volumes. Schematic
diagrams depicting daily and peak hour(s) traffic volumes
shall be presented for roadways within the study area.
Turning movement and mainline volumes shall be
presented for the three peak hour conditions (a.m., p.m.
and site generated) while only mainline volumes are
required to reflect daily traffic volumes. The source and/or
method of computation for all traffic volumes shall be
included.
[2] Volume/capacity analyses at critical points. Utilizing
techniques described in the Highway Capacity Manual
Transportation Research Board Special Report 209 (1985
or latest edition) or derivative nomographs, an assessment
of the relative balance between roadway volumes and
capacity are to be described. The analysis shall be
performed for existing conditions (roadway geometry and
traffic signal control) for the appropriate peak hours.
[3] Level of service at critical points. Based on the results
obtained in the previous section, levels of service (A
through F) shall be computed and presented. Included in
this section shall also be a description of typical operating
conditions at each level of service.
[4] A tabulation of accident locations during the most recent
three-year period shall be provided.
(d) Analysis of future conditions without the proposed
development. The future year(s) for which projections are
made will be specified by the borough and will be dependent
on the timing of the proposed development. The following
information shall be included:
[1] Daily and peak hour(s) traffic volumes. This section shall
clearly indicate the method and assumptions used to
forecast future traffic volumes. The schematic diagrams
§ 195-36 SOLID WASTE § 195-36
185:575
depicting future traffic volumes shall be similar to those
described in Subsection A(4)(c)[1] in terms of location and
times (daily and peak hours).
[2] Volume/capacity analyses at critical locations. The ability
of the existing roadway system to accommodate future
traffic (without site development) shall be described in this
section. If roadway improvements or modifications are
committed for implementation, the volume/capacity
analysis shall be presented for these conditions.
[3] Levels of service at critical points. Based on the results
obtained in the previous section, levels of service (A
through F) shall be determined.
(e) Trip generation. The amount of traffic generated by the site
shall be presented in this section for daily and the three peak
hour conditions. The trip generation rates used in this phase of
the analysis shall be justified and documented to the
satisfaction of the Borough Council. Trip Generation (Fourth or
latest edition), published by the Institute of Transportation
Engineers, shall be used unless the Borough Council approves
other studies.
(f) Trip distribution. The direction of approach for site-generated
traffic shall be presented in this section for the appropriate
time periods. As with all technical analysis steps, the basic
method and assumptions used in this work shall be clearly
stated in order that the borough can replicate these results.
(g) Traffic assignment. This section shall describe the utilization of
study area roadways by site-generated traffic. The proposed
traffic volumes shall then be combined with anticipated traffic
volumes from Subsection A(4)(d) to describe mainline and
turning movement volumes for future conditions with the site
developed as the applicant proposes.
(h) Analysis of future conditions with development. This section
shall describe the adequacy of the roadway system to
accommodate future traffic with development of the site. Any
unique characteristics of the site or within the study (i.e.,
weekend tourists and antique sales or holiday shopping)
affecting traffic shall be considered. If staging of the proposed
development is anticipated, analysis for each stage of
completion shall be made. The following information shall be
included:
[1] Daily and peak hour(s) traffic volumes. Mainline and
turning movement volumes shall be presented for the
highway network in the study area as well as driveways
and internal circulation roadways for the appropriate time
periods.
§ 195-36 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-36
185:576
[2] Volume/capacity analysis at critical points. Similar to
Subsection A(4)(c)[1] and [2], a volume/capacity analysis
shall be performed for the appropriate peak hours for
future conditions with the site developed as proposed.
[3] Levels of service at critical points. As a result of the
volume/capacity analysis, the level of service on the study
area roadway system shall be computed and described in
this section.
(i) Recommended improvements. In the event that the analysis
indicates unsatisfactory levels of service (levels of service D, E
or F) as described in Highway Capacity Manual,
Transportation Research Board Special Report 209 (1985 or
latest edition) will occur on study area roadways, a description
of proposed improvements to remedy deficiencies shall be
included in this section. These proposals would not include
committed projects by the borough and state which were
described in Subsection A(4)(b)[3] and reflected in the analysis
contained in Subsection A(4)(c) and (d). The following
information shall be included:
[1] Proposed recommended improvements. This section shall
describe the location, nature and extent of proposed
improvements to assure sufficient roadway capacity.
Accompanying this list of improvements shall be
preliminary cost estimates.
[2] Volume/capacity analysis at critical points. Another
iteration of the volume/capacity analysis shall be
described which demonstrates the anticipated results of
making these improvements.
[3] Levels of service at critical points. As a result of the
revised volume/capacity analysis presented in the previous
subsection, levels of service for the highway system with
improvements shall be presented.
(j) Conclusion. The last section of the report shall be a clear
concise description of the study findings. This concluding
section shall serve as an executive summary.
B. Impact studies.
(1) The impact studies listed below shall be submitted to the borough
in the following instances; provided, however, that the Borough
Council reserves the right to require impact studies for any
subdivision or land development other than a minor residential
subdivision, lot annexation, abbreviated residential subdivision and
plan for revision to lot lines when the Borough Council deems such
a study necessary to adequately review the impact of the
subdivision or land development:
§ 195-36 SOLID WASTE § 195-36
185:577
(a) A residential subdivision or land development of 50 or more
lots and/or dwelling units.
(b) A nonresidential subdivision of five or more lots.
(c) A nonresidential land development containing 40,000 square
feet or more of gross floor area.
(2) Utilities impact study. A study shall be prepared by an engineer
indicating the impact of the proposed development on the existing
sanitary sewer, water, solid waste and drainage systems serving the
borough. Said impact analysis shall identify the existing capacity of
facilities which would serve the development, the prospects of
those facilities being able to provide service to it, any
improvements that might be required as a direct result of the
proposed development and the improvements the developer
intends to make if capacity does not exist to serve the proposed
development. Additionally, the study shall identify the likely ability
of sanitary sewer, water, solid waste and drainage systems to
continue to provide efficient and economic service to existing
residents and businesses within the borough considering added
service requirements of the proposed development.
(3) Recreation impact study. The study shall analyze the demand for
recreational facilities which the proposed development will
generate and determine whether adequate facilities exist or are
planned or proposed. As a minimum, the study shall include the
following:
(a) A description of the projected age breakdown of the residents
of the proposed development.
(b) A description of any recreational facilities to be provided by the
developer.
(c) A description of existing municipal recreational facilities and
the impact of the proposed development on these facilities.
Accepted national standards for required recreation shall be
used in the analysis.
(d) Discussion of potential for any recreational facilities to be
provided by the developer to compensate for any anticipated
deficiencies of the borough's recreational facilities.
(e) A description of any contributions the developer plans to make
for borough recreation to compensate for expected impacts.
(4) Fiscal impact analysis. A fiscal impact analysis shall be prepared
identifying the likely impact of the development on the borough
and Kutztown Area School District's tax structure and expenditure
patterns. Included shall be a determination of the revenues to
accrue to the borough and Kutztown Area School District as a
§ 195-36 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-36
185:578
result of a proposed development, as well as an identification of
the costs associated with delivering services to the proposed
development. The fiscal impact analysis shall deal with the impact
of the proposed development on the ability of the borough to
deliver fire, police, administrative, public works and utility services
to the development and on the borough's economy. In order to
prepare the analysis, the applicant shall utilize a methodology from
the New Guide to Fiscal Impact Analysis (Rutgers Center for Urban
Policy Research, 1985, as modified from time to time), adapted as
appropriate and to the borough's satisfaction. Particular aspects
of the borough's service delivery capability to be analyzed shall
include:
(a) Public works. This includes potential effects on the
maintenance, repair and upkeep of roads, signal systems,
sanitary sewer, water and drainage systems, open space and
recreation areas or any other applicable function. This study
shall address projected cost increases for the above-mentioned
items in terms of administration, personnel, equipment and
materials.
(b) Administration. This includes time that would be required by
the Borough Council, Borough Secretary, Borough Manager
and other staff to process the application and handle the
project during construction, as well as long-term
administration demands. This should include but not be limited
to the handling of plans, contracts, various legal instruments
or agreements, permits, special problems and escrow. Added
demands on the code administration staff also shall be
projected.
(c) Fire and emergency services. The analysis shall incorporate
the development's impact on fire company capabilities,
including but not limited to municipal water supply, pumping
capacity, specialized equipment and training requirements.
(d) Police. The study shall project the overall effects of the
proposed development on existing borough police personnel
numbers, equipment, vehicles and working space. The study
shall include whatever facilities or assistance the development
will provide to handle emergencies, criminal investigation,
armed robbery or other security-related problems.
(5) Historic and archaeological resources impact study. All historic and
archaeological resources which have been identified and/or
inventoried by the borough, the Berks County Planning
Commission and/or the Pennsylvania Historical Museum
Commission located within the tract shall be identified and the
impact on such resources detailed. The study shall contain as a
minimum the following information:
§ 195-36 SOLID WASTE § 195-36
185:579
(a) Background information.
[1] If not otherwise provided by the applicant, a general site
description, including topography, watercourses,
vegetation, landscaping, existing drives, etc.
[2] General description and classification of all historic
resources located on the subject tract, on tracts
immediately adjacent to the subject tract or road or within
100 feet of the subject tract or road.
[3] Physical description of all historic resources identified in
Subsection B(5)(a)[2] above.
[4] Statement of the significance of each historic resource,
both relative to the borough and region in general.
[5] Sufficient number of black-and-white eight-by-ten-inch
photographs to show every historic resource identified in
Subsection B(5)(a)[2] above in its setting.
[6] Narrative description of the historical development of the
subject tract or road.
(b) Proposed change.
[1] General description of project, including timetable or
phases.
[2] Description of impact on each historic resource identified
in Subsection B(5)(a)[2] above with regard to architectural
integrity, historic setting and future use.
[3] General description of the effect of noise and traffic and
any other impacts generated by the proposed change on
each historic resource.
(c) Mitigation measures. Recommendations for mitigating the
project's impact on historic resources, including design
alternatives, buffering, landscaping and any other appropriate
measures.
(6) Environmental impact study. The study shall include the following
impacts:
(a) Habitats of threatened and endangered species of special
concern in Pennsylvania within the tract, as established by the
Pennsylvania Biological Survey and/or Pennsylvania Natural
Diversity Inventory, shall be identified and the impact on such
resources detailed. If such habitats exist on the tract, the
measures proposed to protect the habitats shall be indicated.
§ 195-36 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-36
185:580
(b) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by
the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains,
aquifers, natural resources and other natural features;
(c) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and
natural features, the degree to which these are protected or
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and
any adverse environmental impacts; and
(d) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture
and other land uses which are essential to public health and
welfare.
(e) The information specified in Appendix VI.
(7) Hydrogeologic impact study. Such study shall be conducted by a
qualified hydrogeologist and consist of the following minimum
considerations:
(a) A description of the geologic conditions on and around the site.
Site geology, including stratigraphy, structure and soils shall
be analyzed. Hydrogeology, including aquifer characteristics,
groundwater movement, local water use, aquifer yield and
water quality shall be analyzed. Groundwater impacts,
availability of groundwater, well interference, water quality
and yield availability shall be analyzed.
(b) Should it be determined that the proposed use(s) would result
in a degradation of groundwater quality or eliminate the
potential groundwater use at nearby properties, the study shall
present measures that will be employed to prevent these
adverse impacts.
§ 195-36 SOLID WASTE § 195-36
185:581

ARTICLE VII
Mobile Home Parks
§ 195-37. Compliance required.
Mobile home parks shall comply with all the design standards and
improvement specifications found in Articles VI and VIII of this chapter.
§ 195-38. Procedures.
The submission, review, approval or disapproval and recording of any
mobile home park shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article IV of
this chapter.
§ 195-39. Plan.
The plan of any mobile home park shall comply with the requirements
stated in Article V of this chapter.
§ 195-40. Zoning requirements.
All mobile home parks shall comply with all the requirements for mobile
home parks as may be listed in Chapter 225, Zoning.
§ 195-37 SOLID WASTE § 195-40
185:583

ARTICLE VIII
Improvement Specifications
§ 195-41. General requirements.
All streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains, curbs, sidewalks
and other physical improvements to the property being subdivided or
developed shall be provided, constructed and installed by the developer as
shown on the approved final plan and all supplemental plans and drawings
accompanying the approved final plan. The developer shall execute an
improvements agreement with the borough for the installation of all such
improvements. All improvements shall be constructed in accordance with
the applicable specifications of the borough or other applicable regulations.
Where none apply, specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation and/or Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources shall be used. If none exist, specifications prepared by the
Borough Engineer shall be used.
§ 195-42. Required improvements.
The following improvements shall be provided by the developer at his
expense:
A. Inspection.
(1) The installation of improvements required by § 195-42 following
will be inspected by the borough as deemed necessary by the
borough. The developer shall reimburse the borough for the
reasonable and necessary expense incurred for the inspection of
the improvements. Such reimbursement shall be based upon a
schedule established by ordinance or resolution.
(2) The developer's contractor shall schedule a meeting with the
borough's representative prior to any construction. Shop drawings
and specifications of all material to be used shall be submitted to
the borough for approval prior to commencement of construction.
(3) If the representative of the borough inspecting the construction or
installation of improvements determines that the work is not in
accordance with approved plans and specifications or is not being
done in a workmanlike manner, said representative may stop work
and/or require corrections to be made. Prior to any construction or
installation, a forty-eight-hour start-work notice is to be given to
the representative.
B. Extension to property boundaries. Where required by the borough,
improvements shall be extended to the boundaries of the subdivision or
land development to facilitate extension into surrounding properties.
A. Street grading. All streets, including those to be dedicated and those
not to be dedicated, shall be graded at full right-of-way width in
accordance with borough regulations.
§ 195-41 SOLID WASTE § 195-42
185:585
(1) Planting strips within street rights-of-way shall be graded, properly
prepared and seeded or sodded with lawn grass.
(2) Where wet conditions are encountered, the Borough Council may
require underdrains.
B. Cartway paving. All streets, including those to be dedicated and those
not to be dedicated, shall be paved to full cartway width in accordance
with borough regulations. Weather limitations in the placing of paving
materials are as follows:
(1) The placing of bituminous concrete base course or binder course
shall terminate after October 15 of each year and shall not be
resumed until April 1 of the following year and until the ground
temperature and air temperature do not fall below and are
continuously above 35° F. for five consecutive days prior to the day
of placement of said materials. When the air temperature falls
below 50° F., extra precautions shall be taken in drying the
aggregate, controlling the temperature of the delivered material
and compacting the mixture. Bituminous concrete base course or
binder course shall not be placed on wet surfaces, nor when the air
temperature is 35° F. or lower, nor when the temperature of the
surface on which it is to be placed is 35° F. or lower.
(2) The placing of bituminous concrete wearing course or surface
course shall terminate after October 15 of each year and shall not
be resumed until April 1 of the following year and until the ground
temperature and air temperature do not fall below and are
continuously above 40° F. for five consecutive days prior to the day
of placement of said materials. When the air temperature falls
below 50° F., extra precautions shall be taken in drying the
aggregate, controlling the temperature of the delivered material
and compacting the mixture. Bituminous concrete wearing course
or surface course shall not be placed on wet surfaces, nor when the
air temperature is 40° F. or lower, nor when the temperature of the
surface on which it is to be placed is 40° F. or lower.
(3) In any case, no bituminous concrete shall be placed after December
15 or resumed prior to April 1 at the earliest. Placement shall not
be resumed on April 1 unless five consecutive days of both ground
temperature and air temperature above 40° F. are experienced.
C. Curbs. Vertical curbs shall be installed along both sides of all streets
within and abutting the subdivision or land development in accordance
with borough regulations, including Ordinance No. 14-1972, as
amended by Ordinance No. 13-1974, and all subsequent amendments
thereto. 158 Curbs shall also be installed along all parking areas and
access drives in mobile home parks and apartment and townhouse
158. Editor's Note: These ordinances were superseded by Ord. No. 3-1992; see Ch. 192, Streets
and Sidewalks, Art. IV.
§ 195-42 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-42
185:586
developments and parking areas, access drives and loading areas in
commercial, industrial and office land developments.
D. Sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalks meeting requirements of applicable borough
regulations, including Ordinance No. 14-1972, as amended by
Ordinance No. 13-1974, and all subsequent amendments thereto,
shall be installed on both sides of all streets within and abutting the
subdivision or land development, except that sidewalks shall be
required on only one side of marginal access streets, and no
sidewalks shall be required along service streets. Notwithstanding
the aforesaid requirements, sidewalks within a mobile home park
shall conform with § 225-32C(1) of Chapter 225, Zoning.
(2) Sidewalks shall be provided along all common parking areas in
mobile home parks and apartment, townhouse, commercial,
industrial and office land developments.
E. Storm drainage. Storm sewers and related facilities shall be installed
consistent with acceptable design principles and the standards
contained in § 195-26 and Appendix V of this chapter.
F. Sanitary sewage disposal.
(1) Public sanitary sewerage facilities shall be provided consistent with
the requirements contained in § 195-24 of this chapter. The system
shall include, as a minimum, all required trunk lines, mains,
laterals and pump stations.
(2) The design and installation of all systems shall be subject to the
approval of the borough and the applicable public agencies.
G. Water supply.
(1) Public water supply facilities shall be provided consistent with the
requirements of § 195-25 of this chapter. The system shall include,
as a minimum, all required mains and house connections.
(2) The design and installation of all water systems shall be subject to
the approval of the borough and the applicable public agencies.
H. Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed in all subdivisions, land
developments and mobile home parks. The location, number and
separation of hydrants shall be approved by the borough and Fire Chief
in accordance with the guidelines of the Insurance Services Office,
except as otherwise provided for in § 225-32E(4) of Chapter 225,
Zoning.
I. Monuments.
(1) Permanent monuments shall be accurately placed at the
intersection of all lines forming angles in the boundary of the
§ 195-42 SOLID WASTE § 195-42
185:587
subdivision or land development and at changes in direction of
lines in the boundary of the property.
(2) All streets shall be monumented on the right-of-way line or the fivefeet-
range line on one side of the street at the following locations:
(a) At least one monument at each street intersection;
(b) At changes in direction of street lines, excluding curb arcs at
intersections;
(c) At each end of each curved street line, excluding curb arcs at
intersections;
(d) At intermediate points wherever topographical or other
conditions make it impossible to site between two otherwise
required monuments;
(e) At such other places along the line of streets as may be
determined by the borough to be necessary so that any street
may be readily defined in the future.
(3) All monuments shall be placed so that the center of the monument
coincides exactly with the point of intersection of the lines being
monumented.
(4) Monuments shall be set with their top level with the finished grade
of surrounding ground, except that where monuments are located
beneath a sidewalk, proper access shall be provided for their use.
J. Street signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all street
intersections. The design and placement of such signs shall be subject
to approval of the borough.
K. Lot markers. Metal markers shall be accurately placed at all lot corners
prior to sale of lots.
L. Streetlights. Unless otherwise provided by resolution of the Borough
Council, streetlights shall be installed by the developer along all streets
(and within the street right-of-way) in the subdivision or land
development. The streetlights shall be of a type approved by the
borough for use within the borough. The distance between streetlights
installed along any street within the subdivision or land development
shall not exceed 200 feet. If any street within the subdivision or land
development is designed to connect with an existing street being served
with streetlighting, the streetlight to be installed by the developer
closest to such existing street beyond the subdivision or land
development shall, if possible, be installed at a location not further than
200 feet from the existing streetlight on said street closest to the
subdivision or land development.
§ 195-42 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-42
185:588
M. Erosion and sediment control measures. Installations necessary to
implement the erosion and sediment control plan shall be made on the
tract by the developer as required improvements.
N. Shade trees. Deciduous hardwood trees of a species approved by the
borough having a minimum caliper of two to two and one-half (2 1/2)
inches shall be provided along all existing and proposed streets within
and abutting the subdivision or land development. The trees are to be
placed outside the street right-of-way at least five feet from the
sidewalk at a maximum distance of 50 feet between trees. Conditions of
placement and inspection shall be specified by the borough. In addition,
the developer shall preserve existing shade trees within the tract when
feasible.
O. Recreation facilities. Recreation facilities shall be provided in
accordance with § 195-32.
P. Solid waste management. The necessary arrangements to implement
the solid waste management plan prepared by the developer for
apartment, townhouse, commercial, office and industrial developments
shall be made at his expense.
Q. Traffic control devices. The traffic control devices shown on the
approved plan, including such items as stop signs and signs restricting
parking, shall be installed as required by the borough.
R. As-built drawings. As-built drawings shall be prepared in accordance
with § 195-13E.
S. Rock removal. Provision shall be made for rock removal in the
improvements agreement and improvements guaranty.
T. When required by the Borough Council pursuant to § 195-23B(5),
acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be provided.
U. Backfilling. Utility excavations in areas of streets, access drives,
parking areas and loading areas shall be backfilled in accordance with
borough standards.
V. Parking and loading area paving. All access drives and parking and
loading areas for apartments, townhouses and commercial, office and
industrial land developments shall be constructed of a minimum of
seven inches of 2A subbase material, six inches of crushed aggregate
base course, one and one-half (11/2) inches of ID-2 binder course and
one inch of ID-2 wearing course. Alternate cross-sections may be
permitted at the discretion of the Borough Council. All construction
shall conform to PennDOT Publication 408, latest edition.
W. Guide rail. Guide rail shall be provided pursuant to § 195-21.
§ 195-42 SOLID WASTE § 195-42
185:589

ARTICLE IX
Administration
§ 195-43. Review fees.
The Borough Council shall establish by resolution a Schedule of Fees for the
review of plans by the Borough Solicitor, Borough Engineer and borough
municipal departments to be paid by the developer. The Schedule of Fees
shall be obtainable from the Borough Secretary. 159 No final plan or sketch
plan of record shall be released for recording unless all fees have been paid
in full.
§ 195-44. Modifications.
§ 195-45. Appeals.
A. The Borough Council may grant a modification of the requirements of
one or more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will
exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question, provided that such modifications will not be contrary
to the public interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter is
observed.
(1) All requests for a modification shall be filed in writing with the
Borough Secretary and shall accompany and be a part of the
application for development. The request shall state in full the
grounds or provisions of this chapter involved and the minimum
modification necessary. The request for modification shall be
referred to the Planning Commission by the Borough Secretary for
advisory comments. The Council shall keep a written record of all
action on all requests for modifications.
(2) In granting modifications, the Council may impose such conditions
as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards or requirements so modified. Modifications shall be
clearly defined and entered on the final plan.
B. No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any
plan of a subdivision or land development after the plan has been
endorsed by the Borough Council unless the plan is first resubmitted to
and approved by the Council in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
A. Any person desiring to challenge the validity of any provision of this
chapter or any amendment thereof shall make such challenge as
prescribed by law.
B. Any person aggrieved by action of the Borough Council may appeal the
action as prescribed by law.
159. Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 195-43 SOLID WASTE § 195-46
185:591
§ 195-46. Remedies; violations and penalties.
A. Preventive remedies. In addition to other remedies, the borough may
institute and maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate violations, to prevent unlawful construction,
to recover damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building,
structure or lot. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument
of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or
transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such
penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
(1) The borough may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which
has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of this chapter. This authority to deny such a
permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
(a) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(b) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such a vendee or lessee
had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(c) The current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to
whether such current owner had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
(d) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who
acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation
without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual
or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(2) As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting
of an approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee
for the development of any such real property, the borough may
require compliance with the conditions that would have been
applicable to the property at the time the applicant acquired an
interest in such real property.
B. Enforcement remedies. Any person, partnership or corporation who or
which has violated the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the borough, pay a judgment as provided for in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 160 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the borough as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until
the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the borough
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
160. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S.§ 10101 et seq.
§ 195-46 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-46
185:592
§ 195-47. Responsibilities of developer.
The developer shall be responsible for observing the procedures established
in this chapter and for submitting all plans and documents as may be
required.
§ 195-48. Conflicts.
§ 195-49. Revision and amendment.
The Borough Council may amend this chapter. Any amendments shall be
made in accordance with the procedures established by law.
§ 195-50. Savings clause.
This chapter shall not affect any act done or any offense committed prior to
its effective date nor affect any action to enforce any prior ordinance or to
punish any offense against a prior ordinance.
procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice determining that there
has been a violation further determines that there was a good-faith
basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter
to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event
there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the
fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice, and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
(1) The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order to
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a
final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
A. Whenever there is a difference between the minimum standards
specified herein and those included in other borough regulations, the
more stringent requirements shall apply.
B. All existing ordinances or parts of ordinances which are contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, including the Borough of Kutztown
Subdivision Regulations Ordinance No. 9-1968, as amended, are hereby
repealed to the extent necessary to give this chapter full force and
effect, except as noted in § 195-50 or elsewhere in this chapter;
provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter shall not affect
any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any
provision of such repealed ordinance or to punish any offense against
any such repealed ordinance committed prior to the effective date of
this chapter.
§ 195-46 SOLID WASTE § 195-50
185:593
Chapter 200
TAXATION
§ 195-50 KUTZTOWN CODE § 195-50
185:594
ARTICLE I
Real Estate Transfer Tax
[Adopted 5-6-1969 by Ord. No. 5-1969; amended in its entirety
2-3-1987 by Ord. No. 2-1987]
§ 200-1. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust or
banking institution which is organized under the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania (and hereinafter referred to as the "commonwealth"), the
United States or any other state, territory or foreign country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
releases thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does
not pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract
has been paid or any cancellation thereof unless due consideration is
payable over a period of time exceeding 30 years or instruments which
solely grant, vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also
include a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording
under § 200-6 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
Recreational activities such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
§ 200-1 SOLID WASTE § 200-1
185:595
foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment or both,
the term "person" as applied to associations shall include the responsible
members or general partners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
Any lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Borough of
Kutztown, including without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures,
mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or
lower boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or
interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance of land,
but excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an
industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate the value of which comprises 90% or more of the value
of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets which
are freely transferable and actively traded on an established market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
§ 200-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § 200-1
185:596
VALUE —
§ 200-2. Imposition of tax. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No.
12-1995]
Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be subject
to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof or for or
in respect of the vellum parchment or paper upon which such document is
written or printed, a local tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate
located within the Borough of Kutztown represented by such document,
which local tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the document is
presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of such document
or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed and ground rents or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate; provided, that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" therefor shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate purposes for the common level ratio of assessed values to
market values of the taxing district as established by the State Tax
Equalization Board or a commensurate part of the assessment where
the assessment includes other real estate;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor or a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
§ 200-1 SOLID WASTE § 200-3
185:597
§ 200-3. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 200-4. Excluded transactions.
A. The tax imposed by § 200-2 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the commonwealth is prohibited from taxing
under the Constitution or statutes of the United States. [Amended
12-26-1995 by Ord. 12-1995]
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax-delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property, passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister and between grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
§ 200-3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 200-4
185:598
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee or an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the recorder of deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from or for the benefit of
his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is
the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee
claims an exemption from taxation under this clause.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth
reasonably determines that the primary intent for such merger,
consolidation or division is avoidance of the tax imposed by this
article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in or
ownership of the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of
the corporation or the interest in the association has been held by
the grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
§ 200-4 SOLID WASTE § 200-4
185:599
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
(68A Stat. 3), 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3), and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities or a transfer from such a
conservancy to the United States, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or to any of their instrumentalities, agencies or
political subdivisions. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No.
12-1995]
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
(23) Any transfer which the commonwealth may hereafter determine to
be exempt or excluded from the tax, said exemption or exclusion to
take effect under this article at the time that such a determination
is made by the commonwealth.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement of
value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such document is
not subject to tax under this article.
§ 200-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 200-5
185:600
§ 200-5. Documents.
Except as otherwise provided in § 200-4, documents which make, confirm or
evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between associations
or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or stockholders
thereof are fully taxable. For the purpose of this article, corporations and
associations are entities separate from their members, partners,
stockholders or shareholders.
§ 200-6. Acquired company.
§ 200-7. Credits against tax.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change:
(1) Does not affect the continuity of the company; and
(2) Of itself or together with prior changes has the effect of
transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or more of the total
ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is devised by the grantor,
a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the devise shall be
§ 200-5 SOLID WASTE § 200-7
185:601
given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer. [Amended
12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
§ 200-7 KUTZTOWN CODE § 200-7
185:602
ARTICLE II
Admissions and Amusements Tax
[Adopted 5-6-1969 as Ord. No. 6-1969]
§ 200-8. Definitions. [Amended 1-3-1984 by Ord. No. 1-1984]
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases,
when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section:
ADMISSION — Any and all monetary charges of any character
whatever, including donations, contributions, dues or membership fees
charged or paid or in any manner received by a producer, as herein
defined, from the general public or a limited number thereof, directly or
indirectly, for the privilege of attending or engaging in any amusement,
as herein defined; but said term shall not include any tax added to the
charge. In the case of person (except employees of the producer or
officials on official business) admitted free or at reduced rates when
an established price is charged to other persons, the term "admission"
shall mean the established price charge to such other persons.
AMUSEMENT — All manner and form of entertainment, including,
among others, the following: carnivals, circuses, dances, shows,
vaudeville shows, side shows, amusement parks (and all forms of
entertainment therein), fairs, festivals, folk festivals, amusement park
attractions or mechanical rides, jukeboxes, pinball machines and any
other form of mechanical and/or electronic device for which admission
is charged or paid or which is coin-operated and any other similar form
of diversion, pastime or recreation for which admission is charged or
paid, whether the same is conducted or held in the open air, under
canvas or within permanent structures; provided, however, that the
term "amusement" shall not include any form of athletic event, bowling,
bowling alleys, bathing, swimming or bathing pool, golf courses, golf
driving ranges, sound motion picture exhibitions, theatrical
performances, dances (only where the proceeds thereof, after payment
of reasonable expenses, inure exclusively to the benefit of any
charitable, religious, civic, educational, fraternal or beneficial nonprofit
organization) operatic performances, motion picture exhibitions, coinoperated
children's rides or any form of entertainment accompanying
or incidental to the serving of food or drink or the sale of merchandise
where the charge for admission is fully included in the price paid for
the refreshment or merchandise.[Amended 10-22-1985 by Ord. No.
10-1985]
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH AMUSEMENT TAX COLLECTOR — The person, public
employee or private agency designated by the Council of the Borough
of Kutztown to collect and administer the tax on amusements as levied
by this article.
§ 200-8 SOLID WASTE § 200-8
185:603
§ 200-9. Imposition of tax. [Amended 1-3-1984 by Ord. No. 1-1984]
COIN-OPERATED MACHINE — Any amusement machine or device
operated by means of insertion of a coin, token, slug or similar object
for the purpose of entertainment, amusement or skill and for the
playing of which a fee is charged; provided, however, that the term
"coin-operated machine" shall not include coin-operated children's
rides.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm, trust,
corporation or other entity. Whenever used in any clause prescribing
and imposing a penalty or imprisonment, or both, the term "person"
as applied to a partnership or association shall mean the partners or
members thereof and as applied to a corporation shall mean the officers
thereof.[Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place indoors or outdoors within the
Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania, where the general
public or a limited or certain number thereof may, upon payment of an
established price of admission, attend any amusement as hereinabove
defined. Without limiting the foregoing, the term "place of amusement"
shall also include any arcade or other establishment maintaining one or
more coin-operated machines.
PRODUCER — Any person who shall conduct any amusement within the
Borough of Kutztown.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. Except as hereinafter provided in Subsection B of this section, a tax is
hereby imposed, for general Borough purposes, under the authority of
the Act of December 31, 1965, No. 511, entitled the "Local Tax Enabling
Act," as amended and supplemented,161 at the rate of 10% of the price
of admission to each and every amusement as defined in this article
within the Borough of Kutztown. The producers shall be responsible for
collecting such tax and, where no fixed admission is charged, the tax
shall be based upon the gross collections or admissions collected or
received and shall be paid by the producer.
B. An annual tax is hereby imposed upon the use of any coin-operated
machine located within the Borough of Kutztown in the amount of $50,
which shall be paid by the person operating the coin-operated machine
or the person in charge of the premises where said machine is
operated. Notwithstanding the aforesaid, the tax imposed upon coinoperated
pool tables, shuffleboard games and jukeboxes shall be at the
rate of $25 per year. [Amended 6-19-1984 by Ord. No. 8-1984]
C. Upon payment of the above-stated tax imposed on coin-operated
machines, the Borough Amusement Tax Collector shall deliver to the
161. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 200-8 KUTZTOWN CODE § 200-9
185:604
§ 200-10. Amusement permits.
§ 200-11. Filing report and payment of tax.
operator of each such coin-operated machine or to the person in charge
of the premises where said machine is operated a license evidencing
the amount of tax paid and the number of coin-operated machines
included in said tax. The license shall be prominently displayed at the
location of the coin-operated machine or machines. The removal or
defacing of said license is hereby prohibited.
A. Any person desiring to conduct or to continue to conduct any
amusement within the Borough of Kutztown shall file with the Borough
Amusement Tax Collector an application for a permanent amusement
permit and shall pay a fee as shall be set from time to time by resolution
of the Borough Council. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No.
12-1995]
B. The Borough Amusement Tax Collector shall procure, at the expense of
the Borough, a sufficient number of permit forms, on each of which the
following information shall be printed or inserted:
(1) The name of the Borough.
(2) Whether a temporary or a permanent permit.
(3) The name of the producer.
(4) The location of the amusement.
(5) The type of amusement.
(6) The period for which issued.
(7) The number of the permit.
(8) The date of issue.
(9) The signature of the Borough Amusement Tax Collector.
C. Every permit shall be issued in duplicate, the original of which shall be
given to the producer and the duplicate kept on file by the Borough
Amusement Tax Collector, and such permit shall be displayed openly by
the producer at the location of the amusement.
A. Every producer to whom a permanent amusement permit shall have
been issued shall, on or before the last day of each month, transmit to
the Borough Amusement Tax Collector a report, under oath or
affirmation, setting forth the total admissions charged, collected or
received and the total amount of tax due from such producer and at the
same time shall pay over to the Borough Amusement Tax Collector the
entire amount of the tax due as of the time of the filing of the report.
§ 200-9 SOLID WASTE § 200-11
185:605
§ 200-12. Penalty.
If any tax levied in pursuance of this article shall not be paid when due, a
penalty of 10% of the amount of tax due and unpaid shall be added thereto.
§ 200-13. Powers and duties of Borough Amusement Tax Collector.
B. Every producer to whom a temporary amusement permit shall have
been issued shall at the close of each day on which such amusement is
conducted pay over to the Borough Amusement Tax Collector the
amount of tax due from such person under this article upon admissions
for such day and at the same time shall submit to the Borough
Amusement Tax Collector a report of the total admissions charged,
collected or received on such day, together with the total amount of tax
due on such admissions. Upon expiration of the temporary permit, the
producer shall, in addition, submit a report under oath or affirmation of
all admissions charged or collected during the period in which such
temporary amusement permit was in effect and of all taxes due and paid
thereupon.
C. Producers conducting a fair, festival, carnival or similar type of
amusement wherein other persons lease, occupy, rent, subcontract or
operate under franchise shall collect from each lessee, occupier, tenant,
subcontractor, operator or licensee the amount of tax due under this
article in the course of each day and shall at the same time receive a
report from such person of the total admissions charged, collected or
received on such day and shall remit all such collections within 24
hours, together with the reports thereon, to the Borough Amusement
Tax Collector.
A. It shall be the duty of the Borough Amusement Tax Collector to collect
and receive the taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this article. It also
shall be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him
from each person or producer paying the tax and the date of such
receipt.
B. The Borough Amusement Tax Collector shall pay all taxes, fines and
penalties collected by him to the Treasurer of the Borough of Kutztown
within 30 days after receipt of the same.
C. The Borough Amusement Tax Collector shall, before entering upon his
official duties, give and acknowledge a bond to the Borough of
Kutztown in such amount as may be fixed from time to time by
resolution of the Council of the Borough of Kutztown, which amount
shall be equal to the maximum amount of taxes of which such Collector
may be in possession at any given time. Said bond shall have one or
more corporate sureties which shall be surety companies authorized to
do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and duly licensed by
the Insurance Commission of said Commonwealth.
§ 200-11 KUTZTOWN CODE § 200-14
185:606
§ 200-14. Compensation of Borough Amusement Tax Collector.
The Borough Amusement Tax Collector shall receive such compensation for
his services and expenses as determined from time to time by the Council
of the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 200-15. Collection of tax.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with any and all penalties, fines,
interest and costs, shall be recoverable under any and all of the pertinent
provisions of the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945 (P.L. 1050), as amended
and supplemented.162
§ 200-16. Disposition of funds.
All taxes, interest, penalties and fines collected or recovered by the Borough
Amusement Tax Collector shall be paid into the Borough Treasury as
general revenue to be used for general Borough purposes.
§ 200-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord.
No. 12-1995]
Any person or producer who fails, neglects or refuses to make any return
required by this article or who fails, neglects or refuses to pay the tax
due under this article or any person or producer who knowingly makes
any incomplete, false or fraudulent return or attempts to do anything
whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the amount of his total admissions
or to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by
this article or otherwise violates or fails to carry out any of the provisions
or requirements of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any
District Justice or a court of competent jurisdiction in the County of Berks,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $600 for each
offense, plus the costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs,
shall be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
162. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 200-14 SOLID WASTE § 200-17
185:607

ARTICLE III
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 16-2007163]
§ 200-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED NOMINEE — The person designated by the governing body
of the Borough of Kutztown by resolution to administer and enforce or to
assist in the administration or enforcement of the tax in the place of the Tax
Collector.
CALENDAR YEAR or YEAR — The period of time beginning on the first day
of January and ending on the 31st day of December of each year.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, limited partnership, association
or corporation that engages the services of any individual and makes
payment to said individual, whether by salary, wages, commission, or
otherwise. An "employer" shall include a self-employed person who engages
in his employ the services of one or more individuals besides himself.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation
of any nature, type or kind whatsoever within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Kutztown, whether in the employ of another or self-employed,
during the calendar year 2008 or any calendar year thereafter.
LOCAL SERVICES TAX — A tax of $52 per year levied on each engagement
in any occupation, as heretofore defined, within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Kutztown during the calendar year 2008 or any calendar year
thereafter.
PRIVILEGE — The exercising or carrying on by any manner or means
of any occupation whatsoever, whether it be trade, profession, business
or undertaking of any type or kind carried on or performed within the
corporate limits of the Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, for which
recompense is received, whether by means of salary, wages, commission
or otherwise, or whether the individual be self-employed, by payment for
services rendered.
RETURN — All forms designated, prepared and supplied by the Tax
Collector or his approved nominee for reporting the tax required to be
deducted and paid at the times specified in §§ 200-23 and 200-25 of this
article.
TAXABLE YEAR — The calendar year in which the tax is payable.
TAX COLLECTOR — The Tax Collector of the Borough of Kutztown, Berks
County, Pennsylvania as appointed by the Borough of Kutztown to collect
the local services tax.
163. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Emergency and Municipal
Services Tax, adopted 3-21-2006 by Ord. No. 7-2006.
§ 200-18 SOLID WASTE § 200-19
185:609
§ 200-19. Imposition of tax.
For the calendar year 2008 and annually thereafter, the Borough of
Kutztown hereby imposes on each individual, to be paid by said individual
exercising the privilege of engaging in any occupation within the corporate
limits of the Borough of Kutztown, an annual local services tax in the
manner and at the rates hereinafter set forth.
§ 200-20. Amount of tax.
Beginning on January 1, 2008, each engagement in an occupation as
hereinbefore defined shall be subject to the payment of a local services tax
of $52 to be paid by each individual exercising the privilege of engaging in
any occupation, as hereinbefore defined, within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Kutztown.
§ 200-21. Exemptions; tax to be paid and refunded.
A. Each individual exercising the privilege of engaging in any occupation
or occupations within the corporate limits of the Borough of Kutztown
and who shall earn less than $12,000 during the calendar year from
said occupation or occupations shall be exempt from the payment of the
local services tax of $52.
B. Each individual who shall be engaged in more than one occupation
within the corporate limits of the Borough of Kutztown and who shall
earn a total of $12,000 or more from the two or more occupations
engaged in shall not be exempt from the local services tax of $52
though he or she shall earn less than $12,000 in each one of the two or
more occupations he or she is engaging in within the corporate limits of
the Borough of Kutztown.
C. Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which the
United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or released
under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a result of
military service, the person is blind, a paraplegic, or a double or
quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability declared by
the United States Veterans Administration or its successor to be a total
one-hundred-percent disability, said person shall be exempt from
payment of the tax.
D. Any person who has served as a member of a reserved component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the taxable
year shall be exempt from payment of the tax. For the purposes of this
subsection, "reserved component of the armed forces" shall mean the
United States Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United
States Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve,
United States Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National
Guard or the Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
§ 200-19 KUTZTOWN CODE § 200-21
185:610
§ 200-22. Date tax is due; penalty for late payment.
E. Any individual exempt from the payment of the local services tax
hereunder shall nevertheless pay said tax pursuant to the provisions of
§§ 200-23, 200-26 or 200-27 hereof and shall, after December 31 of the
subject taxable year but prior to June 30 next following the subject
taxable year, file a claim for refund of said tax. The burden of proof shall
be upon the individual claiming to be exempt to verify and furnish proof
satisfactory to the Tax Collector, or his approved nominee, that he or
she is exempt and is entitled to a refund of the tax previously paid.
Upon the receipt of such proof supporting the exemption, the Tax
Collector, or his approved nominee, is authorized to make refund of the
tax previously paid to such individual having supplied such proof that
he or she is exempt from payment of the tax.
A. Each taxpayer or employer who becomes subject to the tax or the
withholding provisions of this article shall file the required returns and
shall pay the tax due according to the following schedule:
(1) For all employees employed or self-employed persons engaging in
an occupation in the Borough between the dates of January 1 of the
taxable year and March 31 of the taxable year (first quarter), no
later than April 30 of the taxable year.
(2) For all employees employed or self-employed persons engaging in
an occupation in the Borough between the dates of April 1 of the
taxable year, and June 30 of the taxable year (second quarter), no
later than July 31 of the taxable year.
(3) For employees employed or self-employed persons engaging in an
occupation in the Borough between the dates of July 1 of the
taxable year and September 30 of the taxable year (third quarter),
no later than October 31 of the taxable year.
(4) For all employees employed or self-employed persons engaging in
an occupation in the Borough between October 1 of the taxable
year and December 31 of the taxable year (fourth quarter), no later
than January 31 of the year following the taxable year.
B. In the case of an individual who exercises the privilege of engaging in
an occupation within the corporate limits of the Borough of Kutztown
for the first time after the first day of January of the taxable year, said
tax shall be due and payable at close of the quarter said privilege is so
exercised, as set forth in § 200-22A above.
C. Each taxpayer, employer or individual who becomes subject to the tax
or withholding provisions of this article and fails to remit payment for
said tax to the Borough, according to the schedule set forth in
§ 200-22A and B above, shall have levied against him/her a penalty
equal to 10% of the amount due and interest computed at 1% per month
for all amounts due and owing after the due date.
§ 200-21 SOLID WASTE § 200-23
185:611
§ 200-23. Responsibility of employer to collect; procedure.
Each employer within the Borough of Kutztown is hereby charged with
the duty of collecting and paying over to the Tax Collector of the Borough
of Kutztown, or his approved nominee, from each employee engaged in
his services, a pro rata share of the said tax of $52 per year upon the
privilege of engaging in any occupation, as hereinbefore defined, from each
individual employed by said employer who performs services on behalf of
said employer within the Borough of Kutztown or who is engaged in an
occupation, as hereinbefore defined, for the benefit of the said employer or
in the service of said employer within the corporate limits of the Borough
of Kutztown. The pro rata share of the tax assessed by the employer shall
be determined by dividing the $52 tax by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the year. For purposes of determining the
pro rata share, the employer shall round down to the nearest 1/100 of
a dollar. Each employer shall make returns and payments of such tax as
required by this section and § 200-25 and is authorized to deduct the said
local services tax at the rates hereby imposed from each employee in his
service, whether said employee is paid by salary, wages, commission or
otherwise. Each employer within the corporate limits of the Borough of
Kutztown shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the tax
on a form to be obtained by him from the Tax Collector of the Borough
of Kutztown, or his approved nominee. Each employer shall file returns
as required by this section and § 200-25 obtained by him from the Tax
Collector of the Borough of Kutztown, or his approved nominee, showing
a computation of the tax. Each employer, by completing and filing said
returns as required by this section and § 200-25, and making payments
after deducting the tax from the salary, wages, commissions or other
compensations payable by him to his employees, shall be entitled to retain
a commission calculated at 1/2 of 1% on the gross tax due and payable by
each individual, provided that such tax is collected and paid over by the
employer within the one month next following the last day of the quarter
in which it is due. It is further provided that if the employer fails to file
said return and pay said tax, but makes collection thereof from the salary,
wages, commissions or other compensation paid by him to said employee,
the employer shall be responsible for payment of the tax in full without
any deductions or commissions as though the tax had originally been levied
against him. If said employer fails to file a return, deduct and remit the tax
imposed on his employees within four months of the due date, the applicable
penalty and interest shall be chargeable to the employer. It is the employer's
responsibility to file the return and remit the tax on behalf of his employee
whether or not he deducts the tax from the employee. It is further provided
that the provisions of this section shall apply with respect to each and every
employee earning less than $12,000 during the taxable year as defined and
set forth under § 200-21. The burden of proof shall be upon the employee to
verify and furnish proof to the Tax Collector, or his approved nominee, that
he is exempt under § 200-21 and thus entitled to a refund.
§ 200-23 KUTZTOWN CODE § 200-24
185:612
§ 200-24. Individuals having more than one occupation.
Each individual who shall have more than one occupation within the
corporate limits of the Borough of Kutztown or a principal occupation in
another municipality which levies a local services tax shall be subject to
the payment of the annual local services tax solely upon the privilege
of engaging in his principal occupation, and his principal employer shall
deliver to him a certificate of payment in a form to be furnished to the
employer by the Tax Collector, or his approved nominee, certifying to any
other employer of such individual that said local services tax has been paid
by the employee to the employer and, in turn, remitted by said employer to
the Tax Collector, or his approved nominee of said other municipality. Any
employer receiving such original certificate of payment of the local services
tax by another employer shall not deduct or collect the local services tax
imposed by this article.
§ 200-25. Determination by employer as to which employees are
subject to tax; commission.
Each employer in the Borough of Kutztown shall use his employment
records as of the first day of January in determining the number of
employees from whom the said local services tax shall be deducted and
paid over to the Tax Collector or his approved nominee. Each employer who
engages the services of any individual in an occupation to be performed
in the Borough of Kutztown on or after the first day of January 2008 shall
collect from said employee a pro rata share of the fifty-two-dollar tax by
dividing 52 by the number of payroll periods established by the employer
for the year and collecting that sum for each remaining pay period from the
employee's pay.
§ 200-26. Collection from self-employed persons and persons
employed outside Borough.
Each self-employed individual in the Borough of Kutztown who performs
any services of any type or kind within the corporate limits of the Borough
of Kutztown, whether the same is regarded either as a profession or as a
business, shall be required to pay the local services tax of $52 for himself
and shall, further, be required to deduct and pay over in the manner
hereinbefore set forth in § 200-23, but in any event no less than $13 per
quarter to the Tax Collector of the Borough of Kutztown, an annual local
services tax of $52 for himself or herself and every individual in his employ
who is engaged in the performance of any occupation or profession for him
within the Borough of Kutztown. Any individual engaged in any occupation
within the said Borough who is an employee of another shall be liable for the
payment of the tax of $52 for himself and shall be treated and regarded as
a self-employed individual if the location of the business of his employer is
beyond the corporate limits of the Borough of Kutztown and said employee
is not liable for a similar tax in another municipality. Each employer whose
business location is beyond the corporate limits of the Borough of Kutztown
shall be required to furnish to the Tax Collector of the Borough of Kutztown,
§ 200-24 SOLID WASTE § 200-26
185:613
or his approved nominee, a list of all individuals employed by him who
exercise the privilege of engaging in any occupation of any type or kind
within the corporate limits of the Borough of Kutztown during the calendar
year and who are not liable for a similar tax in another municipality. It is
further provided that the provisions of this section shall apply to each selfemployed
individual as defined herein earning less than $12,000 during the
calendar year as defined and set forth under § 200-21. The burden of proof
shall be upon the self-employed individual to verify and furnish proof to the
Tax Collector that he is exempt under § 200-21 and thus entitled to a refund.
§ 200-27. Tax to be in addition to other taxes.
The tax imposed by this article shall be in addition to all other taxes of any
kind or nature heretofore or hereafter levied by the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 200-28. Domestic employees.
Where a person is engaged in domestic services for others and has more
than one employer in the performance of such services, the employer by
whom such domestic is employed on the first day of January of the taxable
year shall be responsible for the collection and payment of the annual
local services tax for such domestic to the Tax Collector of the Borough
of Kutztown, or his approved nominee pursuant to §§ 200-23 and 200-25.
In the event that the domestic is not employed by any person on the first
day of January, the said responsibility for deducting and paying over the
local services tax shall rest upon the employer of the domestic on the next
succeeding date following the first day of January, and said employer shall
furnish to said domestic employee a certificate of payment of said local
services tax to be exhibited to all other employers of said domestic, and
the producing of said certificate to such other employers shall excuse them
from the deduction of any further local services tax from said domestic
employee for the taxable year.
§ 200-29. Powers and duties of Collector.
A. It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector, or his approved nominee, to
collect, to receive and, when required by law or this article, to make
refunds of the taxes, fines or penalties imposed by this article. It shall
also be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him
from each self-employed person paying the tax and the date of such
receipt; and, further, it shall be his duty to keep a record showing the
amount received by him from every employer paying the tax on behalf
of his employees by deduction made by such employer from the salary,
wages, commissions or other forms of recompense.
B. The Tax Collector, or his approved nominee, is hereby charged with the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and is
hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including a provision for the
§ 200-26 KUTZTOWN CODE § 200-29
185:614
§ 200-30. Collection of unpaid taxes.
In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid at the end
of the taxable year, the Tax Collector, or his approved nominee, may sue for
the recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
penalty. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any local services tax, the
individual liable therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the
costs of collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed.
§ 200-31. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statements on any return or exemption
claim required by this article, or who refuses inspection of the books,
records or accounts in his custody or control in order to determine the
number of employees subject to the local services tax who are in his
employment or whoever fails or refuses to file any return required by this
article shall, upon conviction before any District Justice having jurisdiction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 for each offense and, in
default of payment of said fine, to be imprisoned in Berks County Prison
[Lancaster County Prison] for a period not exceeding 30 days for each
offense. It is further provided that action to enforce the penalty herein
provided may be begun and instituted against any person in charge of the
business premises of any employer who has failed or who refuses to file a
return required by this article.
§ 200-32. Limitation on levy; effect of judicial decisions.
examination of the payroll records of any employer within the Borough
of Kutztown and, further, for the reexamination and correction of any
returns made in compliance with this article and any payment alleged
or found to be incorrect or as to which overpayment or exemption
is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any
decision of the Tax Collector, or his approved nominee, shall have the
right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Berks County as in
other cases provided.
C. The Tax Collector, or his approved nominee, is hereby authorized to
examine the books and payroll records of any employer in order to
verify the accuracy of any return made by any employer on behalf of his
employees or, if no return was made, to ascertain the local services tax
due. Each employer in the Borough of Kutztown is hereby directed and
required to give to the Tax Collector, or his approved nominee, the
means, facilities and opportunity for such examinations and
investigations as are hereby authorized.
D. The records, books and accounts of the Tax Collector, or his approved
nominee, shall be audited by whoever from time to time is charged with
the auditing of the accounts of the Borough of Kutztown.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Borough of Kutztown to levy and collect the local services tax hereby
§ 200-29 SOLID WASTE § 200-32
185:615
§ 200-32.1. Individuals in licensed occupations subject to tax.
If any individual is engaged in any occupation of any type or kind licensed
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the tax imposed by this article,
nevertheless, shall be payable and due by said individual for the privilege
of maintaining a location within the corporate limits of the Borough of
Kutztown or for the carrying on of such occupation or business so licensed
within the corporate limits of the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 200-32.2. Deadline for refund claims.
Any claim for refund of any local services tax paid during the calendar year
of 2008 or thereafter must be filed in writing with the Tax Collector, or
his approved nominee, on or before the 30th day of June next following
the subject taxable year. Any claim for refund filed after said date shall be
barred and disallowed.
imposed on any occupation not within the taxing power of the Borough
of Kutztown under the Constitution of the United States and the laws
and Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, particularly
those laws which provide that no person shall pay more than $52 in
any calendar year as a local services tax irrespective of the number of
political subdivisions within which such person may be employed within
any given calendar year.
B. If the local services tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this
article shall be held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in
violation of the Constitution of the United States or of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the
court shall not affect or impair the right to impose or collect said local
services tax or the validity of the tax so imposed upon other persons or
individuals as herein provided.
§ 200-32 KUTZTOWN CODE § 200-32.2
185:616
ARTICLE IV
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 12-5-1972 as Ord. No. 15-1972]
§ 200-33. Definitions; word usage.
§ 200-34. Imposition of tax. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No.
12-1995]
The following tax is hereby imposed for the general Borough purposes for
each calendar year without annual reenactment:
§ 200-35. Effect on other taxes.
The per capita tax levied and assessed by the within Article shall be in
addition to all other taxes levied and assessed by the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 200-36. Collection of tax.
Said per capita tax shall be collected and the payment thereof enforced
by the duly elected or appointed Tax Collector of the Borough of Kutztown
in the same manner and at the same time as other Borough taxes are
collected, as provided by the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945, as amended
and supplemented.164
§ 200-37. Compensation of Tax Collector.
The expenses of collection and compensation of the Tax Collector for the
collection of said per capita tax shall be the same as fixed from time to time
by the Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown for the collection of
Borough taxes.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have, for
purposes of this article, the meanings here indicated:
PERSON — Includes natural persons.
RESIDENT — An individual domiciled in the Borough of Kutztown,
Berks County, Pennsylvania.
INHABITANT — An individual domiciled in the Borough of Kutztown,
Berks County, Pennsylvania.
B. The singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the
feminine.
A. Five dollars per person on each inhabitant or resident of the Borough of
Kutztown who is 18 years of age or over on January 1 of the calendar
year for which the tax is imposed.
164. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 200-33 SOLID WASTE § 200-38
185:617
§ 200-38. Powers and duties of Tax Collector.
The Tax Collector shall demand, receive and collect the per capita tax
provided for herein from all residents and individuals liable for the payment
of the same and in so doing shall have all of the powers conferred upon
him by the Act of General Assembly of Pennsylvania, No. 511, approved
December 31, 1965, known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act," as amended
and supplemented.165 The Tax Collector shall allow discounts from and
add penalties to the amount of tax owing and shall remit such taxes and
penalties to the Borough Treasurer by separate statement at the same time
as other taxes are remitted to the Borough, as provided by the Local Tax
Collection Law of 1945, as amended and supplemented.166
§ 200-39. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-26-1995 by Ord. No.
12-1995]
Any person who shall be convicted of violating or failing to carry out any
provision of this article or of failing or refusing to make returns or pay over
any tax levied by this article shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$50 nor more than $600 for each offense, together with costs of prosecution
thereof, and, in default of payment thereof, may be imprisoned for a period
not to exceed 30 days.
165. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
166. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 200-38 KUTZTOWN CODE § 200-39
185:618
ARTICLE V
Discounts and Penalties
[Adopted 11-9-1976 as Ord. No. 13-1976]
§ 200-40. Discount.
Every taxpayer subject to the payment of taxes assessed by the Borough
of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania, shall be entitled to a discount of
2% from the amount of such tax upon said taxpayer making payment of the
whole amount thereof within two months after the date of the tax notice.
§ 200-41. Penalty.
Every taxpayer who shall fail to make payment within four months after
the date of the tax notice of any tax assessed against said taxpayer by
the Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania, shall be charged
a penalty of 10%, which penalty shall be added to the taxes by the Tax
Collector of the Borough of Kutztown and shall be collected by said Tax
Collector.
§ 200-40 SOLID WASTE § 200-41
185:619

ARTICLE VI
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-15-2011 by Ord. No. 12-2011167]
§ 200-42. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act shall have the meanings set
forth therein. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein:
COLLECTOR — The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the tax.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2012.
ENACTMENT — This Ordinance No. 12-2011.
GOVERNING BODY — The Borough Council of Kutztown Borough.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth
in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. while such numbering and provisions remain in
effect under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
when such numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as
amended in the future.
TCD — Any tax collection district to which the taxing authority or any part
of the taxing authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TCC — The tax collection committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TAX — The tax imposed by this enactment.
TAXING AUTHORITY — Kutztown Borough.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the collector for reporting the amount
of tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted, or
reported under this enactment or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
§ 200-43. Imposition of tax.
A. General purpose resident tax. The taxing authority hereby imposes a
tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned income
and net profits of individual residents of the taxing authority.
B. General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The taxing authority also
imposes a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned
income and net profits derived by an individual who is not a resident of
the taxing authority from any work, business, profession, or activity, of
any kind engaged in within the boundaries of the taxing authority.
167. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. VI, Earned Income Tax, adopted
12-29-1977 by Ord. No. 16-1977, as amended 9-17-2002 by Ord. No. 10-2002.
§ 200-42 SOLID WASTE § 200-43
185:621
§ 200-44. Credits and deductions; exemptions.
Although credits and deductions against tax are permitted under certain
circumstances as provided in applicable law and regulations, no individuals
are exempt from tax based on age, income, or other factors.
§ 200-45. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
§ 200-46. Employer withholding and remittance; tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold, and remit tax, and file tax returns
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 200-47. Tax Collector.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the collector.
C. Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this enactment is repealed or the rate is changed.
D. Combined tax rate applicable to residents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to residents of the taxing authority, including the tax
imposed by the school district and municipality in which the individual
resides, is 1%.
E. Municipal tax rate applicable to nonresidents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to non-residents working within the taxing authority based
on the municipal nonresident tax rate is 1%.
F. Local tax enabling act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority of
the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this
enactment. Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that
are required to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will
automatically become part of this enactment upon the effective date of
such amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this
enactment, to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
G. Applicable laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with: all applicable laws and
regulations; and policies and procedures adopted by the TCC or by the
Collector. This includes any regulations, policies, and procedures
adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 1937.
§ 200-43 KUTZTOWN CODE § 200-48
185:622
§ 200-48. Interest, penalties, costs and fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by
the Collector in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 200-49. through § 200-50. (Reserved)
§ 200-48 SOLID WASTE § 200-49
185:623

ARTICLE VII
Tax Collector
[Adopted 5-23-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1995; amended in its entirety
2-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2-2013]
§ 200-51. Tax certifications.
The Borough hereby appoints the duly elected and/or appointed Tax
Collector of the Borough as the municipal officer authorized to provide
tax certifications, upon request by the public, and the Borough hereby
authorized such Tax Collector to assess, collect and retain, as compensation
for providing such additional service, a fee of not more than $25 for each
tax certification that such Tax Collector provides.
§ 200-52. Check charge.
The Borough hereby authorizes the duly elected and/or appointed Tax
Collector of the Borough to assess, collect and retain, as compensation and
reimbursement for expenses incurred, a fee of not more than $30 for each
check tendered to said Tax Collector which is subsequently returned due to
insufficient funds.
§ 200-53. Charge for photocopying or printing.
The Borough hereby establishes a fee of $0.25 per side of sheet of paper
for photocopying or printing by the Tax Collector. The Borough hereby
establishes a fee to be not more than $5 per bill for the Tax Collector to
provide multiple bills to mortgage companies.
§ 200-54. Compensation.
The compensation to the Tax Collector of the Borough for the collection
of real estate taxes within the Borough limits is hereby fixed at $2.50 per
bill, and the compensation of the Tax Collector for the collection of per
capita taxes within the Borough limits is hereby fixed at $0.75 per bill.
Compensation will be as follows:
A. Compensation will be paid in three installments no later than March 31,
April 30 and September 15.
B. The installments shall be based on the total number of tax bills printed
by Berks County and invoiced by the County Treasurer for the prior
year; and
C. The third and final installment, to be paid no later than September 15,
shall include any shortfall or excess remaining after the reconciliation
is completed of the total number of tax bills printed by Berks County
and invoiced by the County Treasurer for the current year against the
total number of tax bills printed by Berks County and invoiced by the
County Treasurer for the previous year.
§ 200-51 SOLID WASTE § 200-55
185:625
§ 200-55. Delinquent Tax Collector.
The Council appoints the elected Tax Collector of the Borough as the
municipal delinquent Tax Collector, as required by Act 104 of 2000,
amending the Local Tax Collection Law.168
§ 200-56. through § 200-59. (Reserved)
168. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 200-55 KUTZTOWN CODE § 200-56
185:626
ARTICLE VIII
(Reserved)169
§ 200-60. through § 200-68. (Reserved)
169. Editor’s Note: Former Art. VIII, Residential Rental Tax, adopted 2-26-2008 by Ord. No.
3-2008, was repealed 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 7-2016.
§ 200-60 SOLID WASTE § 200-60
185:627

ARTICLE IX
Agency Fees for Delinquent Taxes
[Adopted 4-19-2016 by Res. No. 10-2016]
§ 200-69. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein:
COLLECTOR — The Berks County Earned Income Tax Collection Bureau.
ENACTMENT — This article.
GOVERNING BODY — The Council of the Borough of Kutztown, Berks
County, Pennsylvania.
TAX — All local earned income taxes, other taxes, penalties, interest, and
costs that the Collector collects on behalf of the Taxing Authority under the
Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6924.101, et seq., or other statutory law.
TAXING AUTHORITY — The Borough of Kutztown.
TAXPAYER — An employer or taxpayer that is liable for tax.
§ 200-70. Authorization.
The Taxing Authority acknowledges the Collector may engage one or more
third-party collection agencies to pursue and collect delinquent tax in
situations where the amount of delinquent tax owed is relatively small and
it is therefore cost-prohibitive for the Collector to dedicate the upfront
resources necessary to pursue such delinquent tax. The Taxing Authority
hereby approves of the imposition on and collection of a fee from any
delinquent taxpayer by any third-party collection agency engaged by the
Collector, provided such fee does not exceed 25% of the amount of tax
collected from any such taxpayer.
§ 200-71. Notice.
Promptly after adoption of this article, the Taxing Authority will provide a
copy of this article to the Collector. If the Taxing Authority later rescinds,
limits, or changes the scope of, the authorization set forth in this article
then the Taxing Authority will immediately notify the Collector.
§ 200-69 SOLID WASTE § 200-71
185:629
Chapter 206
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 160.
§ 206-1. License required; definitions; applications. [Amended
12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995; 3-11-2003 by Ord. No. 1-2003]
A. Pursuant to the power of the Council of the Borough of Kutztown to
regulate and license each and every transient retail business within the
Borough for the sale of goods, wares and/or merchandise; each and
every transient retail business within the Borough of Kutztown for the
sale of goods, wares and/or merchandise is prohibited from
commencing or doing any such business until or unless the license
required by this chapter has been procured from the Kutztown Borough
Police Department by the person, partnership, trust, firm, corporation
or other entity desiring to commence or carry on such retail business.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated: [Amended 4-21-2009 by Ord. No. 3-2009]
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation
or similar entity.
PUBLIC RECREATION AREAS — Any areas owned by the Borough of
Kutztown and established and designated as a public park, pool or other
recreational area.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — A person or persons engaging in
the advertising, promoting, selling and/or explaining of any product,
service or a business organization, or soliciting orders for the sale of
goods, wares, merchandise or services, in person, on public or private
property.
C. Applications.
(1) All applications for a transient retail business license must be
submitted to the Kutztown Borough Police Department during
regular business hours and must contain the following information:
(a) The name, address and phone number of the person, firm, or
business organization under which the transient retail
business will be conducted.
(b) The name, date of birth and address of all persons who will be
conducting the transient retail business.
§ 200-71 KUTZTOWN CODE § 206-1
185:630
§ 206-2. Licensing exceptions. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No.
12-1995; 3-11-2003 by Ord. No. 1-2003]
§ 206-3. License fee. [Added 3-11-2003 by Ord. No. 1-2003]
Each and every person, firm, partnership, trust, corporation or other entity
required by the foregoing section to procure the required transient retail
business license shall submit a license fee in the amount of $25 along with
an application to the Kutztown Borough Police Department. All licenses
issued pursuant to this chapter shall remain in effect for 30 days from the
date of issue.
§ 206-4. Prohibitions; exceptions. [Added 4-21-2009 by Ord. No.
3-2009]
(c) Such other information as may be requested by the Kutztown
Borough Police Department pertaining to the application for a
transient retail business license.
(2) The Kutztown Borough Police Department shall process all
transient retail business license applications within two business
days from the date of submission of the application.
A. The following are exempted from the requirements of this Chapter 206:
(1) Farmers selling their own produce;
(2) The sale of goods, wares and merchandise, the proceeds of which
are for the benefit of any religious institution or public, private or
parochial school; or
(3) Any individual, group or organization engaging in the public
advocacy of or solicitation for a political and/or religious cause or
causes.
B. In addition to the above listed exemptions, any vendors attending any
event authorized by the Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown,
including but not limited to a preplanned event occurring at the
Kutztown Fairgrounds, or any other social event intended for
entertainment or educational purposes are hereby exempted from the
requirements of this Chapter 206.
A. No person shall operate a transient retail business within a public
recreation area located in the Borough of Kutztown.
B. No person shall enter or remain upon any public recreation area for the
purpose of conducting a transient retail business or for the sale of
goods, services, or any other thing of value, when a "No Solicitation"
sign has been posted at or near the entrance of said public recreation
area.
§ 206-1 SOLID WASTE § 206-4
185:631
§ 206-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-21-2009 by Ord. No.
3-2009]
Upon failure of said person, firm or corporation to secure such license
as required by this chapter, said person, firm or corporation shall pay a
fine or penalty of $25, to be collected as other fines and penalties are by
law collectible and, in default of payment of said fine or penalty, shall be
imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 212
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 192.
C. Exceptions. The prohibitions listed above shall not apply to bona fide
religious, charitable, school and civic organizations or other
organizations eligible for exemption under Section 501(c) of the
Internal Revenue Code.
D. The prohibitions listed above shall not apply to any person engaged in
distribution of noncommercial information in the exercise of such
person's First Amendment rights under the United States Constitution.
§ 206-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 206-5
185:632
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 212-1. Definitions and interpretation.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
Articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq. (the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except
that in this chapter the word "street" may be used interchangeably with
the word "highway" and shall have the same meaning as the word
"highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated: [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 17-2006]
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The corporate official appointed by the
Borough Council as the Borough Manager or such official's properly
designated representative.
HOLIDAYS — Includes New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence
Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, Martin Luther King
Day, Washington's Birthday, Good Friday, Columbus Day and Veterans
Day.
INDIVIDUAL PARKING SPACE — Portion of an off-street parking facility
specified and marked off sufficiently to accommodate a parked
vehicle.[Added 9-17-2019 by Ord. No. 2-2019]
KIOSK (also referred to as a "payment station") — A device capable
of tracking parking payments of multiple vehicles, which shall indicate
thereon the length of time during which a vehicle may be parked in a
particular individual parking space or parking lot and which shall have
as a part thereof a receptacle or chamber for receiving and storing
coins representing currency of the United States, a slot or place into
which said coins may be deposited, and where payment may be made
by use of a credit card.[Added 9-17-2019 by Ord. No. 2-2019]
MAYOR — The Mayor of the Borough of Kutztown.
OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES — Lots or tracts of land situated
in the Borough as designated in Schedule XXI (§ 212-77.1), attached to
and made a part of this chapter, which are improved, paved, lighted and
marked off into individual parking spaces and equipped with parking
meters and/or kiosks for use in parking of vehicles.[Added 9-17-2019
by Ord. No. 2-2019]
PARKING — Standing of a vehicle on or in any of the off-street parking
facilities provided therefor, and whether such vehicle is occupied or
not, by an operator or otherwise, for a period in excess of one
minute.[Added 9-17-2019 by Ord. No. 2-2019]
§ 212-1 SOLID WASTE § 212-1
185:633
§ 212-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Borough of Kutztown, except as hereinafter provided for in §§ 212-7 and
212-8.
§ 212-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
PARKING METER — Device which shall indicate thereon the length of
time during which a vehicle may be parked in a particular individual
parking space and which shall have as a part thereof a receptacle
or chamber for receiving and storing coins representing currency of
the United States of America, a slot or place into which said coins
may be deposited, or where payment may be made by use of a credit
card, a timing device to indicate the passage of an interval of time
during which parking is permissible, and which shall also display an
appropriate signal when the aforesaid interval of time shall have
elapsed, also brief instructions as to the operation of said parking
meter, and the schedule of parking meter rates and time of
operation.[Added 9-17-2019 by Ord. No. 2-2019]
PORTABLE ON-DEMAND STORAGE UNITS (PODS)® — A temporary
or portable storage unit that is transportable and designed and used
primarily for the temporary storage of building materials, household
goods, personal items, and other materials for use on a limited basis.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any place to which the public has access
including, but not limited to, public streets, sidewalks and municipally
owned parking lots, as well as the front of and any area directly
adjacent to any parking lot, store, tavern, restaurant or other place of
business.
VEHICLE — Any type of mechanical device in which persons or
property may be transported upon public streets or highways.[Added
9-17-2019 by Ord. No. 2-2019]
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in
limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. These temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Mayor and the police in the same manner as permanent regulations.
§ 212-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-3
185:634
§ 212-4. Experimental regulations.
§ 212-5. Streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance
or special events.
§ 212-6. Authority of police officers and community service officers.
[Amended 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000; 9-21-2004 by Ord. No.
21-2004]
The police and community service officers shall have the authority to direct
traffic on the streets in the Borough or on Borough-owned property located
outside of the physical boundaries of the borough, at intersections, in
Any person who drives or parks a vehicle in violation of any such
regulation or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface any
sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature.
A. The Mayor may, from time to time, designate places upon and along the
streets in the Borough where, for a period of not more than 90 days,
specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and restrictions
shall be in force and effect and shall designate those locations by proper
signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions
shall be effective just as if they had been specified in this chapter. No
person shall drive or park a vehicle in violation of any such regulation,
prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move, remove, destroy or
deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of this
section. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be liable to the penalty set out in the law or elsewhere
in this chapter for a violation of such nature.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and parking.
A. The Mayor or designated representative shall have authority to close
any street or specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place
barriers or station police officers at each end of the closed portion while
construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event is
being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Mayor or designated representative shall have authority to
establish a restricted traffic area upon any street where construction or
maintenance work is under way and to station flagmen at each end of
the restricted portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such restricted traffic area at any time when the
flagman is displaying a sign directing that vehicle to stop or is signaling
that vehicle, by a flag or other device, not to proceed.
§ 212-3 SOLID WASTE § 212-6
185:635
public and in other places where the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code170 or this
chapter applies. Police officers and duly authorized community service
officers of the Borough shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of
this chapter. Community service officers of the Borough shall additionally
have the authority to issue citations pursuant to Chapter 192, Streets and
Sidewalks.
170. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 212-6 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-6
185:636
ARTICLE II
Powers of Mayor
§ 212-7. Powers enumerated. [Amended 11-26-1996 by Ord. No.
13-1996; 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000]
Subject to the provisions of this chapter hereinafter set forth, the Mayor of
the Borough of Kutztown (hereinafter referred to as the "Mayor") is hereby
authorized to take certain actions on behalf of the Borough of Kutztown
(hereinafter referred to as the "Borough") as pertain to streets, highways,
and public property within the physical boundaries of the Borough. The
enumeration of police powers concerning which the Mayor is hereby
authorized to take action are as follows:
A. Regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking on streets, alleys,
highways and public properties with the Borough or on borough-owned
properties located outside the physical boundaries of the Borough.
B. Regulate traffic on streets, alleys and highways within the Borough by
means of police officers or official traffic control devices.
C. (Reserved)171
D. Designate particular streets, alleys, highways or roadways for use by
traffic moving in one direction as authorized in § 3308 of the Vehicle
Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (75 Pa. C.S.A. § 3308), as
from time to time amended and supplemented (said Vehicle Code, as
from time to time amended, hereinafter in this section the "Vehicle
Code").
E. Establish speed limits for vehicles in public parks.
F. Designate any street, alley or highway within the Borough as a through
highway or designate any intersection or junction of roadways as a stop
or yield intersection or junction.
G. Prohibit or restrict the use of streets, alleys and highways within the
Borough at particular places or by particular classes of vehicles
whenever the street, alley or highway or portion of the street, alley or
highway may be seriously damaged by the use or the movement of
vehicles would constitute a safety hazard.
H. Regulate the operation of pedalcycles and require their registration and
inspection and the payment of a reasonable registration fee.
I. Regulate or prohibit the turning of vehicles or specified types of
vehicles as authorized in § 3331 of the Vehicle Code.
171. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, which authorized the Mayor to regulate or prohibit
processions or assemblages on streets, alleys and highways within the physical boundaries
of the Borough or on Borough-owned properties outside the physical boundaries of the
Borough, was repealed 9-16-2003 by Ord. No. 7-2003. See now Ch. 155, Parades.
§ 212-7 SOLID WASTE § 212-7
185:637
J. Alter or establish speed limits as authorized in Subchapter F of Chapter
33 of the Vehicle Code.
K. Enforce speed restrictions authorized under Subchapter F of Chapter
33 of the Vehicle Code, except that speed restrictions may be enforced
by local police on a limited access or divided highway in the Borough
only if it is patrolled by the local police force under the terms of an
agreement with the Pennsylvania State Police.
L. Designate no-passing zones as authorized in § 3307 of the Vehicle Code.
M. Prohibit or regulate the use of designated streets, alleys and highways
within the physical boudaries of the Borough or on Borough-owned
properties located outside the physical boundaries of the Borough.
N. Establish minimum speed limits as authorized in § 3364 of the Vehicle
Code.
O. Regulate and temporarily prohibit traffic on streets, alleys and
highways within the physical boundaries of the Borough or on Boroughowned
properties located outside the physical boundaries of the
Borough closed or restricted for construction, maintenance or special
events.
P. Prohibit pedestrians from crossing a roadway in a business district or
any designated street, alley or highway within the physical boundaries
of the Borough or on Borough-owned properties located outside the
physical boundaries of the Borough except in a crosswalk.
Q. Restrict pedestrian crossing at unmarked crosswalks.
R. (Reserved)172
S. Regulate persons upon, or prohibit persons from using in certain areas,
skates, skateboards, roller blades, coasters, sleds and other toy
vehicles. [Amended 11-26-1996 by Ord. No. 13-1996]
T. Adopt and enforce such temporary regulations as may be necessary to
cover emergencies or special conditions pertaining to traffic on streets,
alleys, highways and public property within the physical boundaries of
the Borough or on Borough-owned properties located outside of the
Borough.
U. Regulate the operation of streetcars, the passing of streetcars by other
vehicles and the driving upon streetcar tracks by other vehicles.
V. Provide for and establish procedures governing the removal and
impounding of any vehicle parked on any street, alley, highway or public
property within the physical boundaries of the Borough or on Borough-
172. Editor's Note: Former Subsection R, which empowered the Mayor to regulate persons
propelling pushcarts, was repealed 1-15-2008 by Ord. No. 1-2008.
§ 212-7 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-7
185:638
§ 212-8. Issuance of proclamation.
In order to exercise any authorization hereinabove granted to the Mayor by
§ 212-7 of this article, the Mayor shall issue a proclamation setting forth the
proposed action. In addition to setting forth therein the proposed action, the
proclamation shall state that said action shall not be effective for 30 days,
during which period of time the proclamation shall be subject to review and
approval by the Council of the Borough.
§ 212-9. Advertisement of proclamation.
Before the Mayor shall take any action in accordance with the enumerated
powers hereinabove set forth in §§ 212-7 and 212-8 of this article, the Mayor
shall first cause his proposed proclamation to be advertised in a newspaper
in general circulation within the Borough at least 30 days prior to the
effective date of the proposed proclamation. In addition, at least 30 days
prior to the effective date of the proposed proclamation, the Mayor shall
also give the full text thereof to the Council of the Borough.
§ 212-10. Effective date of proclamation; rejection by Council.
The proposed proclamation by the Mayor shall become effective only in the
event that the Council of the Borough does not adopt a resolution within the
thirty-day period hereinabove referred to in § 212-9 of this chapter rejecting
and nullifying the proposed proclamation of the Mayor.
§ 212-11. Intent.
It is the intention of the Council of the Borough that this chapter constitutes
action on the part of the Borough in accordance with Section 6109(b)
of the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania [75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 6109(b)], as from time to time amended and supplemented.
§ 212-12. Powers and duties of Borough Manager.
The Borough Manager is hereby authorized and directed to take such steps
as may be necessary to effectuate any proclamation issued by the Mayor
pursuant to this chapter after such proclamation becomes effective.
§ 212-13. Powers of Mayor to be nonexclusive. [Amended 9-16-2003
by Ord. No. 7-2003]
The powers granted to the Mayor by the provisions of this chapter shall
not be exclusive, and nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the Council of
the Borough from time to time taking such action as it may so desire as
concerns any of the police powers hereinabove enumerated. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to allow the Mayor to authorize, deny, effect,
permit or otherwise control the closing of streets within the Borough for
owned property located outisde the physical boundaries of the
Borough.
§ 212-7 SOLID WASTE § 212-13
185:639
the purpose of authorizing a parade, special parade or spontaneous parade,
as those terms are defined in Chapter 155 of the Code of the Borough of
Kutztown. Chapter 155 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown provides for
the sole method of obtaining permission to use the cartways of the streets
of the Borough for a parade, special parade or spontaneous parade, as such
terms are defined in Chapter 155 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 212-13.1. Penalties for violating proclamations issued by Mayor.
[Added 11-26-1996 by Ord. No. 13-1996]
Any person who violates any provision of any proclamation issued by the
Mayor pursuant to this article shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a
fine as set forth in the fee schedule approved from time to time by resolution
of the Borough Council,173 and costs.
173. Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 212-13 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-13.1
185:640
ARTICLE III
Traffic Regulations
§ 212-14. Speed limits.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I (§ 212-58), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated in said
schedule. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that street or part of a street.
§ 212-15. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule II (§ 212-59), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 212-16. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street
into another one-way street) when facing a steady red signal at any of the
locations described in Schedule III (§ 212-60), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 212-17. Prohibited turns at intersections.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a turn of the kind
designated (left, right, all) at any of the intersections described in Schedule
IV (§ 212-61), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 212-18. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn on any of
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule V (§ 212-62), attached
to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 212-19. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI (§ 212-63), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle on any one-way street other than in the direction established for
traffic on that street.
§ 212-20. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established along those streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VII (§ 212-64), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake
or pass another vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any nopassing
zone described in said schedule.
§ 212-14 SOLID WASTE § 212-21
185:641
§ 212-21. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VIII (§ 212-65),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby established as
through streets; and the driver of any vehicle, upon approaching any such
street at any intersection thereof (except for such intersections where there
are now or shall hereafter be located official traffic signals), shall come to
a full stop or yield the right-of-way, as the case may be, before entering any
such through street.
§ 212-22. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 212-66), attached to and made
a part of this chapter (in addition to intersections with the through streets
established by this chapter), are hereby established as stop intersections,
and official stop signs shall be erected in such a position upon the firstnamed
street as to face traffic approaching the second-named street in
the direction or directions indicated in said schedule. Every driver of a
vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street, in
the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall come to a full stop
before entering any such intersection.
§ 212-23. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule X (§ 212-67), attached to and made
a part of this chapter (in addition to intersections with the through streets
established by this chapter), are hereby established as yield intersections,
and official yield signs shall be erected in such a position upon the firstnamed
street as to face traffic approaching the second-named street in the
direction or directions indicated. Every driver of a vehicle approaching any
such intersection upon the first-named street, in the direction or directions
indicated in each case, shall slow down or stop the vehicle and then yield
the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on the
second-named street so closely as to constitute a hazard during the time
that the driver is moving across or within such intersection.
§ 212-24. Closing of certain streets to certain vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle, except a passenger
vehicle (but not including any passenger vehicle drawing any trailer or
towing any other vehicle), upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XI (§ 212-68), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 212-25. Vehicle weight limits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any commercial vehicle or
other tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combination having a gross weight in
excess of that respectively prescribed upon any of the streets or bridges,
or portions thereof, described in Schedule XII (§ 212-69), attached to and
§ 212-21 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-25
185:642
made a part of this chapter, except for the purpose of making local
deliveries on said streets.
§ 212-25 SOLID WASTE § 212-25
185:643

ARTICLE IV
Parking Regulations
§ 212-26. Metered parking.174 [Added 9-17-2019 by Ord. No.
2-2019]
§ 212-27. Parking in specified places. [Amended 10-24-2000 by Ord.
No. 6-2000]
A. Any person or persons causing a vehicle to be parked in an individual
parking space upon any of the streets, parts of streets, or off-street
parking facilities described in Schedule XXI (§ 212-77.1), attached to
and made a part of this chapter, shall deposit in the parking meter
adjacent to such space, or payment station, coins of the United States
or, where permitted, other indicated payment according to the time
limits and rates indicated on the legend of such meter or kiosk; failure
to remit payment constitutes a violation, and each additional hour that
such person or persons shall permit such vehicle to remain in such an
individual parking space after the prescribed time for parking has
elapsed is hereby declared to constitute an additional violation. The
provisions of this section shall not be deemed to be in conflict with any
other ordinance otherwise limiting parking or providing for special
privileges for special occasions.
B. No person shall deposit or attempt to deposit in any parking meter or
kiosk any slug, button or any other device or substance as substitutes
for coins of United States currency.
C. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section for
any person to deface, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or
impair the usefulness of any parking equipment installed under the
provisions of this section on any street or in any off-street parking
facility; provided that nothing herein shall apply to the servicing or
opening of parking meters or kiosks by officers, employees and/or
police officers of the Borough under the direction of the Borough
Manager, Chief of Police, Mayor or the Borough Council.
A. Except when necessary to avoid a conflict with other traffic or to
protect the safety of any person or vehicle or in compliance with the law
or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle:
(1) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of
the curb of a street, except that a pedalcycle may be parked on the
roadway abreast of another pedalcycle(s) near the side of the
roadway at any location where parking is allowed.
174. Editor's Note: Former § 212-26, Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces, was repealed
10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000. See now § 212-28A.
§ 212-26 SOLID WASTE § 212-27
185:645
(2) On a sidewalk, except that a pedalcycle may be parked on the
roadway abreast of another pedalcycle(s) near the side of the
roadway at any location where parking is allowed.
(3) Within an intersection.
(4) On a crosswalk.
(5) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by official traffic control
devices.
(6) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping. standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(7) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.
(8) On any railroad tracks.
(9) in the area between roadways of a divided highway. including the
crossovers.
(10) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
B. Except when necessary to avoid a conflict with other traffic or to
protect the safety of any person or vehicle or in compliance with the law
or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle:
(1) In front of a public or private driveway.
(2) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(3) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.
(4) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign,
yield sign or traffic control signal located at the site of a roadway.
(5) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or, when
properly posted. on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any
fire station within 75 feet of the entrance.
(6) Where the vehicle would prevent the free movement of a streetcar.
(7) On a limited access highway unless authorized by official traffic
control devices.
(8) At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
(9) Standing or parking for the purpose of loading or unloading
persons or property may be authorized by local ordinance, but the
ordinance shall not authorize standing or parking on state-
§ 212-27 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-27
185:646
§ 212-28. Additional parking regulations. [Amended 10-24-2000 by
Ord. No. 6-2000]
designated highways, except during off-peak traffic-flow hours as
determined by municipal regulations.
C. Except when necessary to avoid a conflict with other traffic or to
protect the safety of any person or vehicle or in compliance with the law
or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no
person shall park a vehicle:
(1) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
(2) At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
D. No person shall park or leave unattended a vehicle on private property
without the consent of the owner or other person in control or
possession of the property except in the case of emergency or
disablement of the vehicle, in which case the operator shall arrange for
the removal of the vehicle as soon as possible.
(1) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to private parking
lots unless such lots are posted to notify the public of any parking
restrictions and the operator of the vehicle violates such posted
restrictions. For the purposes of this section, "private parking lot"
means a parking lot open to the public or used for parking without
a charge; or a parking lot used for parking with a charge. The
borough hereby adopts the regulations promulgated by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation which defines posting
for public notice pursuant lo Title 75 Pa. C.SA. § 3353(b) and any
amended or successor statute(s).
(2) Property owner may remove vehicle. The owner or other person in
charge or possession of any property in which a vehicle is parked or
left unattended in violation of the provisions of Subsection D may
immediately remove or have removed the vehicle at reasonable
expense of the owner of the vehicle. Such person who removes a
vehicle left parked or unattended in violation of the provisions of
Subsection D shall have a lien against the owner of the vehicle in
the amount of the reasonable costs of removing the vehicle.
E. The department on state-designated highways and local authorities on
any highway within the boundaries of the borough may, by erection of
official traffic control devices, prohibit, limit or restrict stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles on any highway where engineering and
traffic studies indicate that stopping, standing or parking would
constitute a safety hazard or where stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles would unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic.
A. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces. Whenever a space is
marked off on any street, municipal or borough parking lot for the
parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be
§ 212-27 SOLID WASTE § 212-28
185:647
parked wholly within the lines bounding that space, and it shall be a
violation of this article for any person to park a vehicle or allow it to
remain parked otherwise.
B. Angle parking. No person shall park a vehicle upon any streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XIII (§ 212-70), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, except at an angle designated and only within the
painted stall lines. On all streets or portions thereof where angle
parking is now or shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked
thereon shall be parked with the front thereof nearest the curb.
C. Two-way highways. Except as otherwise provided in this section, every
vehicle standing or parked upon a two-way highway shall be positioned
parallel to and with the right-hand wheels within 12 inches of the righthand
curb or, in the absence of a curb, as close as practicable to the
right edge of the right-hand shoulder.
D. One-way highways. Except as otherwise provided in this section, every
vehicle standing or parked upon a one-way highway shall be positioned
parallel to the curb or edge of the highway in the direction of authorized
traffic movement with its right-hand wheels within 12 inches of the
right-hand curb or, in the absence of a curb, as close as practicable to
the right edge of the right-hand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels
within 12 inches of the left-hand curb, or in the absence of a curb, as
close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder.
E. Blocking garage entrances. No person other than the owner or
occupant of the garage shall park a vehicle at any time in front of,
opposite to or in such a position as to block entrance to or exit by a
vehicle from a garage, unless parking in front of the owners garage by
the owner/occupant limits access to the other garages.
F. Greasing or repair work. No vehicle shall stand on any street or
sidewalk for the purpose of greasing or repair except in case of
emergency repairs.
G. Parking prohibited at all times. No person shall park a vehicle at any
time upon any of the streets or parts thereof described in Schedule XV
(§ 212-71), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
H. Parking trucks, trailers and mobile homes. No truck trailer, trailer,
house trailer or mobile home shall be parked upon any borough street,
thoroughfare, municipal or borough parking lot without having
attached thereto a means of mechanical traction constructed or
designated for the purpose of pulling or drawing such trailer. In no
event shall any truck trailer, trailer, house trailer or mobile home be
parked upon any borough street, thoroughfare, municipal or borough
parking lot for more than 48 consecutive hours.
I. Parking or storage of major recreational equipment. It shall be unlawful
for any person to park or allow to remain parked, in excess of 24
consecutive hours, on any public road, street, highway or municipal
§ 212-28 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-28
185:648
parking lot any vehicle other than a passenger car or truck having a
gross vehicle weight rating under 7,000 pounds.
J. Parking of inoperable or illegally registered vehicles or the placement
of Portable On-Demand Storage units (PODS)®. [Amended
11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 17-2006]
(1) No person shall park or leave on the streets, highway or public
property of the Borough any vehicle without current valid
registration plates.
(2) No person shall park or leave on the streets, highways or public
property of the Borough any vehicle without a current inspection
sticker unless the vehicle is legally parked in front of, or in close
proximity to, an official Pennsylvania state inspection station which
identifies said vehicle by work order specifying a state inspection
will be performed within 24 hours. Additional work orders beyond
the initial twenty-four-hour period are prohibited.
(3) No person shall park or leave on the streets, highway or public
property of the Borough any vehicle deemed mechanically
inoperable.
(4) No person shall place, park, or leave any Portable On-Demand
Storage units (PODS)® upon any street, highway or public
property of the Borough.
(5) No person shall park or leave on the streets, highway or public
property of the borough any vehicle deemed mechanically
inoperable.
K. Stopping, standing and parking outside business and residence
districts. Outside a business or residence district, no person shall stop,
park or stand any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the
roadway when it is practicable to stop, park or stand the vehicle off the
roadway, or upon any of the streets or parts thereof described in
Schedule XX (§ 212-77), attached to and made a part of this chapter. In
the event it is necessary to stop, park or stand the vehicle on the
roadway or any part of the roadway, an unobstructed width of the
highway opposite the vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other
vehicles, and the vehicle shall be visible from a distance of 500 feet in
each direction upon the highway. This subsection shall not apply to the
driver of any vehicle which is disabled in such a manner and to such an
extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving
the vehicle in that position.
L. Stopping, standing and parking within business and residence districts.
Within a business or residence district, no person shall stop, park or
stand any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the roadway
when it is practicable to stop, park or stand the vehicle off the roadway,
or upon any of the streets or parts thereof described in Schedule XX
(§ 212-77), attached to and made a part of this chapter. In the event it is
§ 212-28 SOLID WASTE § 212-28
185:649
necessary to stop, park or stand the vehicle on the roadway or any
part of the roadway, an unobstructed width of the highway opposite
the vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and the
vehicle shall be visible from a distance of 500 feet in each direction
upon the highway. This subsection shall not apply to the driver of any
vehicle which is disabled in such a manner and to such an extent that
it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the vehicle in
that position.
M. Person with a disability and disabled veterans. [Amended 1-15-2008
by Ord. No. 1-2008]
(1) When a motor vehicle bearing a person with a disability or severely
disabled veteran plate or displaying a person with a disability or
severely disabled veteran parking placard as prescribed in this
chapter is being operated by or for the transportation of the person
with a disability or severely disabled veteran, the driver shall be
relieved of any liability for parking for a period of 60 minutes in
excess of the legal parking period permitted by local authorities
except where local ordinances or police regulations provide for the
accommodation of heavy traffic during morning, afternoon or
evening hours.
(2) Except for persons parking vehicles lawfully bearing a person with
a disability or severely disabled veteran registration plate or
displaying a person with a disability or severely disabled veteran
parking placard when such vehicles are being operated by or for
the transportation of a person with a disability or a severely
disabled veteran, no person shall park a vehicle on public or private
property reserved for a person with a disability or severely disabled
veteran, which property has been so posted in accordance with
departmental regulations, which shall require a sign stating the
penalty amount as set forth in the fee schedule approved from time
to time by resolution of the Borough Council, and costs, a sign
indicating that vehicles in violation of the subsection may be towed
and require that signs be replaced when they become either
obsolete or missing with all costs to replace the necessary signs to
be borne by the persons responsible for signing the particular
location. Any vehicle which is unlawfully parked in a designated
person with a disability parking area may be removed from that
area by towing and may be reclaimed by the vehicle owner upon
payment of the towing costs.
(3) Local authorities shall have the power and may, by ordinance or
resolution, authorize a person with a disability and severely
disabled veterans to issue statements to violators or violating
vehicles for violation of Subsection M(2). The form of the statement
shall be as prescribed by the local authorities.
N. Unauthorized use. An operator of a vehicle bearing a person with a
disability or severely disabled veteran plate or displaying a person with
§ 212-28 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-28
185:650
§ 212-29. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XV (§ 212-72), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, during the hours specified in said schedule, on any day except
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
§ 212-30. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XVI (§ 212-73),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, between the hours specified,
for longer than the time indicated in said schedule.
§ 212-31. Special purpose parking zones.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or to allow the
same to remain parked in any special purpose parking zone established
in Schedule XVII (§ 212-74), attached to and made a part of this chapter,
except as specifically provided for such zone.
§ 212-32. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-24-2000 by Ord.
No. 6-2000; 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001; 9-21-2004 by Ord. No.
21-2004; 1-15-2008 by Res. No. 1-2008]
a disability or severely disabled veteran parking placard shall not make
use of the parking privileges accorded to a person with a disability and
severely disabled veterans under Subsection M(3) unless the operator
is a person with a disability or a severely disabled veteran or unless
the vehicle is being operated for the transportation of a person with
a disability or severely disabled veteran.175 [Amended 1-15-2008 by
Ord. No. 1-2008]
A. Any person who violates any provisions of this article is guilty of a
summary offense and shall be sentenced to pay a fine as set forth in the
fee schedule approved from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council, and costs.
B. Any police officer or duly authorized community service officer shall
place on motor vehicle(s)/conveyances parked in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, a notice for the owner or operator. Whenever
a motor vehicle is caused, allowed or permitted by any person to be
parked in any area in violation of any parking restriction or parking
regulation, either in this chapter or as otherwise provided by law,
notification of the violation may be given by the placing of a parking
notice or copy thereof upon or within such vehicle, indicating the time
of the violation, the dollar amount of the penalty charged and that such
penalty shall be paid to the Borough of Kutztown within the time
specified; and the place where the penalty charge shall be paid and the
175. Editor's Note: Former Subsection O, Penalty, was repealed 1-15-2008 by Ord. No. 1-2008.
§ 212-28 SOLID WASTE § 212-32
185:651
manner of payment. All unlawful parking penalties shall be paid no later
than 20 days after the date of the violation. If the owner or operator
fails to make a payment as aforesaid, a citation shall be issued pursuant
to the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure.
§ 212-32 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-32
185:652
ARTICLE V
Residential Permit Parking
§ 212-33. Purpose; enforcement.
The Council of the Borough of Kutztown considers it to be in the interest of
the citizens of the borough to provide for the establishment of a residential
permit parking program in order to alleviate the hardship experienced by
residents in certain areas of the borough in obtaining on-street parking
space, to preserve the residential quality of neighborhoods and to provide
for improvement in air quality. The powers and duties as contained in this
article shall be performed by the Mayor and the Police Department of the
borough as more fully described in this article.
§ 212-34. Authority to designate permit parking areas.
Certain streets and other public areas within the borough may be
designated, as provided for in this article, as permit parking areas in which
resident vehicles displaying valid parking permits may stand or be parked
without limitation by parking time restrictions established by this article.
Vehicles not displaying valid parking permits may stand or be parked for
a limited period of time not to exceed the time specified upon adequately
posted signs.
§ 212-35. Designation criteria.
No area within the borough shall be designated as a residential permit
parking area unless said area is within any one or more of the following
zoning districts within the Borough of Kutztown: R-1 Residential, R-2 Low
Density Residential, R-3 Medium Density Residential, R-4 Medium High
Density Residential or R-5 High Density Residential. In addition, in order
for an area to be eligible for residential permit parking designation, the
following additional criteria must be satisfied:
§ 212-36. Designation of permit parking areas.
A. At least 50% of the street level front footage use is non-businessrelated.
B. During any period between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on
weekdays, except holidays, the number of vehicles parked and/or
standing, legally or illegally, at on-street parking spaces is equal to 70%
or more of the legal on-street parking capacity of the area. For purposes
of this evaluation, a legal parking space shall be 20 linear feet.
C. During the same period of time as specified in Subsection B above, 10%
or more of the vehicles parked and/or standing on the streets in the
area are not registered in the name of a person residing within a threeblock
distance of the location at which the vehicle is parked.
§ 212-33 SOLID WASTE § 212-36
185:653
§ 212-37. Issuance of permits.
Following Borough Council's approval of the Mayor's designation of a
residential permit parking area, the Police Department of the Borough
shall issue appropriate parking permits and shall cause parking signs to be
erected in the designated area indicating the times and conditions under
which parking shall be allowed. A parking permit shall be issued only upon
application and payment of the applicable fee and only to the owner or
operator of a motor vehicle who resides in the designated residential permit
parking area. Vehicles exceeding a gross weight of 10,000 pounds and/
or 20 or more feet in length are not eligible for parking permits. Two
parking permits shall be issued for each residence or dwelling unit within
a designated residential permit parking area for which a separate electric
meter has been installed if said residence or dwelling unit is situate within
A. Areas in residential zoning districts may from time to time be
designated by the Mayor of the Borough as residential permit parking
areas upon determination by the Mayor; provided, however, that said
designation shall not become effective until approved by resolution of
Borough Council.
B. If an area within a residential zoning district is not an approved
residential permit parking area, a majority of the residents within said
area may, by filing a petition with Borough Council, request said area to
be designated a residential permit parking area. The petition shall be
referred by Borough Council to the Mayor of the Borough who may
either act in accordance with Subsection A of this section or may refer
the petition to Borough Council for its consideration. If the Mayor of the
Borough refers the petition to Borough Council, the Mayor shall inform
Borough Council whether or not the signatories to the petition
constitute a majority of the residents, 18 years of age or older, who
reside within the area requested to be designated as a residential
permit parking area.
C. Under no circumstances shall the Mayor or Borough Council designate
an area as a residential permit parking area unless all of the
designation criteria hereinabove established in § 212-35 of this article
are met. In order to determine whether such designation criteria have
been met, Borough Council may designate the Mayor or any duly
appointed and designated representative of the Borough to make such
studies or surveys as may be appropriate under the circumstances to
make such determination and shall report the findings of such study or
survey to Borough Council.
D. Either the Mayor of the Borough or Borough Council may, prior to
acting upon a petition filed in accordance with Subsection B of this
section, request the Borough Planning Commission for its
recommendation as to whether or not the area in question should be
designated a residential permit parking area. Any such
recommendation by the Borough Planning Commission shall not be
binding upon either the Mayor of the Borough or Borough Council.
§ 212-36 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-37
185:654
an R-1 Residential Zoning District or an R-2 Low Density Residential Zoning
District of the Borough, and one parking permit shall be issued for each
residence or dwelling unit within the designated residential permit parking
area for which a separate electric meter has been installed if said residence
or dwelling unit is located within an R-3 Medium Density Residential Zoning
District, an R-4 Medium High Density Residential Zoning District or an
R-5 High Density Residential Zoning District of the Borough. The parking
permit shall be issued to the person in whose name the electric meter is
registered; provided, however, that the parking permit may only be issued
for a vehicle owned or used by a person residing within the residential
permit parking area. To be eligible for a parking permit, residents must
prove residency and vehicle ownership or evidence of having a leased or
company-owned vehicle. The Mayor of the Borough shall establish criteria
for proof of residence.
§ 212-38. Application for permit; duration.
Each parking permit issued shall be valid for the calendar year for which
such parking permit is issued, and in the event that such parking permit
is issued during the calendar year, then it shall be valid only for the
remainder of said calendar year for which the parking permit is issued.
Parking permits may be renewed annually upon reapplication in the manner
required by the Police Department of the Borough. Each application or
reapplication for a parking permit shall contain information sufficient to
identify the applicant, his residence address or address or real property
owned or leased by the applicant and located within a residential permit
parking area and the license number(s) on the motor vehicle(s) for which
application is made and such other information that may be deemed
relevant by the Mayor. If the holder of a parking permit acquires a motor
vehicle not included in the holder's initial application or transfers a motor
vehicle previously included in the holder's application, the holder shall
submit to the Police Department of the Borough information concerning the
transfer and/or acquisition deemed relevant by the Mayor.
§ 212-39. Permit fees.
The initial cost for each residential parking permit, whether said parking
permit is issued for a full calendar year or any portion thereof, and the cost
for each renewal of a residential parking permit shall be set from time to
time by resolution of the Borough Council.176
§ 212-40. Display of permit.
Parking permits shall be displayed inside the vehicle for which the parking
permit has been issued either on the top of the dashboard of the vehicle or
otherwise so that the parking permit shall be visible through the windshield
of the vehicle.
176. Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 212-37 SOLID WASTE § 212-41
185:655
§ 212-41. Permit revocation.
The Chief of the Police Department of the Borough is authorized to revoke
the residential parking permit of any person found to be in violation of this
article, and, upon written notification thereof, the person shall surrender
such parking permit to the Police Department of the Borough. Failure, when
so requested, to surrender a residential parking permit so revoked shall
constitute a violation of law and of this article.
§ 212-42. Effect of permit.
§ 212-43. Time limit; existing regulations.
§ 212-44. Violations and penalties.
A. A resident's vehicle on which is properly displayed a valid parking
permit as provided for in this article shall only be permitted to stand or
be parked in the residential permit parking area for which the parking
permit has been issued without being limited by time restrictions
established pursuant to this article. However, said resident's vehicle
shall not be exempt from parking restrictions or prohibitions
established pursuant to authority other than this article, and said
resident's vehicle shall comply with all other limited or special parking
restrictions pertaining to the parking area that may have been or may
hereafter be established by other appropriate ordinance or resolution
of Borough Council. All other motor vehicles parked within a residential
permit parking area shall be subject to the time restrictions provided
for in this article as well as the penalties provided for in this article.
B. A residential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the
holder thereof an on-street parking space within the designated
residential permit parking area.
A. Except as otherwise designated, on-street parking within residential
permit parking areas shall be restricted to a two-hour time limit on
streets that now have legal on-street parking. A vehicle bearing a valid
residential parking permit for the particular residential permit parking
area shall be exempt from the two-hour time limit. The Police
Department of the Borough shall cause to be erected appropriate signs
to indicate the two-hour time limit and the exclusion of vehicles with
residential parking permits. The two-hour limit shall be enforced from
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. prevailing time, except Sundays and holidays.
[Amended 1-15-2008 by Ord. No. 1-2008]
B. Existing parking regulations. As set forth in § 212-42 of this article, all
existing parking regulations shall remain in effect. These include but
are not limited to: prohibited parking areas, street cleaning
restrictions, snow removal restrictions, limited time parking areas and
loading zones. Holders of residential parking permits will not be exempt
from such regulations.
§ 212-41 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-44
185:656
A. (Reserved)177
B. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for a person to falsely
represent himself or herself as eligible for a parking permit or to
furnish false information in an application therefor.
C. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for a person holding a
valid parking permit issued pursuant hereto to permit the use or display
of such parking permit on a motor vehicle other than that or those for
which the parking permit is issued. Such conduct shall constitute an
unlawful act in violation of this article both by the person holding the
valid parking permit and the person who so uses or displays the parking
permit on a motor vehicle other than that for which it is issued.
D. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for a person to copy,
produce or otherwise bring into existence a facsimile or counterfeit
parking permit or permits. It shall further be unlawful and a violation of
this article for a person to knowingly use or display a facsimile or
counterfeit parking permit in order to evade time limitations on parking
applicable to a designated residential permit parking area.
E. For any violation of any provision described in Subsection B, C or D of
this section or § 212-41 above, the person committing the unlawful act
shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $600 and/or imprisonment
for not more than 30 days for each such violation.
177. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, as amended 1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 1-1996, which set
forth penalties for violation of the provisions of this article, was repealed 1-15-2008 by
Ord. No. 1-2008.
§ 212-44 SOLID WASTE § 212-44
185:657

ARTICLE VI
Removal and Impounding of Certain Vehicles
§ 212-45. Official impound lot designated. [Amended 5-29-2001 by
Ord. No. 5-2001]
The Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania (the "Borough")
shall designate by resolution an official towing service or services, storage
garages and impound lot or impound lots for all vehicles impounded under
the provisions of this article. Any vehicle impounded pursuant to this article
will be stored at the impound lot with the exception of those vehicles
impounded by the Borough Police Department for a criminal investigation.
Any vehicle impounded by the Borough Police Department pursuant to a
criminal investigation and/or for the collection of evidence shall be stored at
a Borough garage and/or impound lot (the "criminal impound lot") situated
at the rear of the Borough Hall located at 45 Railroad Street in the Borough
or any other location as specified by the Borough Police Department.
§ 212-46. Removal of vehicles. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No.
5-2001]
Whenever any vehicle shall be impounded or towed pursuant to a violation
of the Motor Vehicle Code178 and/or any other laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania or ordinances of the Borough, now or hereafter in effect,
such vehicles shall be removed, by or at the direction of the Kutztown
Borough Police Department, to the impound lot; provided, however, that
no vehicle will be towed away from the place where it is so found if at
the time of the intended removal the owner or person for the time being
in charge thereof is present and shall express a willingness and intention
to immediately remove said vehicle and be willing to pay any reasonable
charges incurred by the towing service, and provided that such owner or
person for the time being in charge of the vehicle would otherwise be
permitted by law to operate such vehicle at that time. All vehicles that are
seized pursuant to the authority of the Motor Vehicle Code and/or other
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or ordinances of the Borough
shall be removed, by or at the direction of the Borough Police Department,
to the impound lot. In the case of a criminal investigation and/or for the
collection of evidence, all vehicles shall be removed, by or at the direction
of the Borough Police Department, to the criminal impound lot or any other
location as specified by the Borough Police Department.
§ 212-47. Recovery by owner. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No.
5-2001]
A. Before an owner shall be permitted to remove an impounded vehicle
from the impound lot, the owner shall:
178. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 212-45 SOLID WASTE § 212-47
185:659
§ 212-48. Payment of charges; liability to other penalties. [Amended
5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001]
The payment of the towing and/or storage charges shall not operate to
relieve the owner of such vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty
imposed for any civil and/or criminal violation of any law or ordinance on
account of which the vehicle is impounded, and provided further that the
payment of such charges shall be final and conclusive and shall constitute a
waiver of any right to recover the monies paid.
§ 212-48.1. Waiver of charges. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No.
5-2001]
The Chief of Police or the Borough Manager may waive the payment of
towing and/or storage charges, in whole or in part, by the owner of any
vehicle impounded to the Criminal Impound Lot when warranted.
§ 212-49. Agreement with Towing Service. [Amended 5-29-2001 by
Ord. No. 5-2001]
Prior to performing any services identified under this article, each towing
service designated by the Borough shall execute an agreement with the
Borough accepting all the conditions and requirements as specified by the
Borough.
(1) Procure from the Borough Police Department a release in
triplicate, such release to indicate permission by the Borough
Police Department to remove the vehicle from the impound lot.
(2) Review and execute a property form for such vehicle so removed on
a form to be provided by the Borough Police Department.
(3) Pay to the towing service the actual towing charges and storage
fees incurred by the towing service in removing such vehicle to the
impound lot.
B. Before an owner shall be permitted to remove an impounded vehicle
from the criminal impound lot, the owner shall:
(1) Procure from the Borough Police Department a release in
triplicate, such release to indicate permission by the Borough
Police Department to remove the vehicle from the criminal
impound lot.
(2) Pay to the Borough Police Department the actual charges incurred
by the Borough in removing such vehicle to the criminal impound
lot and storage charges, all of which storage charges shall be
determined in accordance with the provisions of § 212-50 of this
article.
(3) Review and execute a property form for such vehicle so removed on
a form to be provided by the Borough Police Department.
§ 212-47 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-50
185:660
§ 212-50. Amount of storage charges. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord.
No. 5-2001]
The charges for towing and removing any vehicle impounded under the
provisions of this article shall be the actual charge to or expense incurred
by the towing service and/or the Borough in effecting the removal to the
impound lot or criminal impound lot. In addition, the storage charges for all
vehicles impounded at the criminal impound lot is fixed at $15 per day or
any fraction thereof during which said vehicle is there impounded pursuant
to a criminal investigation. Storage charges for the criminal impound lot
shall not begin to accrue until notice is given to the registered owner or
their assign that the vehicle has been released and is to be removed from
the criminal impound lot. The official towing service or services shall set
forth their own reasonable storage fees for vehicles stored on the impound
lot.
§ 212-51. Records of impoundments.
The Borough shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under
this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners of
those vehicles with information as to the place of storage of the vehicles.
§ 212-52. Disposal of unclaimed vehicles. [Amended 5-29-2001 by
Ord. No. 5-2001]
After a period of 15 days following the release of the vehicle and the vehicle
remains unclaimed, the Police Department shall proceed with declaring
the vehicle abandoned as provided for by Title 75 of the Pennsylvania
Consolidated Statutes.179
§ 212-52.1. Definitions. [Amended 5-29-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001]
The following defined terms shall be applicable to this article, and in
addition to any other terms defined elsewhere in this article.
BOROUGH TOWING SERVICE — The business(es) appointed by the
Borough of Kutztown by resolution which provides for the towing, storage
and impoundment of vehicles impounded under the provisions of this article
for a fee.
CRIMINAL IMPOUND LOT — The secured vehicle storage area maintained
by the Borough Police Department for the purpose of storing impounded
vehicles seized by the Borough Police Department pursuant to a criminal
investigation and collection of evidence presently situated at the rear of the
Borough Hall located at 45 Railroad Street in the Borough or any other
location as specified by the Borough Police Department.
IMPOUND LOT — The storage facility(ies) appointed by the Borough of
Kutztown by resolution which provides for the secure storage of impounded
vehicles seized pursuant to this article.
179. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A § 101 et seq.
§ 212-50 SOLID WASTE § 212-52.1
185:661
MOTOR VEHICLE CODE — The Motor Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania (codified at 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 101 et seq.), as amended,
supplemented, modified, reenacted and/or recodified, from time to time.
OWNER — Any person which is the actual owner or holder of legal title to
any vehicle; the agent for any such actual owner or holder; the custodian of
a vehicle; and/or the lessee of any vehicle.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
trust or other entity.
§ 212-52.1 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-52.1
185:662
ARTICLE VII
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 212-53. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named pursuant to this
article, the Mayor, or his designated representative, in his discretion, may
declare a snow and ice emergency (designated in this article as a "snow
emergency"). Information on the existence of a snow emergency may be
given by the Borough through radio, newspaper or other available media,
and information on the termination of the emergency may be given by use
of the same media.
§ 212-54. Parking and driving restrictions.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
§ 212-55. Snow emergency routes.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XVIII (§ 212-75),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as snow
emergency routes.
§ 212-56. Penalty for violation. [Amended 1-15-2008 by Ord. No.
1-2008]
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated pursuant to this
article; or
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
A. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under this
article, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a motor vehicle to
remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency route, that person
shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction, shall be
punishable as set forth in the fee schedule approved from time to time
by resolution of the Borough Council, and costs.
B. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under this
article, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow emergency
route without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires or chains,
that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon
conviction, shall be punishable as set forth in the fee schedule approved
from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council, and costs.
§ 212-53 SOLID WASTE § 212-56
185:663

ARTICLE VIII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 212-57. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Vehicle Code (75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or except as herein specified, every person
convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, or any supplement
thereto, shall be liable to a penalty as set forth in the fee schedule adopted
from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council,180 and costs of
prosecution.
180. Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 212-57 SOLID WASTE § 212-57
185:665

ARTICLE IX
Schedules
§ 212-58. Schedule I: Speed Limits. [Amended 2-15-1997 by Ord.
No. 4-1997]
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-14, speed limits are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
All roads 15 Park
Baldy Street
[Added 5-14-2002
by Ord. No.
5-2002]
25 From West Main Street to Trexler
Avenue
Constitution
Boulevard, South
15 School Zone established pursuant to
the traffic study approved by
Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation on December 30,
1996, from the southern right-of-way
line of Deisher Lane north 1600 feet
to a point 150 feet north of Normal
Avenue; 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and
2:45 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., prevailing
time, each day school is in session
Constitution
Boulevard, South
25 From West Main Street south to
Trexler Avenue
Deisher Lane 15 School Zone established pursuant to
the traffic study approved by
Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation on December 30,
1996, from the western right-of-way
line of Constitution Boulevard west
150 feet; 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and
2:45 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., prevailing
time, each day school is in session
Fairview Drive 25 From Greenwich Street to College
Boulevard
Highland Avenue
[Added 7-20-2005
by Ord. No.
22-2005]
25 From Pine Street east to terminus at
Borough's easterly boundary
§ 212-58 SOLID WASTE § 212-58
185:667
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Main Street
[Added 7-19-2011
by Ord. No.
5-2011]
25 College Boulevard to Elm Street
Normal Avenue 15 School Zone established pursuant to
the traffic study approved by
Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation on December 30,
1996, from the western right-of-way
line of Constitution Boulevard west
150 feet and from the western rightof-
way line of Constitution Boulevard
east 700 feet; 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
and 2:45 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., prevailing
time, each day school is in session
Normal Avenue
[Added 7-20-2005
by Ord. No.
22-2005]
25 From Willow Street to West Main
Street
South Laurel Street
[Amended
5-14-2002 by Ord.
No. 5-2002]
25 From East Main Street to the
Borough's south boundary
Trexler Avenue 15 School Zone established pursuant to
the traffic study approved by
Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation on December 30,
1996, from the western right-of-way
line of Constitution Boulevard west
150 feet; 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and
2:45 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., prevailing
time, each day school is in session
Walnut Street, West
[Added
11-20-2007 by
Ord. No. 15-2007]
25 From Greenwich Street to College
Boulevard
Wentz Street 25 From Greenwich Street to College
Boulevard
§ 212-59. Schedule II: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-15, traffic control signals shall
be installed and operated at the following described intersections:
§ 212-58 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-59
185:668
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 212-60. Schedule III: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-16, no person shall make a right
turn (or a left turn from a one-way street onto another one-way street) when
facing a steady red signal at any of the locations described below:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on Red
Signal Onto
(Reserved)
§ 212-61. Schedule IV: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-17, no driver of any vehicle
shall make a turn of the kind designated below at any of the following
intersections:
Name of Street
Direction
of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At Intersection
of
Strausser Alley
[Added 8-21-2001
by Ord. No.
8-2001]
North Left All Sacony Alley
§ 212-62. Schedule V: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-18, no driver of any vehicle shall
make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts thereof described below:
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 212-63. Schedule VI: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-19, the following described
streets or parts thereof are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Baldy Alley North From West Main Street to West
Walnut Street
Foundry Alley North From West Main Street to West
Walnut Street
§ 212-59 SOLID WASTE § 212-63
185:669
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Foundry Alley South From Main Street to Sander Alley
Greenwich Street South From North Constitution Boulevard
to West Main Street
Keystone Avenue East From South Constitution
Boulevard to Raspberry Alley
Park Roadway [Added
2-22-2000 by Ord. No.
2-2000]
South Concession building to exit
roadway
Park Roadway [Added
2-22-2000 by Ord. No.
2-2000]
West From baseball field to South
Laurel Street
Raspberry Alley North From Keystone Avenue to
Siegfried Alley
Roeller Alley South From Peach Street to East Main
Street
Sacony Alley [Added
4-17-2007 by Ord. No.
3-2007]
East From College Boulevard to North
Whiteoak Street
Sander Alley East From South Whiteoak Street to
Noble Street
Siegfried Alley West From Raspberry Alley to South
Constitution Boulevard
Strausser Alley North From West Main Street to West
Walnut Street
Strausser Alley South From West Main Street to Sander
Alley
Walnut Street, West West From Greenwich Street to
College Boulevard
§ 212-64. Schedule VII: No-Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-20, no-passing zones are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
(Reserved)
§ 212-65. Schedule VIII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-21, the following described
streets or parts thereof are hereby established as through streets:
§ 212-63 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-65
185:670
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 212-66. Schedule IX: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-22, the following described
intersections are hereby established as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as provided therein:
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Albright Alley [Added
9-21-2004 by Ord. No.
22-2004]
West Greenwich Street
Apple Alley Both Keystone Avenue
Apple Alley Both Normal Avenue
Apple Alley North Sander Alley
Apple Alley South Trexler Avenue
Baldy Alley Both West Walnut Street
Baldy Alley North Vine Alley
Baldy Street, North [Added
8-21-2002 by Ord. No.
8-2001]
North Sacony Alley
Baldy Street, South Both Normal Avenue
Baldy Street, South North West Main Street
Baldy Street, South [Added
6-16-2015 by Ord. No.
5-2015]
South South Campus Drive/Trexler
Avenue
Bieber Alley Both Normal Avenue
Bieber Alley North Sander Alley
Bieber Alley South Trexler Avenue
Block Alley Both Cemetery Lane
Block Alley North Wentz Street
Boro Alley East Church Lane
Boro Alley West North Whiteoak Street
Boyer Alley East Railroad Street
Briar Circle North East College Boulevard
Briar Circle North South Briar Circle South
Briar Circle South East College Boulevard
Broad Street East South Laurel Street
Broad Street West South Laurel Street
§ 212-65 SOLID WASTE § 212-66
185:671
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Carriage Court [Added
1-18-2005 by Ord. No.
1-2005]
East North Kemp Street
Cedar Street, North
[Repealed 7-20-2005 by
Ord. No. 21-2005]
Cedar Street, North [Added
2-9-1999 by Ord. No.
2-1999]
North North Kemp Street
Cedar Street, North South East Main Street
Cedar Street, North South Luella Drive
Cemetery Lane Both North Whiteoak Street
Cemetery Lane East Greenwich Street
Chestnut Street Both South Laurel Street
Chestnut Street East Park Alley
Chestnut Street West South Maple Street
Church Lane Both Cemetery Lane
Church Lane North Wentz Street
Church Lane South North Whiteoak Street
College Boulevard [Added
4-16-2013 by Ord. No.
3-2013]
Both Wentz Street/College Garden
Drive
College Garden Drive East College Boulevard
Constitution Boulevard, South Both Normal Avenue
Constitution Boulevard, South North Trexler Avenue
Deisher Lane Both South Constitution
Boulevard
Deisher Lane West Noble Street
Elm Street, North [Added
1-16-2018 by Ord. No.
1-2018]
North North Elm Street/Seem
Drive
Elm Street, North South East Main Street
Elm Street, South North East Main Street
Fair Street Both North Whiteoak Street
Fairview Drive Both North Whiteoak Street
Fairview Drive Both Spruce Street
Fairview Drive East Greenwich Street
Fairview Drive West College Boulevard
§ 212-66 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-66
185:672
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Foundry Alley North West Walnut Street
Foundry Alley South Sander Alley
Ginseng Alley North Siegfried Alley
Ginseng Alley South Trexler Avenue
Greenwich Street South West Main Street
Grimley Street Both South Laurel Street
Grimley Street East Park Alley
Grimley Street West South Maple Street
Heffner Alley East Greenwich Street
Herring Alley North Sander Alley
Herring Alley South Normal Avenue
Highland Avenue [Added
7-20-2005 by Ord. No.
21-2005]
Both North Cedar Street
Highland Avenue Both North Elm Street
Highland Avenue [Added
7-20-2005 by Ord. No.
21-2005; repealed
6-20-2006 by Ord. No.
11-2006]
Hoch Alley East Bieber Alley
Hoch Alley West Noble Street
Industrial Avenue East Willow Street
Industrial Avenue South Normal Avenue
James Alley Both South Kemp Street
James Alley Both South Elm Street
James Alley [Added
10-24-2000 by Ord. No.
6-2000]
East South Laurel Street
James Street Both South Maple Street
Keiter Alley [Added
9-21-2004 by Ord. No.
22-2004]
East Rhodes Alley
Keiter Alley West Greenwich Street
Kemp Street, North [Repealed 7-21-2005 by Ord. No. 21-2005]
Kemp Street, North [Added
6-20-2006 by Ord. No.
11-2006]
Both Highland Avenue
§ 212-66 SOLID WASTE § 212-66
185:673
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Kemp Street, North East North Laurel Street
Kemp Street, North [Added
5-22-2007 by Ord. No.
7-2007]
North Seem Drive
Kemp Street, North South East Main Street
Kemp Street, South North East Main Street
Keystone Avenue Both Ginseng Alley
Keystone Avenue Both Noble Street
Keystone Avenue Both Pennsylvania Avenue
Keystone Avenue Both South Whiteoak Street
Keystone Avenue East Bieber Alley
Keystone Avenue East South Constitution
Boulevard
Keystone Avenue West Lenni Street
Keystone Avenue West South Baldy Street
Koffee Lane West Noble Street
Kutztown Park, east exit North East Main Street
Kutztown Park, west exit North East Main Street
Lambert Alley Both Normal Avenue
Lambert Alley North Keystone Avenue
Lambert Alley North Sander Alley
Lambert Alley South Trexler Avenue
Laurel Street, North Both Highland Avenue
Laurel Street, North [Added
1-18-2005 by Ord. No.
1-2005]
North North Kemp Street
Laurel Street, North South East Main Street
Laurel Street, North South Luella Drive
Laurel Street, South North East Main Street
Lemon Alley West South Maple Street
Lenni Street North Normal Avenue
Lenni Street South Trexler Avenue
Luella Drive [Added
1-14-1997 by Ord. No.
3-1997]
Both North Kemp Street
§ 212-66 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-66
185:674
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Luella Drive [Added
1-14-1997 by Ord. No.
3-1997]
East North Elm Street
Luella Drive South Highland Avenue
Luella Drive West North Elm Street
Luella Drive West North Laurel Street
Maple Street, North Both Highland Avenue
Maple Street, North South East Main Street
Maple Street, South North East Main Street
Midway Alley East South Whiteoak Street
Midway Alley West Lambert Alley
Miller Alley North Sander Alley
Miller Alley South Normal Avenue
Noble Street Both Normal Avenue
Normal Avenue Both Noble Street
Normal Avenue Both South Baldy Street
Normal Avenue Both South Constitution
Boulevard
Normal Avenue Both South Whiteoak Street
Normal Avenue Both Willow Street
Orange Alley East Trout Alley
Orange Alley West Rose Alley
Park Alley North James Alley
Park Road [Repealed 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000]
Park Roadway [Added
2-22-2000 by Ord. No.
2-2000]
East Roadways at detention basin
Park Roadway [Added
2-22-2000 by Ord. No.
2-2000]
West Roadway and South Laurel
Street, Maxatawny Township
Park Roadway [Added
2-22-2000 by Ord. No.
2-2000]
West and
South
Roadways at baseball field
Peach Street East Railroad Street
Peach Street West Greenwich Street
Pennsylvania Avenue Both Normal Avenue
Pennsylvania Avenue South Trexler Avenue
§ 212-66 SOLID WASTE § 212-66
185:675
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Pine Street North Highland Avenue
Pine Street South East Main Street
Plum Alley Both East Walnut Street
Plum Alley Both Highland Avenue
Plum Alley Both Vine Alley
Plum Alley South Sacony Alley
Railroad Street Both Peach Street
Railroad Street South East Main Street
Rhodes Alley South Peach Street
Roeller Alley South East Main Street
Roeller Alley South Peach Street
Roeller Alley [Repealed 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000]
Rose Alley Both Grimley Street
Rose Alley North James Street
Rose Alley South Chestnut Street
Route 222 [Added
10-24-2000 by Ord. No.
6-2000]
North Off ramp of Route 737
Sacony Alley Both Baldy Alley
Sacony Alley Both Foundry Alley
Sacony Alley Both Greenwich Street
Sacony Alley Both North Cedar Street
Sacony Alley Both North Kemp Street
Sacony Alley Both North Laurel Street
Sacony Alley Both North Maple Street
Sacony Alley Both North Whiteoak Street
Sacony Alley Both Strausser Alley
Sacony Alley East North Constitution
Boulevard
Sacony Alley East North Elm Street
Sacony Alley West College Boulevard
Sacony Alley [Added
10-24-2000 by Ord. No.
6-2000]
West Roeller Avenue
Sacony Alley West Pine Street
Sander Alley Both Noble Street
§ 212-66 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-66
185:676
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Sander Alley Both South Baldy Street
Sander Alley East South Constitution
Boulevard
Sander Alley East South Whiteoak Street
Sander Alley West Normal Avenue
Schaeffer Alley North West Walnut Street
Schaeffer Alley South Sacony Alley
Seem Drive [Added
10-17-2006 by Ord. No.
16-2006; amended
5-22-2007 by Ord. No.
7-2007; 1-16-2018 by Ord.
No. 1-2018]
East North Elm Street/Seem
Drive
Seem Drive [Added
1-16-2018 by Ord. No.
1-2018]
West North Elm Street/Seem
Drive
Short Street North Highland Avenue
Short Street South East Walnut Street
Siegfried Alley Both South Constitution
Boulevard
Siegfried Alley West Lenni Street
Spruce Street [Amended
10-24-2000 by Ord. No.
6-2000]
North Fairview Drive
Spruce Street South Wentz Street
Stimmel Alley Both Keystone Avenue
Stimmel Alley Both Normal Avenue
Stimmel Alley North Sander Alley
Stimmel Alley South Trexler Avenue
Strausser Alley North Sacony Alley
Strausser Alley North West Walnut Street
Strausser Alley South Sander Alley
Trexler Avenue Both Noble Street
Trexler Avenue East South Constitution
Boulevard
Trexler Avenue West South Baldy Street
Trout Alley Both Chestnut Street
Trout Alley Both Grimley Street
§ 212-66 SOLID WASTE § 212-66
185:677
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Trout Alley [Repealed 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000]
Trout Alley North James Alley
Vine Alley Both North Laurel Street
Vine Alley East Greenwich Street
Vine Alley East North Cedar Street
Vine Alley West North Maple Street
Vine Lane East North Whiteoak Street
Vine Lane West College Boulevard
Walnut Street, East Both North Cedar Street
Walnut Street, East Both North Elm Street
Walnut Street, East Both North Kemp Street
Walnut Street, East Both North Laurel Street
Walnut Street, East North Highland Avenue
Walnut Street, East West North Maple Street
Walnut Street, West West College Boulevard
Walnut Street, West West North Whiteoak Street
Wentz Street Both North Whiteoak Street
Wentz Street East Greenwich Street
Wentz Street West College Boulevard
Whiteoak Street, North Both Wentz Street
Whiteoak Street, South Both Normal Avenue
Whiteoak Street, South South Trexler Avenue
Willow Street South Normal Avenue
§ 212-67. Schedule X: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-23, the following described
intersections are hereby established as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 212-68. Schedule XI: Closing of Certain Streets to Certain
Vehicles.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-24, it shall be unlawful for any
person to drive any vehicle, except a passenger vehicle (but not including
§ 212-66 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-68
185:678
any passenger vehicle drawing any trailer or towing any other vehicle),
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below:
Name of Street Limits
South Constitution Boulevard From West Sander Alley to Trexler
Avenue
Trexler Avenue From Noble Street to South Constitution
Boulevard
§ 212-69. Schedule XII: Vehicle Weight Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-25, gross weight limits are
hereby established as indicated for commercial vehicles or other tractor,
trailer or tractor-trailer combinations upon the streets, bridges or portions
thereof described below, except for the purpose of making local deliveries
on said streets, bridges or portions thereof:
Name of Street or
Bridge
Max Gross Weight
(pounds) Location
Peach Street bridge 48,000 (except
combination 80,000)
Peach Street
§ 212-70. Schedule XIII: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-28B, no person shall park a
vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below, except at
the angle designated:
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
(Reserved)
§ 212-71. Schedule XIV: Parking Prohibited at All Times. [Amended
8-27-1996 by proclamation; 10-28-1997 by proclamation; 7-28-1998
by proclamation; 8-25-1998 by proclamation; 1-26-1999 by
proclamation; 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000; 4-29-2003 by
proclamation; 9-21-2004 by proclamation; 10-16-2007 by
proclamation; 6-16-2009 by Res. No. 20-2009; 11-1-2009 by
proclamation; 1-20-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015; 12-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 5-2016]
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-28G, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts
thereof:
§ 212-68 SOLID WASTE § 212-71
185:679
Name of Street Side Location
All Borough bridges Both Entire length
All streets – Between signs posted in front of any
church, theater or any public meeting
place
Apple Alley East From Sander Alley to a point 285 feet
south of Sander Alley
Apple Alley West From Sander Alley to a point 355 feet
south of Sander Alley
Baldy Street, South East From Sander Alley to a point 35 feet
north of Sander Alley
Baldy Street, South East From West Main Street to a point 72
feet south of West Main Street
Baldy Street, South West From Normal Avenue to Trexler
Avenue
Baldy Street, South West From West Main Street to Sander
Alley
Boyer Alley South From Railroad Street to Roeller Alley
Cemetery Lane South From North Whiteoak Street to
Greenwich Street
Church Lane Both From North Whiteoak Street to Boro
Alley
College Boulevard East From West Main Street to a point 792
feet north of West Main Street
College Boulevard West From College Garden Drive for 360
feet in a northward direction
College Boulevard West From College Garden Drive
southward 178 feet, more or less, to
Lytle Lane
College Boulevard West From 300 feet south of the south side
curb line of Briar Circle South and
extending from that point southward
290 feet, more or less
College Boulevard West From 339 feet north of the north side
curb line of Briar Circle North and
extending from that point northward
1,415 feet, more or less, to the
intersection of Short Lane
Constitution
Boulevard, North
East From Greenwich Street to West Main
Street
Constitution
Boulevard, North
West From West Main Street to Sacony
Alley
§ 212-71 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-71
185:680
Name of Street Side Location
Constitution
Boulevard, South
Both From West Main Street to Sander
Alley
Constitution
Boulevard, South
West From Normal Avenue to Siegfried
Alley
Deisher Lane North From South Constitution Boulevard to
Noble Street
Deisher Lane South From Noble Street to a point 60 feet
east thereof
Elm Street, North Both From East Main Street to Sacony
Alley
Elm Street, North East From Sacony Alley (unopened) to East
Walnut Street a distance of 140 feet
Fair Street [Added
9-17-2019 by Ord.
No. 2-2019]
South From Banner Alley to a point 45 feet
east thereof
Fair Street South From North Whiteoak Street to
Church Lane
Greenwich Street East From Fairview Drive to North
Constitution Boulevard
Greenwich Street East Radius of curve to North Constitution
Boulevard
Greenwich Street East From North Constitution Boulevard to
West Main Street
Greenwich Street West From Fairview Drive to Wentz Street
Greenwich Street West From Sacony Alley to a point 40 feet
north thereof
Greenwich Street West From West Main Street to a point 95
feet north thereof
Heffner Alley North From Greenwich Street to Bock Alley
Highland Avenue North From Pine Street to a point 30 feet
east thereof
Highland Avenue South From Pine Street to a point 30 feet
east thereof
Keystone Avenue North From Noble Street to Bieber Alley
Keystone Avenue South From South Baldy Street to South
Whiteoak Street
Lambert Alley West From Sander Alley to Normal Avenue
Laurel Street, North West From East Main Street to Sacony
Alley
Laurel Street, South East From East Main Street to James Alley
§ 212-71 SOLID WASTE § 212-71
185:681
Name of Street Side Location
Laurel Street, South West From Broad Street to the Borough
line
Laurel Street, South West From East Main Street to James Alley
Main Street, East North From North Laurel Street to a point
45 feet 2 inches east thereof
Main Street, East North From Railroad Street to a point 152
feet 6 inches west thereof
Main Street, East
[Added 9-17-2019
by Ord. No.
2-2019]
South From South Laurel Street to a point
107 feet west thereof
Main Street, East South From South Maple Street to a point
53 feet east thereof
Main Street, East
[Added 9-17-2019
by Ord. No.
2-2019]
South From South Maple Street to a point
86 feet west thereof
Main Street, East South From Willow Street to a point 49 feet
3 inches west thereof
Main Street, East South From Willow Street to a point 70 feet
east thereof
Main Street, West North From North Baldy Street 24 feet in a
westerly direction
Main Street, West North From North Baldy Street 125 feet in
an easterly direction
Maple Street, North East From Sacony Alley to a point 80 feet
south thereof
Maple Street, North West From Highland Avenue to East Walnut
Street
Maple Street, South East From East Main Street to a point 40
feet south thereof
Noble Street East From Sander Alley to a point 40 feet
south of Sander Alley
Noble Street East From West Main Street to Sander
Alley
Noble Street West From Sander Alley to Koffee Lane
Noble Street West From Sander Alley to West Main
Street
Normal Avenue East From West Main Street to Sander
Alley
§ 212-71 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-71
185:682
Name of Street Side Location
Normal Avenue North From Herring Alley to a point 39 feet
west of Herring Alley
Normal Avenue South From Constitution Boulevard to a
point 35 feet east thereof
Normal Avenue South Beginning at the bridge over the
Sacony Creek easterly 616 feet, more
or less, to Willow Street
Peach Street North From Roeller Alley for a distance of
40 feet
Peach Street South From Greenwich Street to the Peach
Street Bridge
Pine Street East From East Main Street to a point 40
feet north of East Main Street
Pine Street East From Highland Avenue to a point 92
feet south thereof
Pine Street West From Highland Avenue to a point 80
feet south thereof
Pine Street West From Sacony Alley to East Main
Street
Railroad Street East From East Main Street north to Peach
Street
Railroad Street West From East Main Street to a point 58
feet north of East Main Street
Sacony Alley Both From North Whiteoak Street to
College Boulevard
Sacony Alley South From North Whiteoak Street to a
point 56 feet 9 inches east thereof
Sander Alley Both From Normal Avenue to Miller Alley
Sander Alley Both From South Whiteoak Street to
Foundry Alley a distance of 307 feet
Trexler Avenue North From Noble Street to South Baldy
Street
Vine Alley North Within cul-de-sac at west end of
roadway
Vine Lane South From North Whiteoak Street to Baldy
Alley
Walnut Street, East South Between signs at church parking lot
exit
Walnut Street, West North Between signs at 313 West Walnut
Street, church parking lot entrance
§ 212-71 SOLID WASTE § 212-71
185:683
Name of Street Side Location
Walnut Street, West North From North Whiteoak Street to a
point 35 feet west of North Whiteoak
Street
Walnut Street, West South From College Boulevard to Greenwich
Street
Wentz Street South From College Boulevard for 160 feet
in an easterly direction
Wentz Street South From Greenwich Street west to Bock
Alley
Whiteoak Street,
North
East From the northern right-of-way line of
Sacony Alley and in a northerly
direction a distance of 15 feet
Whiteoak Street,
North
East From the southern right-of-way line of
Sacony Alley and in a southerly
direction a distance of 15 feet
Whiteoak Street,
North
East From Wentz Street to West Walnut
Street
Whiteoak Street,
North
East From West Main Street to a point 55
feet north thereof
Whiteoak Street,
North
West From Vine Lane to a point 42 feet 10
inches north thereof
Whiteoak Street,
North
West From West Main Street to West
Walnut Street
Whiteoak Street,
South
East From Sander Alley to Normal Avenue
Whiteoak Street,
South
East From West Main Street to a point 90
feet south thereof
Whiteoak Street,
South
West From West Main Street to Sander
Alley
Willow Street Both From East Main Street to Normal
Avenue
§ 212-72. Schedule XV: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
[Amended 12-30-2003 by proclamation; 1-20-2004 by proclamation;
3-15-2005 by proclamation; 1-20-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015;
12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 5-2016]
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-29, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified below of any day, except Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays, upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below:
§ 212-71 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-72
185:684
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Constitution
Boulevard
East 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:45 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
From the intersection of
the Kutztown Area High
School parking lot
entrance (Trexler
Avenue) for a distance
of 150 feet north to the
driveway exit from the
Kutztown Area High
School parking lot; then
from the opposite side of
the driveway exit north
for a distance of 100
feet
Constitution
Boulevard
West 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:45 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
From Trexler Avenue
northward for a distance
of 235 feet
Main Street,
East
Both 6:00 a.m. and 8:00
a.m./Friday (street
cleaning)
From east Borough
boundary to Main Street
bridge
Main Street,
West
Both 6:00 a.m. and 8:00
a.m./Friday (street
cleaning)
From Main Street
bridge to west Borough
boundary
Maple Street,
South
West 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Weekdays,
except holidays
From East Main Street
to James Alley
Normal Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:45 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
From a point 128 feet, 8
inches east of
Constitution Boulevard
to the Sacony Creek
Bridge
Normal Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:45 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
From 35 feet east of the
intersection of
Constitution Boulevard a
distance of 121 feet east
to the driveway
entrance to the
Kutztown Elementary
School, then from the
opposite side of the
driveway exit, east for a
distance of 98 feet to
the bridge over Sacony
Creek
§ 212-72 SOLID WASTE § 212-72
185:685
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Seem Drive North 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m. Weekdays,
except holidays
From a point 369 feet
West of North Kemp
Road for a distance of
187 feet
§ 212-73. Schedule XVI: Time Limit Parking. [Amended 10-24-2000
by Ord. No. 6-2000; 11-19-2002 by proclamation; 4-17-2007 by Ord.
No. 4-2007; 11-18-2008 by Ord. No. 13-2008; 9-20-2011 by Ord. No.
9-2011; 11-15-2011 by Ord. No. 11-2011; 1-20-2015 by Ord. No.
1-2015; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 5-2016]
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-30, no person shall park a vehicle
or allow the same to remain parked upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described below, between the hours specified, for longer than the time
indicated below:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Baldy Alley East 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From West Main Street
to Sacony Alley
Baldy Street,
South
Both 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From Sander Alley to
Normal Avenue
Baldy Street,
South
East 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From Normal Avenue to
Trexler Avenue
Baldy Street,
South
East 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From a point 72 feet
south of West Main
Street for a distance of
90 feet south
C-1 Business
Commercial Zone
streets
All 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
All areas designated as
C-1 Business
Commercial on the
official Zoning Map of
the Borough of
Kutztown referenced in
§ 225-6 of the Code of
the Borough of
Kutztown which abut
residential areas
§ 212-72 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-73
185:686
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Cedar Street,
North
East 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From East Main Street
to Sacony Alley
College
Boulevard
East 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
Adjacent to the property
located at 181 College
Boulevard
Fairview Drive Both 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From College Boulevard
to North Whiteoak
Street
Greenwich Street West 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From Heffner Alley to
West Walnut Street a
distance of 403 feet
Greenwich Street West 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From West Main Street
to Sacony Alley
Main Street, West North 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From Baldy Alley to
North Constitution
Boulevard
Main Street, West North 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From College Boulevard
to Baldy Alley
Main Street, West South 2 hrs., 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From Constitution
Boulevard to South
Baldy Street
Main Street, West South 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From Normal Avenue to
South Baldy Street
Main Street, East North 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From Main Street
Bridge for 252 feet east
thereof
§ 212-73 SOLID WASTE § 212-73
185:687
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Main Street, East South 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From Main Street
Bridge for 247 feet east
thereof
Municipal
parking lot,
located at 52
Herring Alley
Entire
lot
4 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
—
Municipal
parking lot,
located at 22 S.
Whiteoak Street
[Amended
9-17-2019 by
Ord. No.
2-2019]
Entire
lot
2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
—
Normal Avenue Both 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From South Baldy Street
to South Whiteoak
Street
Normal Avenue East and
North
2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From West Main Street
to South Baldy Street
Normal Avenue North
and
South
2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
Between South
Whiteoak Street and
Noble Street
Normal Avenue West
and
South
2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From the Western
Borough boundary line
to South Baldy Street
Railroad Street West 15 mins.; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:30 p.m., except
Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays
Adjacent to the Borough
Municipal Building, 45
Railroad Street
Railroad Street West 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From East Main Street
to East Sacony Alley
Walnut Street,
West
North 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From College Boulevard
to Baldy Alley
§ 212-73 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-73
185:688
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Walnut Street,
West
North 15 mins.; no
exceptions
From 95 feet east of the
intersection of West
Walnut Street and North
Whiteoak Street a
distance of 55 feet east
Wentz Street South 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From 160 feet east of
College Boulevard to
North Whiteoak Street
Whiteoak Street,
North
East 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From West Main Street
to Sacony Alley
Whiteoak Street,
North
West 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From a point 42 feet 10
inches north of Vine
Lane to Wentz Street
Whiteoak Street,
South
East 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From West Main Street
to Sander Alley
Whiteoak Street,
South [Added
9-17-2019 by
Ord. No.
2-2019]
West 15 mins.; 8:00 a.m.
to 12:00 noon,
Sundays
From 262 feet south of
the intersection of South
Whiteoak Street and
Sander Alley for a
distance of 60 feet south
thereof
§ 212-74. Schedule XVII: Special Purpose Parking Zones. [Amended
9-14-1999 by proclamation; 9-17-1999 by proclamation; 6-27-2000
by proclamation; 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000; 3-6-2001 by
proclamation; 4-23-2002 by proclamation; 5-14-2002 by Res. No.
9-2002; 8-28-2002 by proclamation; 5-13-2003 by proclamation;
7-1-2003 by proclamation; 8-5-2003 by proclamation; 1-20-2004 by
proclamation; 11-16-2004 by proclamation; 8-2-2005 by
proclamation; 12-20-2005 by proclamation; 5-22-2007 by
proclamation; 10-16-2007 by proclamation; 8-19-2008 by Ord. No.
9-2008; 9-16-2008 by proclamation; 4-21-2009 by Res. No. 16-2009;
1-20-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 5-2016]
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-31, the following are hereby
established as special purpose parking zones:
§ 212-73 SOLID WASTE § 212-74
185:689
Name of Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Borough park
Legion Field
parking lot
– Disability
parking
2 spaces
Borough park
tennis courts
parking lot
– Disability
parking
2 spaces
College
Boulevard
East Permit
parking
From Fairview
Drive to
Northern
Borough
boundary line
College
Boulevard
East Permit
parking
From Wentz
Street to
Fairview Drive
College Garden
Drive
Both Permit
parking/§ 212-103
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
weekends
and holidays
West from
college
Boulevard to end
East Main Street – Disability
parking
2 spaces at the
Borough park
parking lot
Fairview Drive Both Permit
parking
From College
Boulevard to
North Whiteoak
Street
Greenwich
Street
West Permit
parking
From Heffner
Alley south to
West Walnut
Street
21 Greenwich
Street
— Disability
parking
1 space at 21
Greenwich
Street beginning
at a point 40 feet
north of the
intersection of
Sacony Alley and
Greenwich
Street in a
northerly
direction for a
distance of 20
feet
§ 212-74 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-74
185:690
Name of Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Herring Alley – Disability
parking
3 spaces at the
Borough
municipal
parking lot at 52
Herring Alley
Industrial
Avenue
– Disability
parking
2 spaces at the
Borough pool
parking lot
Keystone Avenue North Permit
parking
From South
Baldy Street to
South Whiteoak
Street
150 Main Street,
East [Added
9-17-2019 by
Ord. No.
2-2019]
– Disability
parking
1 space at 150
East Main Street
beginning at a
point 86 feet
west of the
intersection of
East Main Street
and South Maple
Street in a
westerly
direction for a
distance of 20
feet
253 Main Street,
East
East Disability
parking
Beginning at a
point 85 feet 10
inches west of
the intersection
of the
intersection of
North Laurel
Street and East
Main Street in
an easterly
direction for a
distance of 20
feet
§ 212-74 SOLID WASTE § 212-74
185:691
Name of Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Main Street,
East
North Disability
parking
From a point 21
feet west of the
westerly right-ofway
line of
Roeller Alley and
extending in a
westerly
direction for a
distance of 20
feet
Main Street,
East
South Disability
parking
From a point 49
feet, 3 inches,
west of the
westerly
curbline of
Willow Street
and extending in
a westerly
direction for a
distance of 20
feet
122 Noble Street – Disability
parking
One space at 122
Noble Street, on
Noble Street
beginning at a
point 231 feet
north of the
intersection of
Normal Avenue
and Noble Street
in a southerly
direction for a
distance of 20
feet
§ 212-74 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-74
185:692
Name of Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
49 Normal
Avenue
– Disability
parking
1 space at 49
Normal Avenue
beginning at a
point 33 feet 8
inches east of
the intersection
of Normal
Avenue and
Constitution
Boulevard in an
easterly
direction for a
distance of 20
feet
Normal Avenue Both Permit
parking
From South
Baldy Street to
South Whiteoak
Street
Normal Avenue North Permit
parking
From South
Baldy Street to
Sander Alley
Normal Avenue North Permit
parking
From South
Whiteoak Street
to Noble Street
Pennsylvania
Avenue
Both Permit
parking
From Trexler
Avenue to a
point
approximately
250 feet north of
Normal Avenue
to the end of the
paved area of
Pennsylvania
Avenue
Railroad Street West Disability
parking
2 spaces at 45
Railroad Street
(in front of the
Borough
municipal
building)
§ 212-74 SOLID WASTE § 212-74
185:693
Name of Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Sander Alley – Disability
parking
3 spaces at the
Borough
municipal
parking lot at
Sander Alley and
South Whiteoak
Street
South Baldy
Street
Both Permit
parking
South from
Sander Alley to
Normal Avenue
(R-3 Zoning)
South Baldy
Street
East Permit
parking
South from
Normal Avenue
to Trexler
Avenue (R-2
Zoning)
Spruce Street Both Permit
parking
From Wentz
Street to
Fairview Drive
Wentz Street North Permit
parking/§ 212-103
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
weekends
and holidays
College
Boulevard to
North Whiteoak
Street
West Main
Street
North Disability
parking
1 space at 129
West Main
Street,
beginning at a
point 89.5 feet
east of
Greenwich
Street in an
easterly
direction
West Main
Street
North Disability
parking
1 space at 243
West Main
Street,
beginning at a
point 27.5 feet
west of
Strausser Alley
in a westerly
direction
§ 212-74 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-74
185:694
Name of Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
West Main
Street
North Disability
parking
1 space at 331
West Main
Street,
beginning at a
point 21.5 feet
west of Foundry
Alley in a
westerly
direction
West Main
Street
South Disability
parking
1 space at 168
West Main
Street,
beginning at a
point 88 feet
east of Noble
Street in an
easterly
direction
West Main
Street
South Disability
parking
1 space at 232
West Main
Street,
beginning at a
point 31 feet
east of Strausser
Alley in an
easterly
direction
129 West Walnut
Street
– Disability
parking
1 space at 129
West Walnut
Street beginning
at a point 24 feet
west of the
intersection of
West Walnut
Street and
Greenwich
Street in a
westerly
direction for a
distance of 20
feet
§ 212-74 SOLID WASTE § 212-74
185:695
Name of Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
465 West Walnut
Street
– Disability
parking
1 space at 465
West Walnut
Street,
beginning at a
point 264 feet
east of the
intersection of
West Walnut
Street and
College
Boulevard in an
easterly
direction for a
distance of 22
feet
West Walnut
Street
North Permit
parking
From Baldy Alley
west to College
Boulevard
West Walnut
Street
North Disability
parking
1 space
beginning 33
feet east of the
east curbline of
North Whiteoak
Street for a
distance of 20
feet
Whiteoak Street,
North
East Loading only
zone
From a point 15
feet in a
southerly
direction from
the southern
right-of-way line
of Sacony Alley
and continuing
along said
eastern side of
North Whiteoak
Street in a
southerly
direction a
distance of 22
feet
§ 212-74 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-74
185:696
Name of Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Whiteoak Street,
North
West Permit
parking/§ 212-103
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
weekends
and holidays
From a point 42
feet 10 inches
north of Vine
Lane to Wentz
Street
Whiteoak Street,
North
West Permit
parking/§ 212-103
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
weekends
and holidays
West Walnut
Street to
Fairview Drive
Whiteoak Street,
South
Both Permit
parking/§ 212-103
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
except
weekends
and holidays
Normal Avenue
to Trexler
Avenue
Whiteoak Street,
South
West Disability
parking
1 space
beginning at a
point 30 feet
north of Normal
Avenue in a
northerly
direction for a
distance of 20
feet
§ 212-75. Schedule XVIII: Snow Emergency Routes.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-55, the following streets or parts
thereof are hereby designated as snow emergency routes:
Name of Street Limits
College Boulevard From Wentz Street to West Main Street
Constitution Boulevard,
North
From West Main Street to Trexler Avenue
Constitution Boulevard,
South
From Greenwich Street to West Main
Street
Greenwich Street From north Borough boundary to West
Main Street
Highland Avenue From Pine Street to North Elm Street
Main Street, East From east Borough boundary to Main
Street bridge
Main Street, West From Main Street bridge to west Borough
boundary
§ 212-74 SOLID WASTE § 212-75
185:697
Name of Street Limits
Noble Street From West Main Street to south Borough
boundary
Normal Avenue From West Main Street to Willow Street
Wentz Street From Greenwich Street to College
Boulevard
Whiteoak Street, North From Wentz Street to West Main Street
Whiteoak Street, South From West Main Street to Normal Avenue
Willow Street From East Main Street to south Borough
boundary
§ 212-76. Schedule XIX: Special Regulations, Prohibitions and
Restrictions. [Added 5-27-1997 by proclamation]
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-7, the following regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions are hereby enforced:
§ 212-77. Schedule XX: No Stopping, Standing or Parking. [Added
10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000; 8-28-2002 by proclamation;
9-21-2004 by proclamation; 5-22-2007 by Ord. No. 10-2007;
10-16-2007 by Ord. No. 13-2007; 1-20-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015]
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-28K and L and § 212-27A(10)
no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts
thereof:
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 212-7S, the use of skates,
skateboards and/or roller blades by any person is prohibited at all times
on the trafficway and/or sidewalk on Main Street between its
intersection with College Boulevard and its intersection with
Constitution Boulevard, and between 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
prevailing time, upon all other Borough streets or public ways,
including the trafficway and/or sidewalk. Persons using skates,
skateboards and/or roller blades are permitted to cross Main Street,
between its intersection of Main Street with each of the following
streets and alleys, and only between 6:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m.,
prevailing time:
Baldy Street
College Boulevard
Constitution Boulevard
Foundry Alley
Strauser Alley
Whiteoak Street
§ 212-75 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-77
185:698
Name of Street Side Location
Albright Alley Both From New Rhodes Alley west 149 feet,
more or less, to Greenwich Street
Bock Alley Both From Wentz Street to a point 94 feet, more
or less, north
College Boulevard East From a point 318 feet (being the property
line between 181 College Boulevard and the
Kutztown Fairgrounds) in a northerly
direction from the north right-of-way line of
Vine Lane and continuing along the
aforesaid easterly side of College Boulevard
in a northerly direction for a distance of
1,235 feet to the southerly curbline of
Wentz Street
Industrial Avenue Both Beginning at a point in the center line of
Industrial Avenue 356.5 feet west of the
westerly building line of Willow Street and
extending along said center line along a
curve to the left 160 feet to a point on
Industrial Avenue
Main Street, West North From College Boulevard 179 feet in an
easterly direction
Main Street, West North From Greenwich Street 310 feet in a
westerly direction
Main Street, West North From North Constitution Boulevard 184 feet
in a westerly direction
Main Street, West North From North Whiteoak Street 129 feet in an
easterly direction
Main Street, West North From North Whiteoak Street 110 feet in a
westerly direction
Main Street, West South From Constitution Boulevard 184 feet in a
westerly direction
Main Street, West South From Noble Street 89 feet in an easterly
direction
Main Street, West South From Noble Street to a point 35 feet in a
westerly direction
Main Street, West South From Normal Avenue 160 feet more or less
in an easterly direction
Main Street, West South From South Baldy Street to a point 98 feet
west of South Baldy Street
Main Street, West South From South Whiteoak Street 116 feet in an
easterly direction
§ 212-77 SOLID WASTE § 212-77
185:699
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street, West South From South Whiteoak Street 117 feet in a
westerly direction
New Rhodes Alley Both From Keiter Alley north 339 feet, more or
less, to Albright Alley
Whiteoak Street,
North
West From West Main Street 162 feet in a
northerly direction
Whiteoak Street,
South
East From West Main Street 171 feet in a
southerly direction
§ 212-77.1. Schedule XXI: Metered Parking. [Added 9-17-2019 by
Ord. No. 2-2019]
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-26, any person or persons
causing a vehicle to be parked in an individual parking space upon any of
the streets, parts of streets, or off-street parking facilities thereof described
below shall deposit in the parking meter adjacent to such space, or payment
station, coins of the United States or, where permitted, other indicated
payment according to the time limits indicated on the legend of such meter
or kiosk indicated below:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Municipal
parking lot,
located at 22
South Whiteoak
Street
Entire lot Metered; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sundays
and holidays
—
§ 212-77 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-77.1
185:700
ARTICLE X
On-Street Person With Disability Parking Spaces
[Added 4-17-2007 by Ord. No. 4-2007]
§ 212-78. Installation; marking.
An on-street person with disability parking space may be installed in front
of a residence to accommodate a disabled resident with limited mobility.
The on-street space is comprised of blue curb and a person with disability
parking sign and post at the parking area in accordance with Pennsylvania
statute.
§ 212-79. Intent.
§ 212-80. Policy for installation and use.
A. An on-street person with disability parking space is intended to provide
safe, close parking for a mobility-disabled resident in a residential highparking-
demand area where parking in front of his/her home may not
be readily available.
B. An on-street person with disability parking space is not intended to
replace parking in the resident's driveway or garage.
C. An on-street person with disability parking space is provided as a
courtesy to the disabled resident or family member living at that
residence who has mobility limitations getting to and from the vehicle.
D. Each on-street person with disability parking space displaces a general
parking space, which can create an impact where the residential
parking supply is limited. For this reason, the resident must
demonstrate a real need for an on-street person with disability parking
space.
A. If a mobility-disabled resident demonstrates a need for an on-street
person with disability parking space through the application process
and the criteria for an on-street person with disability parking space are
met, then the Borough shall install the person with disability parking
space, free of charge to the resident, as a courtesy to the disabled
resident.
B. The Mayor of the Borough of Kutztown shall approve or deny the
request. The resident may appeal the Mayor's decision to the Kutztown
Borough Council with a written letter of appeal. The Borough is not
required to provide an on-street person with disability parking space.
C. An on-street person with disability parking space remains open to the
public. The resident does not have exclusive use of the on-street person
with disability parking space. Any registered vehicle with a valid person
with disability placard or person with disability or severely disabled
§ 212-78 SOLID WASTE § 212-80
185:701
§ 212-81. Application and review process; approval; appeal;
installation.
veteran license plate may park in the on-street person with disability
parking space.
D. The Borough may periodically check to see if the person with disability
parking space is still required.
E. The Borough may remove the on-street person with disability parking
space at any time.
A. Application. A disabled resident may request an on-street person with
disability parking space in front of his/her home by submitting an
application to the Kutztown Borough Police Department. The requestor
may obtain an application form from the Kutztown Borough Police
Department or submit an on-line application.
B. Criteria. In order for an application for an on-street person with
disability parking space to be approved, the following conditions must
be met:
(1) The applicant is a resident of the Borough of Kutztown and is
permanently disabled, or will be disabled for a period of time
exceeding one year, or resides with a disabled person who is
permanently disabled or will be disabled for a period of time
exceeding one year and the applicant is responsible for his or her
transportation; and
(2) The applicant must be able to demonstrate, by providing
documentation from a treating physician, that the disabled
person's mobility is impaired to the extent that ambulation is
severely restricted; and
(3) The requested location is on a public street; and
(4) The applicant resides at the address where the on-street handicap
space is requested; and
(5) The applicant supplies the vehicle's license plate number and/or
disabled parking placard number with expiration date for
verification; and
(6) The applicant, or resident being cared for, has a currently valid
person with disability or severely disabled veteran registration
plate on his/her vehicle, or has been issued a currently valid person
with disability placard; and
(7) The applicant must be able to demonstrate that off-street parking is
inaccessible; and
(8) The requested on-street person with disability parking space must
be installed in front of the property of the applicant's property,
§ 212-80 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-81
185:702
§ 212-82. Removal.
unless deemed unfeasible by the Borough, and then such space
should be placed as near to the requested property as possible; and
(9) The requested parking space does not conflict with any parking
restrictions already in place and the parking width in front of the
residence is at least 22 feet; and
(10) The applicant agrees to advise the Kutztown Borough Police
Department when the person with disability parking space is no
longer required.
C. Staff review. The Kutztown Borough Police Department reviews the
application to determine if an on-street person with disability space is
justified based on the criteria as specified under § 212-81B. The
Kutztown Borough Police Department will make a recommendation to
the Mayor of the Borough of Kutztown regarding the installation of a
person with disability parking space at the location of the request.
D. Approval. The Mayor of the Borough of Kutztown or the Mayor's
designated representative shall approve or deny the request based
upon the recommendation of the Police Department. If the Mayor
approves the request, the Mayor shall issue a proclamation pursuant to
§§ 212-7 and 212-8 of § 212 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown.
E. Appeal. If the request is denied, the applicant shall be notified of the
decision in writing. The applicant shall have 30 days from receipt of
said notice to appeal the decision to the Council of the Borough of
Kutztown. The Kutztown Borough Police Department shall submit a
copy of the report of the prior recommendation to the Council of the
Borough of Kutztown.
F. Installation. If the request is approved, the Borough of Kutztown shall
mark the space and install the on-street person with disability parking
space as prescribed in Chapter 212, § 212-78.
A. The Kutztown Borough Police Department may follow up with the
resident annually to ensure the space is still needed. If the resident has
moved or if at the discretion of the Mayor the space is no longer
needed, the Borough of Kutztown will remove the space.
B. Additionally, should a determination be made by the Police Department
that the space is being misused by the applicant, or that the on-street
person with disability parking space is not in conformance with this
chapter, then the Police Department may make recommendation to the
Mayor to have the on-street person with disability parking space
removed.
C. If the decision is made to remove the on-street person with disability
parking space, the applicant will be notified in writing of the decision.
The applicant has 30 days from receipt of notice to appeal the decision
§ 212-81 SOLID WASTE § 212-82
185:703
§ 212-83. Size of space; posting.
§ 212-84. through § 212-99. (Reserved)
to the Council of the Borough of Kutztown. The Kutztown Borough
Police Department shall submit a copy of the prior recommendation to
the Council of the Borough of Kutztown, and the Police Department may
submit any additional comments as deemed necessary.
A. An on-street person with disability parking space is 22 feet long and is
marked with blue curb and posted in accordance with Pennsylvania
Title 67 and Title 75.
§ 212-82 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-84
185:704
ARTICLE XI
Residential Permit Parking Outside of Time-Limit Areas
[Added 8-19-2008 by Ord. No. 9-2008]
§ 212-100. Purpose; enforcement.
The Council of the Borough of Kutztown considers it to be in the interest of
the citizens of the Borough to provide for the establishment of a residential
permit parking program in order to alleviate the hardship experienced by
residents in certain areas of the Borough in obtaining on-street parking
space, to preserve the residential quality of neighborhoods and to provide
for improvement in air quality. The powers and duties as contained in this
article shall be performed by the Mayor and the Police Department of the
Borough as more fully described in this article.
§ 212-101. Authority to designate permit parking areas.
Certain streets and other public areas within the Borough may be
designated, as provided for in this article, as permit parking areas in which
vehicles displaying valid parking permits may stand or be parked. Vehicles
not displaying valid parking permits may not stand or be parked in these
adequately posted designated areas.
§ 212-102. Designation criteria.
No area within the Borough shall be designated as a residential permit
parking area unless said area is west of the Saucony Creek within the
Borough of Kutztown and is within any one or more of the following zoning
districts within the Borough of Kutztown, as set forth in Chapter 225 of
the Kutztown Code: R-2 Low Density Residential, R-3 Medium Density
Residential, or C-2 Commercial/Residential. In addition, in order for an
area to be eligible for residential permit parking designation, the following
additional criteria must be satisfied:
§ 212-103. Designation of permit parking areas.
A. At least 50% of the street level front footage use is non-businessrelated.
B. The area has not been previously designated for limited time parking
pursuant to Article V, Residential Permit Parking, § 212-36, of this
chapter.
A. Areas in the R-2, R-3, or C-2 Zoning District may from time to time be
designated by the Mayor of the Borough as residential permit parking
areas upon determination by the Mayor; provided, however, that said
designation shall not become effective until approved by resolution of
the Borough Council.
B. If an area within an R-2, R-3, or C-2 Zoning District is not an approved
residential permit parking area, a majority of the residents within said
§ 212-100 SOLID WASTE § 212-103
185:705
§ 212-104. Issuance of permits.
Following the Borough Council's approval of the Mayor's designation of
a residential permit parking area, the Police Department of the Borough
shall issue appropriate parking permits and shall cause parking signs to be
erected in the designated area indicating the times and conditions under
which parking shall be allowed. A parking permit shall be issued only upon
application and payment of the applicable fee, except as otherwise provided
for under Chapter A231 regarding fees, to the property owner or property
owner's lawfully authorized representative of a property in the designated
residential permit parking area. Upon application, two parking permits shall
be issued to the owner of a dwelling unit within a designated residential
permit parking area. An issued parking permit may be used on any vehicle
regardless of ownership. To be eligible for a parking permit, property
owners must prove ownership of the property. The Mayor of the Borough
shall establish criteria for proof of ownership. Owners of multifamily
dwelling units, as defined in Chapter 225 of the Kutztown Code, are not
eligible for parking permits.
area may, by filing a petition with the Borough Council, request said
area to be designated a residential permit parking area. The petition
shall be referred by the Borough Council to the Mayor of the Borough
who may either act in accordance with Subsection A of this section or
may refer the petition to the Borough Council for its consideration. If
the Mayor of the Borough refers the petition to the Borough Council,
the Mayor shall inform the Borough Council whether or not the
signatories to the petition constitute a majority of the residents, 18
years of age or older, who reside within the area requested to be
designated as a residential permit parking area.
C. Under no circumstances shall the Mayor or the Borough Council
designate an area as a residential permit parking area unless all of the
designation criteria hereinabove established in § 212-102 of this article
are met. In order to determine whether such designation criteria have
been met, the Borough Council may designate the Mayor or any duly
appointed and designated representative of the Borough to make such
studies or surveys as may be appropriate under the circumstances to
make such determination and shall report the findings of such study or
survey to the Borough Council.
D. Either the Mayor of the Borough or the Borough Council may, prior to
acting upon a petition filed in accordance with Subsection B of this
section, request the Borough Planning Commission its recommendation
as to whether or not the area in question should be designated a
residential permit parking area. Any such recommendation by the
Borough Planning Commission shall not be binding upon either the
Mayor of the Borough or the Borough Council.
§ 212-103 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-105
185:706
§ 212-105. Application for permit; duration.
Each parking permit issued shall be valid for the calendar year for which
such parking permit is issued, and in the event that such parking permit
is issued during the calendar year, then it shall be valid only for the
remainder of said calendar year for which the parking permit is issued.
Parking permits may be renewed annually upon reapplication in the manner
required by the Police Department of the Borough. Each application or
reapplication for a parking permit shall contain information sufficient to
identify the applicant, his residence address or address of real property
owned or leased by the applicant and located within a residential permit
parking area and such other information that may be deemed relevant by
the Mayor.
§ 212-106. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — Any person who owns land improved for residential use within
the permit zone described in § 212-101 above, whether or not such person
resides upon said land.
§ 212-107. Permit fees.
The initial cost for each residential parking permit, whether said parking
permit is issued for a full calendar year or any portion thereof, and the cost
for each renewal of a residential parking permit shall be set from time to
time by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 212-108. Display of permit.
Parking permits shall be displayed inside the vehicle so that the parking
permit shall be visible through the windshield of the vehicle.
§ 212-109. Permit revocation.
The Chief of the Police Department of the Borough is authorized to revoke
the residential parking permit of any person found to be in violation of this
article, and, upon written notification thereof, the person shall surrender
such parking permit to the Police Department of the Borough. Failure, when
so requested, to surrender a residential parking permit so revoked shall
constitute a violation of law and of this article.
§ 212-110. Effect of permit.
A. A vehicle on which is properly displayed a valid parking permit as
provided for in this article shall not be exempt from parking restrictions
or prohibitions established pursuant to authority other than this article,
and said vehicle shall comply with all other limited or special parking
restrictions pertaining to the parking area that may have been or may
§ 212-105 SOLID WASTE § 212-110
185:707
§ 212-111. Violations and penalties.
hereafter be established by other appropriate ordinance or resolution
of the Borough Council. All other motor vehicles parked within a
residential permit parking area shall be subject to the penalties
provided for in this article.
B. A residential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the
holder thereof an on-street parking space within the designated
residential permit parking area.
A. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to stand
or park a motor vehicle in any residential permit area enacted pursuant
to this legislation between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, except holidays. Any person who violates any
provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a
fine as set forth in the fee schedule adopted from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council, and costs. The police officer or other
person enforcing this section shall attach to or place upon every such
vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle was parked in violation of this
article. The notice shall contain instructions to the owner or driver of
the vehicle that if such person will report to the office of the Borough
Manager and pay the sum as set forth in the fee schedule adopted from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council, in the time specified
under § A231-1.17, or if such person will place the sum as set forth in
the fee schedule adopted from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council, within the envelope provided and deposit said envelope in any
of the special parking fine boxes installed at various locations within the
Borough, that act will save the violator from prosecution.
B. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for a person to falsely
represent himself or herself as eligible for a parking permit or to
furnish false information in an application therefor.
C. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for a person to copy,
produce or otherwise bring into existence a facsimile or counterfeit
parking permit or permits. It shall further be unlawful and a violation of
this article for a person to knowingly use or display a facsimile or
counterfeit parking permit in order to evade time limitations on parking
applicable to a designated residential permit parking area.
D. For any violation of any provision described in Subsection B or C of this
section above, the person committing the unlawful act shall be subject
to a penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $600 and/or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days for each such violation.
§ 212-110 KUTZTOWN CODE § 212-111
185:708
Chapter 217
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 11.
Appeals Boards — See Ch. 12.
Plumbing — See Ch. 163.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 218.
§ 217-1. Administration.
The management, regulations and operation of the water system of the
Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania, and all things pertaining
thereto and arising in connection therewith shall be vested in the Water
Department (hereinafter “Department”) previously established by the
Borough Council.
§ 217-2. Definitions.
A. Office of Code Official. The Code Official shall be appointed by the
Borough and shall have the powers, duties and qualifications
prescribed by this chapter, or otherwise prescribed. The duties shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(1) To make any required inspections and supervise any tests
necessary to insure that all provisions of this chapter are being
faithfully complied with, and to cause the removal or correction of
any work or materials that are faulty and/or not approved.
(2) The Code Official shall, upon proper identification, be given access
to any structure or area in order to fulfill duties to make inspections
to determine whether any water service is adequate, faulty,
improperly used, neglected or abandoned, or whether any unlawful
repair, alteration, installation or addition has been made thereon.
Insofar as possible, such inspections shall be made at times
reasonably convenient to the occupants.
(3) When an investigation reveals any condition that is or may be
unsanitary, inadequate, violative of these regulations or dangerous
to life or health, the Code Official shall issue an order to the owner/
owner's agent and occupier of the premises if different than the
owner of the property wherein such condition exists to take such
action as may be necessary and adequate to correct and completely
abate and remove that unlawful or objectionable condition. The
order shall be in writing, and duplicated. A copy shall be sent to or
served on the owner and shall state the nature of the correction
ordered. The condition shall be abated or corrected by the owner/
owner's agent or occupier within the time stated in the order.
§ 212-111 SOLID WASTE § 217-2
185:709
A. General terms. The word "shall" or "must" is mandatory; the word
"may" is permissive.
B. Unless the context of this chapter clearly indicates otherwise, the
meaning of terms and abbreviations used in this chapter shall be, as
follows;
APPROVE — That a device, including without limitation or method, that
has been accepted by the Water Department and/or the Code Official as
suitable for the proposed use.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM — Any water source or system on the
premises of or available to the consumer other than the Borough water
supply system.
BACKFLOW — A flow condition, induced by a differential in pressure,
that causes the flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids,
gases or other substances into the distribution pipes of the water
system from a source other than its intended source.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania,
acting through its Borough Council, its Water Department or other duly
designated employees or representatives, including the Code Official,
Engineer and Solicitor.
BOROUGH DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN — A water conservation
plan mandated by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to be activated
during conditions of drought as proclaimed by the Governor of
Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH WATER SYSTEM — The existing waterworks, water supply
works and water transmission and distribution system lines and other
facilities and storage facilities and properties, together with all
appurtenant facilities and properties which the Borough has acquired
or hereafter shall acquire, from time to time, in connection therewith,
including all property, real, personal and mixed, rights, powers,
licenses, easements, rights-of-way, privileges, licenses, leases,
franchises and other property or interest in property of whatsoever
nature used or useful in connection with such facilities, and together
with all additions, extensions, alterations and improvements thereof
or thereto which may be made or acquired from time to time by the
Borough.
CODE OFFICIAL — The person or designee of said person appointed by
the Borough Council to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
CONNECTION FEE — A fee payable by an owner for water service from
the Borough prior to the water service supply line being provided by
the Borough.
CONSUMER — The owner and his tenant or other occupant of the
premises where owner has contracted or after the effective date of this
chapter shall contract for water service to the premises and/or who
contracts for the purchase of water other than the service to a premises
upon or after the effective date of this chapter.
§ 217-2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 217-2
185:710
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM — Any water system, located on the
consumer's premises, supplied by or in any manner connected to the
Borough's water system.
CONTAMINATION — The degradation of the quality of the drinking
water by waste waters, processed fluids, pollutants or any water of a
quality less than accepted drinking water quality to a degree which
would create hazard to the public health through poisoning or through
the spread of disease, as mandated by PADEP.
CROSS-CONNECTION — An arrangement allowing either a direct or
indirect connection through which backflow, including, but not limited
to, backsiphonage, can occur between the potable drinking water in the
Borough's water system and a system containing a source or potential
source of contamination.
DEPARTMENT — The Borough of Kutztown Water Department.
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM — All piping, fixtures and appurtenances used
to transport water to, within, and from a building, including all
residential and nonresidential facilities and the source, transmission,
treatment and distribution facilities of public water systems.
HEALTH HAZARD — Any condition, device or practice in the
consumer's water system or its operation that creates, or may create, a
danger to the health and well-being of its users.
INDIVIDUAL UNIT — Each and every single residential, industrial or
commercial entity.
LEAD FREE — When used with respect to solders and flux, refers to
solders and flux containing not more than 0.2% lead, and when used
with respect to pipes and pipe fittings, refers to pipes and pipe fittings
containing not more than 8% lead.
METER — A devise to measure the amount of water consumed.
NONPOTABLE WATER — Water not safe for drinking, culinary,
domestic use and fails to meet the requirements of the PADEP.
OWNER — The person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole
or partial, of any premises.
PADEP — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or other legal entity, or their legal representatives,
agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and
the singular shall include the plural, where indicated by the context.
POLLUTION — The presence in water of any foreign substance that
tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the
usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create
an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and
unreasonably affect such water for domestic use.
§ 217-2 SOLID WASTE § 217-2
185:711
POTABLE WATER — Water which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary
and domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the PADEP.
PREMISES —
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS REQUIREMENTS MANUAL (PIRM) — The
most recent set of standards and specifications governing the type
and installation of Borough water system components and facilities, as
adopted by the Borough.
READER, REMOTE — A devise which records the measurements made
by the meter.
REASONABLE TIME — Deemed to be between 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.,
prevailing time.
SCHEDULE OF WATER RATES AND CHARGES — The water rates,
charges and fees adopted and amended or revised from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council.181
SERVICE CONNECTION — The water service pipe from the Borough's
curb stop in the street right-of-way to the premises except for the water
meter assembly.
SERVICE SUPPLY LINE — The water service pipe from the Borough's
water main to and including the Borough's curb stop.
SYSTEM HAZARD — A condition posing an actual or potential threat of
damage to the physical properties of the Borough's water system or the
consumer's water system.
TAPPING FEE — Shall mean a fee applicable to a new premises, or
parts thereof or a change in use of a premises. Such fee is a direct
proportionate share of cost for including new premises and change of
use into the Borough's water system.
TENANT — A person who leases or rents from the owner or otherwise
occupies a premises.
A building or structure or part thereof occupied by one family or
business; or
(1)
(2) A building or structure occupied by one family and boarders; or
A building or structure or part thereof occupied by a group of
persons living independent of any other group of persons or
families. Without intending to limit the foregoing, each multifamily
dwelling and rooming house shall constitute a premises; or
(3)
(4) A trailer or mobile home occupied by one family or business; or
A building devoted entirely to public or religious use, such as a
school, house of worship, firestation or other similar use.
(5)
181. Editor's Note: Said schedule is included in Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 217-2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 217-2
185:712
§ 217-3. Service applications.
WATER DEPARTMENT — The operating department organized and
supervised by the Borough Council to manage and operate the
Borough's water system (hereinafter "Department").
WATER METER ASSEMBLY — The water meter with reader and the
backflow preventer in the case of residential premises.
A. Applications for new water service and renewal of existing or previous
water services, or requests for discontinuance of water service, shall be
made by the owner of the premises. Such application shall be made to
the Department and shall bind the owner and any other consumer,
including, without limitation, a tenant and all subsequent owners and
other consumers to which water service is furnished. By the signing of
the application for water service, the owner signifies his understanding
and agreement that if the owner elects to lease the premises to a tenant
or allow the premises to be occupied by a person other than the owner,
then the tenant or other person, at the request of the owner, shall
thereafter be billed for water service. The owner of the premises shall
nevertheless remain responsible and liable for the payment of any bills
for water service not timely paid. The acceptance of water service by
any consumer shall represent an agreement between the Borough and
the consumer. Use of the water supplied to the premises or any portion
thereof shall be limited to the owner or other consumer on the premises
whose identity has been made known to and appears on the records of
the Borough, or as otherwise permitted by the Department. The
Borough may require the posting of deposit with the Borough of any
consumer; provided, however, that the posting of such deposit by any
consumer shall not affect the owner's responsibility or liability for water
service rendered to the premises as hereinabove provided.
B. Applications for the purchase of water other than for service to a known
premises shall be made by the person defined as consumer and, as
such, shall bind said person as responsible and liable for the payment of
any bills for water supplied, and said payment is required at the time
water is received. The Borough reserves the right to refuse the supply
of water to any person where not required to supply water under the
rules and regulations of the Borough's water rates.
C. Except in the case of an emergency, 10 days' written notice to the
Department shall be given by an owner desiring service and/or to
discontinue service. Water valves owned by the Borough shall not be
operated by any person without the permission and supervision of the
Department.
D. The owner of any property within the Borough upon which there is
erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy and/or use by human beings shall make service connection
therewith for the purpose of that premises utilizing water from the
Borough’s water system. Any well, spring or cistern existing on any
§ 217-2 SOLID WASTE § 217-3
185:713
§ 217-4. Service connection.
property shall either be abandoned in accordance with the Well
Abandonment Guidance Document produced by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection or have any associated water
line inside the premises return through the wall to the exterior of
the premises and terminate at a yard hydrant or hydrants for use as
a source of nonpotable water. Either method shall receive approval
as such by the Borough. If approved for use as a nonpotable water
source, any pressure tank and water lines associated with said use shall
be marked as nonpotable water and no interconnections between the
private well and the public water supply shall be permitted. [Added
3-16-2011 by Ord. No. 3-2011]
A. All service connections hereinafter installed and/or replaced shall be
made at the Borough curb stop and shall be installed as specified in the
Borough's Public Improvements Requirements Manual as adopted and
supplemented by the Borough, copies of which are available for
inspection or purchase at the office of the Borough Code Official.
B. The Department shall install the service supply line from the water
main to and including the curb stop and curb stop box which shall be at
the owner's property line. Such locations shall be determined by the
Department. For such installation, a connection fee and/or any other
applicable fee provided for in the Schedule of Water Rates and
Charges182 shall be charged to the owner.
C. In the case of existing installation, upon this chapter becoming
effective, the Borough shall assume responsibility for the service supply
line up to and including the curb stop and curb stop box and the repair
and/or replacement of such service supply line shall be made at the sole
determination and discretion of the Department.
D. In the event that the Borough shall hereafter replace an existing service
supply line as provided for in § 217-4C, the owner shall cause the
service connection from the curb stop to the meter to be replaced
unless such service is a minimum of three-quarter inch diameter Type K
copper and is determined by the Borough to be in good and serviceable
condition.
E. All service connections shall be installed so as to provide an accessible
place for the location of the Borough's water meter assembly, as
determined by the Department.
F. No person other than a master plumber shall connect any premises with
the Borough's water system at the curb stop, and prior to doing same
shall obtain a plumbing permit from the Borough Code Office.
182. Editor's Note: Said schedule is included in Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 217-3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 217-4
185:714
§ 217-5. Water meters.
G. All soldered joints shall be made with lead-free solder and fluxed in
compliance with the Pennsylvania Plumbing System Lead Ban and
Notification Act.
H. Any work done in connection with the water system shall be inspected
by the Department and/or Code Office of the Borough prior to covering
same. Closures made in violation of this section shall be uncovered for
inspection.
A. Water service by the Department shall only be provided through water
meters supplied and installed by the Department. The fee for the meter
and installation shall be paid for by the owner as set forth, or provided
for, in the Schedule of Water Rates and Charges.183
B. The location and size of the water meter assembly shall be determined
by the Department.
C. Meters, backflow preventers and remote readers shall be sealed by the
Department, and no other person shall break or disturb such seals or
tamper with the water meter assembly in any way without the
permission of the Department. In the event that a seal is broken or
disturbed or the water meter assembly has been tampered with, a
charge shall be made by the Department to the owner as set forth in the
Schedule of Water Rates and Charges.
D. In the event that a water meter assembly is broken due to freezing and/
or through the negligence of the owner, or any other occupant of the
premises, the owner shall pay for all costs incurred to replace the
damaged components of the water meter assembly.
E. Only Department personnel or persons authorized by the Department
shall install, change or alter the location of a water meter assembly, in
which case a charge shall be made as set forth in the Schedule of Water
Rates and Charges to cover the cost of inspection and resealing same.
F. The maintenance, care and ordinary repairs of the water meter
assembly shall be the responsibility of the Department; provided,
however, that where replacements, repairs or adjustments of any
nature are rendered necessary due to an intentional, negligent or
careless act of the owner or any occupant of the premises, the resulting
expense shall be charged to the owner.
G. The owner of the premises where a water meter assembly is installed
shall be held responsible for its care and protection, including, but not
limited to, damage from freezing, from hot water, from injury or from
interference by any person or persons. If any water meter assembly is
stolen or destroyed by fire, flood or any other cause, the owner shall be
liable for such loss and damage.
183. Editor's Note: Said schedule is included in Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 217-4 SOLID WASTE § 217-5
185:715
§ 217-6. Water conservation.
No water shall be provided for use to any building or other structure of any
kind which is hereafter construction or remodeled, and in which plumbing,
water piping or water fixtures are to be installed, extended or altered in any
way, and for which construction a permit is required to be obtained from
the Borough, unless the new, extended or altered plumbing, water piping
and other water using fixtures therein conform to the requirements and
standards of the Borough's Plumbing Code.184
§ 217-7. Water uses and leaks.
H. In all cases of disconnecting and reconnecting of any water meter
assembly, a charge is hereby imposed upon the owner of the premises
as set forth in the Schedule of Water Rates and Charges.
I. In cases where the distance between the curb stop and the dwelling to
be serviced exceeds 125 feet, or in any other case where deemed
necessary by the Department, the water meter assembly shall be
installed by the Department in an outside meter pit. The construction
and dimensions of such outside meter pit shall be in accordance with
Borough specifications, and its installation and location shall be
approved by the Department. The cost of the water meter pit shall be
the responsibility of the owner.
A. No person shall take or use Borough water from any premises other
than his own (either as owner or occupant of such premises), and no
person shall sell or give away Borough water for any purpose other than
as specified in the original application pursuant to which water service
is furnished, or as otherwise permitted in writing by the Department.
B. In terms of emergency and/or during periods of drought conditions, the
Department may limit the use or water to such an extent and in such a
manner as in the opinion of the Department is warranted, pursuant to
the Borough's Drought Contingency Plan from time to time in effect.
C. In the event of leaks upon the premises of an owner that remain
unrepaired after twenty-four-hour notice to the owner and any other
occupant of the premises, the Water Department shall have the
authority to shut off the water following written notice by personal
service, or if unable to personally serve, by posting the same in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected by the notice until such
leaks are repaired.
D. No bypass of a residential water meter assembly shall be made or
maintained unless approved in writing by the Department; however, all
commercial and industrial meters shall be equipped with a bypass, with
lockable valves, approved by the Department.
184. Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Plumbing.
§ 217-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 217-7
185:716
§ 217-8. Cross-connection control.
E. If any person shall open or use a fire hydrant except in case of fire in the
vicinity thereof without prior approval from the Department or shall
obstruct the access to any fire hydrant by placing debris or material of
any sort within 15 feet of such fire hydrant, or shall willfully break,
injure or disturb any curb stop, valve or fixture pertaining to the
Borough's water system, such person, in addition to being subject to a
penalty as provided for in § 217-17, shall pay the cost of any repair
made necessary by such acts.
F. Fire companies may use the fire hydrants for practice or other uses
without a permit but shall report such use to the Department.
A. The Department and the consumer have the joint responsibility for the
protection of the Borough's water system from the contamination due
to backflow of contaminants through the service connections. The
Department will furnish as a component of the meter installation, as
provided for in § 217-5A, a backflow preventer to all new residential
consumers. It shall be the obligation of each nonresidential consumer to
furnish and install, at said consumer's cost, a backflow preventer. The
Department shall decide what type of backflow preventer is needed,
where it is to be placed in the service connection (either within the
building or structure served or in an outside pit) and shall also
determine the deadline for compliance. Failure, refusal or inability on
the part of the consumer to comply with this section shall constitute
grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises of such
consumer.
B. No service connection shall be installed or maintained to any premises
where actual or potential cross-connections to the Borough's water
system or consumer's water system may exist unless such actual or
potential cross-connections are abated or controlled to the satisfaction
of the Department.
C. No service connection shall be installed or maintained whereby water
from an auxiliary water system may enter the Borough's water system
or a consumer's water system.
(1) The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to
the Department for the purposes of conducting surveys and
investigations of water use practices within the consumer's
premises to determine whether there are actual or potential crossconnections
to the consumer's water system.
(a) A backflow preventer or vacuum breaker shall be installed on
any water outlet to which a hose could be connected at the
consumer's cost and expense.
(b) A vacuum breaker shall be installed on all yard and wall
hydrants.
§ 217-7 SOLID WASTE § 217-8
185:717
(2) Existing backflow preventers approved by the Department at the
time of installation and properly maintained shall, except for
inspection and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the
requirement of § 217-8A, provided that the Department is assured
that such devices will satisfactorily protect the Borough's water
system.
(3) Backflow preventers required shall be installed at a location and in
a manner approved by the Department and shall be installed by a
master plumber or a person who is, in the opinion of the
Department, properly qualified to perform such installations.
(4) Pits or vaults, where backflow preventers are located, shall be of
watertight construction approved by the Department, be so located
and constructed as to prevent flooding and shall be maintained by
the consumer free from standing water by means of either a sump
pump or a suitable drain. Such sump pump or drain shall not
connect to a sanitary sewer nor permit flooding of the pit or vault
by adverse flow from its point of discharge. An access ladder and
adequate natural or artificial lighting shall be provided to permit
maintenance, inspection and testing of the backflow preventer.
D. Inspection and maintenance of nonresidential backflow preventer.
(1) It shall be the duty of the nonresidential consumer to have
inspections, tests and overhauls made as directed by the
Department in accordance with the following schedule (or more
often where inspections indicate a need):
(a) Air gap separation shall be inspected at time of installation and
at least every 12 months thereafter.
(b) Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested
for tightness at the time of installation and at least every 12
months thereafter. They shall be dismantled, inspected
internally, cleaned and repaired whenever needed and at least
every 30 months.
(c) Reduced pressure zone - backflow preventers shall be
inspected and tested for tightness at the time of installation
and at least every 12 months thereafter. They shall be
dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned and repaired
whenever needed and at least every five years.
(d) Interchangeable connections shall be inspected at the
installation and at least every 12 months thereafter.
(2) Inspections, tests and overhaul of nonresidential backflow
preventers shall be made at the expense of the consumer and shall
be performed by a person certified by the Department to inspect,
test and overhaul backflow preventers.
§ 217-8 KUTZTOWN CODE § 217-8
185:718
§ 217-9. Service discontinuance.
(3) Whenever backflow preventers required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the
expense of the consumer without delay.
(4) The owner must maintain a complete record of each backflow
preventer from purchase to retirement. Such record shall include a
comprehensive listing that includes a record of all tests,
inspections and repairs. Records of inspections, tests, repairs and
overhaul shall be submitted to the Department annually.
(5) Backflow preventers shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective.
E. Inspection and maintenance of residential backflow preventers.
Inspection, tests and maintenance of residential backflow preventers
shall be conducted by the Department. The consumer shall provide
access to Department personnel for this purpose.
F. Consumer's storage tanks supplied with Borough water shall be
approved by the Department and shall be inspected periodically by the
Department to assure compliance with this chapter and applicable
regulations.
G. Color coding.
(1) In buildings or industrial plants where multiple piping systems are
used for water, extreme care shall be taken not to interconnect the
systems. Where water from the Borough's water system is used to
service systems of lesser quality, such as ejectors, pumps and
numerous other hazardous items, the Borough's water system must
be separated or protected from such cross-connections by an air
gap separation, vacuum breaker's backflow preventers or double
check valve assemblies. Each outlet on the nonpotable water line,
which may be inadvertently used for drinking water, shall be posted
"Danger! Unsafe Water." Other pipes shall be painted or banded at
twenty-five-foot intervals and stenciled to identify their contents
and direction of flow. Gas piping shall be painted or banded at fivefoot
intervals. The following system shall be used:
Piping System Color Stenciling
Potable water Green Potable Water
Nonpotable water Brown Nonpotable Water
Fire protection Red Fire
Chemical Orange Chemical
Gas Yellow Gas
(2) Colored plastic bands may be used instead of paint, i.e., Dymo tape
with legends, so long as bands are permanently fastened to pipes.
§ 217-8 SOLID WASTE § 217-9
185:719
A. The Department reserves the right to shut off the supply of water to any
consumer for any of the following reasons:
(1) For repairs.
(2) For unavoidable misrepresentation by the consumer as to the use
of the water furnished to him.
(3) For fraudulent misrepresentation by the consumer as to the use of
the water furnished to him.
(4) For any disapproval of the consumer's equipment or installation by
virtue of its being defective or unsafe without prompt action being
taken to remedy the same.
(5) When service is incompatible with laws, ordinances, rules,
regulations or orders of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
political subdivision or department thereof.
(6) For nonpayment of any bill, including service charge, payable to
the Borough under the provisions of this chapter or any other
ordinance or regulations of the Borough establishing or otherwise
related to the supply of water from the Borough's water system.
(7) For violation of or noncompliance with the terms and conditions,
regulations and rules set forth in this chapter or any other
ordinance or regulations of the Borough pertaining to the supply of
water from the Borough's water system.
(8) Whenever such action is necessary in the opinion of the
Department to protect the Borough from fraud or abuse.
B. The Department shall notify the owner in writing and shall be serviced
personally or by certified United States first class mail, postage
prepaid, when discontinuance is due to nonpayment of bills or any other
violation described above.
C. The Borough shall not be liable for any damage, loss or injury sustained
by the owner or other occupant of the premises by reason of any failure
to supply water on account of storms, accident or for any other cause
whatsoever.
D. Should any system supplied by Borough water be operated in violation
of any provisions of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the Department
to completely disconnect all service supply lines at the curb stop
serving such system or to assure itself that there is a physical
separation of piping until this chapter is followed. Any cost of such
disconnection and the estimated cost of reconnection shall be paid by
the consumer before service is restored to the premises.
E. Reconnection charge. Service disconnected by the Borough under the
provision of Subsections A, B, C and D of this section will be restored
only on payment in advance of a fee, which shall be from time to time
§ 217-9 KUTZTOWN CODE § 217-9
185:720
§ 217-10. Access.
determined by resolution of the Borough Council, in addition to all
arrearages due by the consumer, except when it has been necessary
to remove service pipes to affect discontinuance of service. In the
latter case, service will be restored only on payment to the Borough
of all costs of discontinuance and restoration in addition to all such
arrearages. [Added 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 19-2006]
A. The properly authorized agent(s) of the Department and/or Borough
Code Official's office shall at all reasonable time have free and
unrestricted access to the premises of any consumer for the purpose of
inspecting the consumer's installation of a service connection or the
water meter assembly, for examining, reading, repairing or removing
the Borough's meter(s) or other property of the Borough or for any
other purposes consistent with this chapter.
B. Right of entry; inspection and sampling. The Borough shall have the
right to enter the premises of any customer at any time during
operations to determine whether the customer is complying with all
requirements of this chapter and any order issued hereunder. Customer
shall allow the Department employees ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination
and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
(1) Any temporary or permanment obstruction to safe or easy access to
a Borough facility shall be promptly removed by and at the
customer's expense.
(2) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Department employees access
to customer's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
C. Search warrants. If Department employees and/or the Code Official
have been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any
part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that
there may be a violation of these regulations, or that there is a need to
inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of the Borough designed to verify compliance with these
regulations or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the
overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the
Department employees and/or the Code Official may seek issuance of a
search warrant from the appropriate commonwealth official authorized
to issue a search warrant. Probable cause shall exist where Department
employees and/or the Code Official have been refused access to the
property, building, premises, place, book, record, lot or physical
evidence or has been prevented from taking samples or conducting
tests; and that the sampling, testing, inspection or examination is
authorized and required by this chapter and/or any other applicable
law, or that the Code Official has reason to believe that a violation of
this chapter has or will occur giving rise to the necessity of such
inspection, sampling, test or examination.
§ 217-9 SOLID WASTE § 217-11
185:721
§ 217-11. Separate services.
§ 217-12. Water consumption.
A. Principle structures supplied by the Borough's water system shall have
a separate water service supply line installed for said structure,
whether or not such structure is separately assessed for tax purposes
and whether or not two or more such principle structures are erected
upon adjoining land of the same consumer.
B. In a multi-use building under the ownership of one person, a single
service supply line may be used to provide water service to more than
one unit. The size of the service connection and water meter assembly
shall be approved by the Water Department.
C. On condominium buildings and co-ops, where individual units are
owned by different consumers, a separate service supply line and water
meter assembly shall be required for each condominium unit.
A. A water service charge for the consumption of water is hereby imposed
as set forth in the Schedule of Water Rates and Charges.185
B. The water rates for consumption of water by consumer shall be as set
forth in the Schedule of Water Rates and Charges.
C. The water consumption shall be measured by a meter or meters
installed by the Borough, and all bills shall be calculated upon the basis
of the registration of such meter or meters. If a meter ceases to register
or is found defective, the quantity of water consumed shall be
determined by taking the average water consumption of the twelvemonth
period immediately preceding the date when the meter was
found to be not registering, which amount shall be used to determine
the amount of water used by the consumer during the billing period in
which the meter was found not to have registered. Exceptions will be
made to this rule only where the facts clearly show that the stated
method does not give a reasonably accurate volume of consumption for
the period.
D. The schedule of water rates and charges associated with the Borough of
Kutztown’s public water system shall be promulgated and imposed by
the Borough Council of the Borough of Kutztown by resolution, from
time to time, and shall be kept on file in the office of the Borough
Secretary and made available to the public for inspection during the
normal hours of operation of the Borough of Kutztown. [Amended
8-18-2009 by Ord. No. 10-2009]
E. The accuracy of any meter will be tested upon consumer's request
which shall be made to the Department. The request shall be
accompanied by a fee as set forth in the Schedule of Water Rates and
Charges186 to cover the cost of the test. If, upon making such test the
185. Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 217-11 KUTZTOWN CODE § 217-12
185:722
§ 217-13. Fire hydrant rental.
A rental is hereby imposed for each fire hydrant located upon land other
than property owned by the Borough, as set forth in the Schedule of Water
Rates and Charges.187
§ 217-14. Fire protection service charge.
A charge is hereby imposed for the furnishing of standby fire protection by
means of sprinkler systems or otherwise, in addition to any other charge
imposed by this chapter, or set forth in the Schedule of Water Rates and
Charges.188
§ 217-15. Billings.
meter shall be found to register in excess of 1 1/2% more or less water
than actually passes through it, another meter will be substituted and
the fee will be refunded to the consumer. If the meter registers within
1 1/2% of the actual quantity of water passing through it, the said fee
shall be retained by the Borough.
A. All bills for water consumed shall be rendered quarterly on meter
readings made in the respective immediately preceding months, and
such bills shall include the service charge for the immediately
preceding calendar quarter. All such bills shall be due and payable on or
before the last day of the month following the month the bills were
rendered All bills remaining unpaid for one calendar month after the
due date shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in the Schedule of
Water Rates and Charges.189
B. In case of any bill rendered under the foregoing subsection shall remain
unpaid for a period of at least 30 days, the water service to the
consumer may be shut off by the Water Department after compliance
with any applicable rules and regulations then in effect and service may
not be renewed until arrears and penalties are paid, together with any
expense incurred by the Water Department in shutting off and restoring
the water service.
C. In cases involving rented premises, the procedures to be followed to
effect discontinuance shall be as set forth in the Pennsylvania Utility
Service Tenants Rights Act, Act No. 299 of 1978, as amended and
supplemented.
D. In addition to the right and remedies of the Borough hereinabove
provided, the Borough shall also have the right to file a municipal lien
against the premises for any unpaid and delinquent bills for water
186. Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the Borough offices.
187. Editor's Note: Said schedule is included in Ch. A231, Fees.
188. Editor's Note: Said schedule is included in Ch. A231, Fees.
189. Editor's Note: Said schedule is included in Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 217-12 SOLID WASTE § 217-15
185:723
§ 217-16. Consumer deposit.
§ 217-17. Notice of violations and enforcement.
service rendered to said premises to the extent permitted and provided
for by applicable law.
A. Any consumer who is not the owner henceforth applying for water
service may be required to deposit with the Borough an amount equal
to the estimated gross bill of such consumer for any single billing
period, plus one month maximum period not to exceed four months or
as set forth in the Schedule of Water Rates and Charges.190
B. In the event that any consumer is delinquent in the payment of any bill
for water service more than one time within any one-year period, then
upon notice from the Borough Secretary to the consumer, the consumer
may be required to post a duplicate deposit in the same amount as the
previous deposit within 10 days from the receipt of such notice, and in
the event the consumer shall fail to post such duplicate deposit, the
Department shall discontinue service to such consumer.
C. The payment of any undisputed bill, within the meaning of the Public
Utility Law, shall be payment of the bill with or without disconnect or
penalty, within 30 days following the period for which the bill was
rendered or payment within 30 days following presentation of the bill,
or the payment of any contested bill, payment of which is withheld
beyond the period herein mentioned and the dispute is terminated
substantially in favor of the consumer and payment made by the
consumer within 10 days thereafter.
D. A deposit with the Borough shall bear no interest.
E. Upon discontinuance of service, the Borough may apply any deposit
then in its possession and previously made by the consumer toward the
final settlement of such consumer's account, and any remaining balance
of such deposit thereof shall be refunded to the consumer.
A. Whenever the Code Official believes or has cause to believe that here
has occurred and/or is continuing any violation of the provisions of this
chapter or any rules, regulations or resolutions adopted pursuant to
this chapter, the Code Official shall give notice of such violation to each
person responsible therefor, and such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing and state the place and location of the violation.
(2) State the nature, condition and manner of the violation.
(3) State the determination of the Code Official with respect to the
violation.
190. Editor's Note: Said schedule is included in Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 217-15 KUTZTOWN CODE § 217-17
185:724
(4) State the name of each person deemed responsible by the Code
Official for such violation, together with the name of the owner of
the property upon which the violation occurred and/or is located.
(5) State the date of the notice and the period of time, if any, allowed
for compliance with this chapter, as such period of time is specified
in Subsection C of this section.
(6) Be served upon the owner of the property involved and all other
persons, if any, named in the notice pursuant to Subsection A(4) of
this section, and service of such notice shall be made upon the
owner and each such other person, if any, either personally or by
certified first-class mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid,
sent to the last known address of such owner and each such person.
B. The requirements for service of notice as contained in this chapter shall
apply only as to notification of the first occurrence of any violation. The
issuance of a notice thereafter regarding any repeated occurrence of
the same violation shall not be required prior to imposition of penalties
as provided for in this chapter.
C. The period of time within which a person determined to be responsible,
pursuant to Section A(4) of this section, for any violation shall comply
with the specific provisions of this chapter, following the issuance of a
notice, shall be the period of time determined by the Code Official,
taking into consideration the nature and the degree of danger to public
health and safety posed by such violation. The notice of any violation
may require immediate compliance with this chapter (any such notice
requiring immediate compliance hereinafter referred to as an
"emergency order") when it is determined by the Code Official that the
violation in question presents an immediate and present danger or
nuisance to the health, safety and welfare of the public, and, in such
case, notice of the violation constituting such emergency order may be
verbal (which verbal notice shall thereafter be confirmed with a written
notice) and shall be served personally upon the person, if available, who
has caused or is responsible for or in control of said violation, and such
notice constituting such emergency order may require the immediate
correction and discontinuance of the violation and compliance with this
chapter.
D. Notwithstanding any such notice requirements of this section, when it
is determined by an officer of the Kutztown Police Department that an
immediate, present danger exists to the health, safety and welfare of
the public, said officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter being
violated by verbal notice constituting an emergency order, without need
for the issuance of any written notice of any violation.
E. Any person aggrieved by a determination or order issued by the Code
Official or by any rule or regulation may appeal said notice,
determination, order, rule or regulation to the Code Appeals Board as
provided for in Chapter 12, Article I, of this Code.
§ 217-17 SOLID WASTE § 217-17
185:725
§ 217-18. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a determination or order issued by the Code
Official or any other rule or regulation may appeal said notice,
determination, order, rule or regulation except §§ 217-12, 217-13, 217-14,
217-15 and 217-16 of this chapter to the applicable Appeals Board as
provided for in Chapter 12 of this Code.
§ 217-19. Miscellaneous provisions.
If any provision, sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter shall
for any reason be found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
determination shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this chapter, and it is hereby
declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this chapter would
have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid provision,
sentence, clause, section or part not been included herein.
F. Any person to whom an emergency order is issued may file an appeal to
the Code Appeals Board as provided for in this section, but such appeal
shall not excuse the need for immediate compliance with such
emergency order, nor shall such appeal serve as a supersedeas to the
immediate effectiveness of the emergency order.
G. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, which violation
causes a system hazard or caused contamination or pollution which
creates a hazardous condition to the sewer system or general public,
upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a penalty of not less than
$500 nor more than $1,000 for each violation.
H. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $100 nor more
than $600 for each violation.
I. Every violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense, and
each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
J. The penalties as prescribed above shall be imposed and collected in the
manner provided for by the Borough Code in the case of violations of
Borough ordinances.
K. The Borough shall have the right in addition to the penalties imposed
herein to sue the responsible person for costs and expenses incurred by
the Borough for testing and remediation of any condition causing the
Borough to incur expenses resulting from a violation of this chapter.
A. Repeal of conflicting ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, including the following
ordinances of the Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania:
Ordinance No. 7-1960, enacted on March 15, 1960; and Ordinance No.
12-2002, enacted September 30, 2002, are hereby repealed; provided,
§ 217-17 KUTZTOWN CODE § 217-19
185:726
§ 217-20. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective after enactment on the earliest date
permitted by law.
Chapter 218
WATER AND SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 11.
Plumbing — See Ch. 163.
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Street excavations — See Ch. 192, Art. III.
Water — See Ch. 217.
however, that the rates adopted thereunder, which are now or
heretofore in effect, are not repealed.
B. Tense, gender and number. Words used in the present tense include the
future. Words in the masculine gender include the feminine and the
neuter. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the
singular.
§ 217-19 WATER AND SEWERS § 217-20
218:727

ARTICLE I
Connection Fees
[Adopted 9-10-1991 by Ord. No. 10-1991]
§ 218-1. Connection fee imposed.
A connection fee (hereinafter referred to as the "connection fee"), as said
term is described in Act No. 203 of 1990 of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania,191 which Act was enacted on December 19, 1990, and as
authorized by Section 507-A of Act No. 209 of 1990 of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, enacted on December 19, 1990, is hereby imposed for any
connection hereafter made to the water distribution system of the Borough
of Kutztown (hereinafter referred to as the "water system") or to the sewer
system of the Borough of Kutztown (hereinafter referred to as the "sewer
system").
§ 218-2. Connection fee amount.
The connection fee to either the water system or the sewer system shall
be in an amount equal to the actual costs incurred by the Borough of
Kutztown in making such connection. Such costs shall include, by way
of illustration and not limitation, all labor costs, equipment rental fees,
reasonable equipment use charges and cost of all materials utilized in such
connection.
§ 218-3. Deposit. [Amended 6-15-2004 by Ord. No. 14-2004]
Each request for a connection to either the water system or the sewer
system shall be accompanied by a deposit. A request for connection to both
the water system and sewer system shall be accompanied by a deposit
for each connection. Each such deposit shall be held by the Borough of
Kutztown in a non-interest-bearing account and shall be utilized by the
Borough of Kutztown for payment of actual costs incurred in the making of
such connection. Upon completion of the connection and the payment of all
costs related thereto, the Borough of Kutztown shall return any remaining
and unspent portion of the deposit to the person who made the application
for the connection and paid the deposit. In the event that the actual costs of
the connection exceed the deposit, the additional costs shall be billed to the
owner of the real property serviced by the connection. No water service or
sewer service shall be provided to the real property to be serviced by such
connection or conections until such time as any such additional costs have
been paid in full to the Borough of Kutztown. The amount of the deposit
shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
191. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 306.
§ 218-1 WATER AND SEWERS § 218-4
218:729
§ 218-4. Cost for facilities fee. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No.
12-1995]
In addition to the connection fees hereinabove provided for in § 218-3 of this
article, a cost for facilities fee, as such term is defined by the aforesaid Act
No. 203 of 1990192 and authorized by the aforesaid Act No. 209, is hereby
imposed for the furnishing of a water meter and the installation of a water
meter. Such fee shall be in an amount equal to the greater of the cost of
furnishing such water meter and the installation thereof or the sum set from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.193
192. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 306.
193. Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
§ 218-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 218-4
218:730
ARTICLE II
General Provisions
[Adopted 2-9-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993; amended in its entirety
6-21-2005 by Ord. No. 20-2005]
§ 218-5. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable to this article:
BASE YEAR — The calendar year 2005.
BASE YEAR USE — Shall equal the number of EDU's utilized by customer
in the calendar year 2005.
COMMERCIAL CUSTOMER — The owner of an improved property where a
commercial activity only is conducted.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
IMPROVED PROPERTY —
INDUSTRIAL CUSTOMER — The owner of an improved property where an
industrial activity is conducted.
OWNER — Such person who owns an improved property.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, company, association, society,
corporation, trust or governmental body or any agency, department or
political subdivision thereof or any other group or entity.
SEWER EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT OR SEWER EDU — The unit of
measure by which the sewer tapping fee shall be imposed upon each
improved property connected to the sewer system in constituting the annual
sewer usage by such improved property in any amount up to 224 gallons
per day and increments of up to 224 gallons per day thereafter.
SEWER SYSTEM — The existing sewage collection, conveyance and
treatment system, sewage treatment plant, pumping station, manholes,
lines and facilities of the borough, together with all appurtenant facilities
the borough currently owns and operates and all future expansions thereof,
including all property, real, personal and mixed, rights, powers, licenses,
easements, rights-of-way, privileges, franchises and other property or
interest in property of whatsoever nature used or useful in connection
with such sewer facilities and all alterations, extensions, additions and
improvements thereof or thereto which may be made or acquired from time
to time by the borough. As used in this article, "sewage" shall mean sanitary
sewage and/or wastewater.
Any property upon which is erected any type of structure and/or
improvements intended for continuous or periodic use, occupancy or
habitation by human beings or animals; and/or
A.
Any property to which water shall be supplied from the water system
and/or from which property sewage shall be transmitted to the sewer
system.
B.
§ 218-5 WATER AND SEWERS § 218-5
218:731
WATER EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT OR WATER EDU — The unit of
measure by which the water tapping fee shall be imposed upon each
improved property connected to the water system and constituting an
annual water usage of such improved property in any amount up to 162
gallons per day and increments of up to 162 gallons per day thereafter.
WATER SYSTEM — The existing water system, wells, pumps, reservoirs,
lines and facilities of the borough, together with all appurtenant facilities
the borough currently owns and operates and all future expansions thereof,
including all property, real, personal and mixed, rights, powers, licenses,
easements, rights-of-way, privileges, franchises and other property or
interest in property of whatsoever nature used or useful in connection
with such water facilities and all alterations, extensions, additions and
improvements thereof or thereto which may be made or acquired from time
to time by the borough.
§ 218-6. Permit required.
No person shall connect any improved property to or with any part of
the water system and/or sewer system without first making a written
application for and securing a permit from the borough. Application for
connection to the borough's water system and/or sewer system shall be
made by the owner of any such improved property in a form that indicates
the amount of water usage and/or sewage discharge requested and the type
and use of the improved property to be connected to the water system and/
or sewer system. The form of application shall be provided by the borough.
§ 218-7. Sewer tapping fee imposed.
A tapping or tap-in fee (herein after referred to as the "sewer tapping fee"),
as said term is described in Act Number 203 of 1990 of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania (Application Works Act 203), "(which Act was enacted on
December 19, 1990, as amended by Act 57 of 2003 of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania) Act 57, "(which Act was enacted on December 30th, 2003,
and as authorized by Section 507-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as enacted by Act Number 209 of 1990 of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania on December 19th, 1990, is hereby
imposed, in the amount set forth in § 218-8 of this article, against the owner
of any improved property as to which the service point of connection for
sewer service is located within the corporate boundary limits of the borough
and which improved property is required to be connected to the sewer
system pursuant to the term and provisions of the ordinances, codes and
regulations of the borough then in effect requiring such connection.
§ 218-8. Sewer tapping fee amount.
The total dollar amount of the sewer tapping fee payable by the owner of
an improved property regarding such improved property, as described in
§ 218-7 of this article, shall be the product of the sum of $3,676 and the
number of equivalent dwelling units and fractions thereof made applicable
to such improved property by § 218-11 of this article. (The minimum number
§ 218-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 218-8
218:732
of sewer equivalent dwelling units applicable to any improved property shall
be one).
§ 218-9. Water tapping fee imposed.
A tapping or tap-in fee (hereinafter referred to as the "water tapping fee")
(the sewer tapping fee and the water tapping fee, herein after collectively
the "tapping fees"), as said term is described in Act 203, as amended by Act
57 and as authorized by Section 507-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as enacted by Act 209 of 1990 of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania on December 19th, 1990, is hereby imposed, in the amount set
forth in § 218-10 of this article, against the owner of improved property as
to which the service point of connection for water service is located within
the corporate boundary limits of the borough at which improved property
is required to be connected to the water system pursuant to the terms and
provisions of the ordinances, codes and regulations of the Borough then in
effect requiring such connection.
§ 218-10. Water tapping fee amount.
The total dollar amount of the water tapping fee payable by the owner
of an improved property regarding such improved property, as described
in § 218-9 of this article, shall be the product of the sum of $1,143 and
the number of equivalent dwelling units and the fractions thereof made
applicable to such improved property by § 218-11 of this article. (The
minimum number of water equivalent dwelling units applicable to any
improved property shall be one).
§ 218-11. Manner of determining equivalent dwelling units;
borough's refusal to accept tapping fee.
A. The number of equivalent dwelling units (or fraction thereof) applicable
to any property, for purpose of the sewer tapping fee and/or water
tapping fee, shall be equal to one plus such additional equivalent
dwelling units (or fraction thereof) which shall be determined in the
discretion of the borough by any one of the following methods: Method
1: in accordance with the EDU Schedule attached hereto, marked as
Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference thereto;194 Method 2: at
the discretion of the borough, based upon the estimated annual water
usage and/or sewage discharge (calculated as number of gallons per
day) of an improved property; or Method 3: in accordance with actual
metered flow as hereinafter provided. For each improved property
consisting of a single-family residential attached or detached dwelling
unit, notwithstanding the actual or estimated amount of water
consumed or sewage discharged by such improved property, the
equivalent dwelling units shall be one.
194. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 218-8 WATER AND SEWERS § 218-11
218:733
B. In the event that the owner of any improved property, other than the
owner of an apartment complex or a multifamily residential structure, is
required by the borough to pay a sewer tapping fee or water tapping fee
so determined, then such owner shall have the right to challenge the
amount of the tapping fees and thereafter have the tapping fees
calculated based upon the actual metered volume of water used at the
owner's improved property at full design occupancy and utilization, as
determined by the water meter connected to such improved property,
and thereafter meter the water usage for the improved property for a
period of one year. All costs of installing such a water meter shall be
paid for by owner, and the type of water meter to be installed and the
installation thereof shall be approved and performed by the borough.
After such water usage has been metered at full design occupancy and
utilization for a period of one calendar year, should the number of
equivalent dwelling units actually consumed at such improved property
be greater than the number of equivalent dwelling units previously
determined by the borough, the owner shall pay the borough additional
tapping fees based upon the actual metered water usage. In the
alternative, should the amount of equivalent dwelling units, as
determined by the actual metered water usage, be less than originally
determined by the borough, then in such event the owner shall be
entitled to a refund of the portion of the tapping fees the owner initially
paid which was in excess of the tapping fees subsequently calculated
using the actual metered water usage. Any challenge to the amount of
tapping fees initially determined to be due by the borough at time of the
owner's application must be made by such owner in writing within five
days of the date the borough determines the amount of the initial
tapping fees; provided, however, that in no event shall any challenge be
allowed to minimum tapping fees based upon one equivalent dwelling
unit or to tapping fees determined for apartment complexes or
multifamily residential structure purposes. The borough reserves the
right to utilize devices and methods, in the alternative to the metering
of water being supplied to an improved property, which are, in the
opinion of the borough more suitable for the purpose of measuring the
quantity and/or type of water usage and/or sewer discharge. Such
alternative devices and methods shall be utilized at the expense of the
owner of the improved property.
C. In the event that the borough discovers or has reason to believe, within
one year following the date of payment by any owner of any tapping
fees for any improved property, that the application filed by any owner
of such improved property seeking connection to the water system and/
or sewer system was grossly inaccurate or contained
misrepresentations of material facts as to the full design occupancy and
utilization of the improved property which would have affected the
borough's determination of the tapping fees, then the borough shall be
permitted to utilize the Method 3 described in Subsections A and B
hereinabove to determine actual metered water usage and/or sewage
discharge and may thereupon redetermine the amount of tapping fees
applicable to the improved property. If the amount of the applicable
§ 218-11 KUTZTOWN CODE § 218-11
218:734
tapping fees is thereby increased, then the owner shall immediately pay
to the borough a sum equal to the amount of increase in such tapping
fees.
D. Until such time as the borough has accepted tapping fees pursuant to
an owner's application, no availability of sewer and/or water capacity
shall be deemed guaranteed with respect to any improved property.
Further, the borough reserves the right to refuse to accept any tapping
fees for the reason of lack of capacity and/or for the reason that the
application submitted by the owner indicates that the applicable
connections to the sewer system and/or water system will not be made
within one year from the date of application submission.
E. In the event that a commercial or industrial customer increases its
discharge into the sewer system or its consumption of water in the
measured year, as measured in terms of water or sewer EDU's, above
its base year use or above the highest level of use subsequent to the
base year, and higher than the base year use, the owner of the improved
property shall be responsible to pay to the borough a tapping fee in
conjunction with the additional EDU's allocable to such property as a
result of the increased discharge into the sewer system or the increase
consumption of water.
F. In the event that any owner of any improved property changes the use
of said property in such a manner as to require the issuance of a new
zoning permit, the Code Office will review the proposed use, with
reference to the Exhibit A, EDU Schedule, to this Chapter 218, to
determine:
(1) Whether the proposed new use of said property constitutes a
change in the description of improved property set forth on such
Exhibit A applicable to said property and a change in the number of
EDU's allocable to said property as a result of the proposed new
use; and
(2) The additional number, if any, of EDU's allocable to such property
as a result of the proposed new use, in excess of the number of
EDU's allocable to said property as a result of prior use.
G. In the event that the Code Office determines that the conversion of use
will cause an increase in the number of EDU's allocable to the property
in question under the proposed new use, then no zoning, housing,
building, occupancy or other permits for the new proposed use shall be
issued by the borough unless and until the owner of said property shall
have paid to the borough the respective additional sewer tapping fee
amount and additional water tapping fee amount, calculated pursuant
to §§ 218-8 and 218-10 of this chapter, respectively, on account of the
additional EDU's determined to be applicable to the new proposed use
in accordance with the preceding Subsection E.
H. Notwithstanding changes from time to time in the use of a particular
property, the present and subsequent owners thereof shall be entitled
§ 218-11 WATER AND SEWERS § 218-11
218:735
§ 218-12. When fees due.
§ 218-13. Calculation of sewer maximum tapping fees.
The calculation and itemization of the maximum tapping fee pursuant to
Section 4B(t) of Act 203, as amended by Act 57, determined in accordance
with the replacement cost approach, is set forth in Exhibit B, attached
hereto and incorporated herein by reference thereto.195
§ 218-14. Calculation of maximum water tapping fees.
The calculation and itemization of the maximum water tapping fees
pursuant to Section 4B(t) of Act 203, as amended by Act 57, determined
in accordance with the replacement cost approach is set forth in Exhibit C,
attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference thereto.196
§ 218-15. Payment of tapping fees.
All tapping fees imposed by the borough pursuant to this article shall
be payable to the Treasurer of the borough or to such other officer or
representative of the borough as shall be authorized, from time to time, to
accept payment thereof.
§ 218-16. Enforcement.
Payment of tapping fees imposed by the borough pursuant to this article
shall be enforced by the borough in any manner appropriate under laws in
effect at the time of such enforcement.
to the benefit of the highest number of EDU's allocated to and paid for
such property at any time.
A. The tapping fees shall be due and payable at the time a determination of
the tapping fee is made by the borough following receipt of the owner's
application to make any connection to the sewer system and/or water
system as provided in this article or, if the borough so permits, the time
when the borough causes the connection of any such improved property
to the sewer system and/or water system, at the cost and expense of the
owner pursuant to the provisions of the ordinances of this borough then
in effect.
B. The tapping fees shall be due and payable within 30 days after the
owner has received notice from the borough that their consumption of
water or discharge into the sewer system has increased above the base
year use in terms of EDU's which were allocable to the property in
question.
195. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the Borough offices.
196. Editor's Note: Exhibit C is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 218-11 KUTZTOWN CODE § 218-17
218:736
§ 218-17. Amendments.
The borough may, from time to time, adopt modifications of, supplements to
or amendments of this article.
§ 218-18. Effect on existing agreements.
This article shall not affect any existing agreements which relate to the
subject matter of Act 203 and the tapping fees for connections to the water
system and/or sewer system. The provisions of Section 4B(z) of Act 203 shall
be applicable to any agreements for extension of the sewer system and/or
water of the borough entered into after the effective date of this article.
§ 218-17 WATER AND SEWERS § 218-18
218:737
Chapter 220
WELLHEAD PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Floodplain regulations — See Ch. 123.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 189.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
195.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 220-1. Purpose and intent; authority.
§ 220-2. Establishment and delineation of Wellhead Protection
Overlay District and wellhead protection zones.
The Wellhead Protection Overlay District shall be defined as that area
within the corporate boundaries of the borough as is set forth on the
map attached hereto, marked as "Exhibit A" and incorporated herein by
A. The borough and its residents depend exclusively on groundwater for a
safe drinking water supply. The borough has developed and owns the
drinking water wells utilized by the borough, which are located upon a
parcel of land adjacent to the corporate boundary of the borough.
Certain land use practices and activities outside and within the borough
can seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality. The purpose of
this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare through
the preservation of the groundwater resources of the borough public
water supplies and to ensure a future supply of safe and healthful
drinking water for the residents of the borough. The designation of the
Wellhead Protection Overlay District, as provided hereinbelow, and the
regulation of activities within such Wellhead Protection Overlay District
will reduce the potential for ground and surface water contamination of
the borough-owned water wells and thereby preserve irreplaceable
groundwater resources. The delineation of the Wellhead Protection
Overlay District and the development of the provisions of this chapter
are based upon a professional study of the hydrogeologic and other
features of the borough and contiguous areas conducted for the benefit
of the borough and certain nearby municipalities.
B. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Article I,
Section 27, of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and Sections 501, 503, 601, 604(1), and 603(b) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170
of 1988, as amended by Act 209 of 1990, and as further amended by Act
131 of 1992, which provisions authorize the borough to enact
ordinances regulating development and land uses to ensure the public
health and safety, provide a safe, reliable and adequate water supply
and preserve natural values and aquifers.
§ 218-18 KUTZTOWN CODE § 220-2
220:738
reference thereto.197 Within the Wellhead Protection Overlay District, the
following wellhead protection zones are hereby established:
§ 220-3. Regulated land uses.
Within the Wellhead Protection Overlay District, land uses shall be
regulated as follows:
§ 220-4. Reporting requirements. [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
2-1998]
As to each lot or tract of land located within the Wellhead Protection
Overlay District upon which there is conducted a regulated land use, the
record owner thereof shall submit, or cause to be submitted, to the Code
Official of the borough the following reports and information in the manner
prescribed:
A. Zone 2 shall be that area marked on Exhibit A198 as Zone 2, which Zone
2 represents an area determined, by methods applicable to that
hydrogeologic setting, as having a ten-year time-of-travel of
groundwater supply to public well sites.
B. Zone 3 shall be that area marked on Exhibit A199 as Zone 3, which Zone
3 represents the upland area that contributes surface and groundwater
to Zone 2.
A. Lots and tracts of land located within the Wellhead Protection Overlay
District, as delineated on Exhibit A,200 shall be governed by the
restrictions applicable to the wellhead protection zone in which such
lots and tracts of land are located.
B. Land uses within the Wellhead Protection Overlay District will be
regulated (hereinafter "regulated land uses") according to the Schedule
of Regulated Land Uses attached hereto, marked "Exhibit B" and
incorporated herein by reference.201 Certain particular regulated land
uses will be prohibited, or permitted only by special permit, within Zone
2 or Zone 3, as applicable, as is set forth in the Schedule of Regulated
Land Uses.202 [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2-1998]
A. Copies of all federal, state and county operational approvals,
certificates, permits and applications, on-going environmental reports
and monitoring results, relating to environmental, pollution control,
hazardous substance and drinking water laws and regulations
197. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the borough offices.
198. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the borough offices.
199. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the borough offices.
200. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the borough offices.
201. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is included at the end of this chapter.
202. Editor's Note: See Exhibit B at the end of this chapter.
§ 220-2 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 220-4
220:739
§ 220-5. Administration; nonconforming uses; special permits.
pertaining to such lot or tract of land, as and when required to be
submitted to federal, state and county governmental authorities.
B. In the event that any contaminants and/or substances regulated under
federal, state or state environmental, pollution control, hazardous
substance and drinking water laws and regulations are released on or
from any lot or tract of land within the Wellhead Protection Overlay
District, copies of any and all notices, reports and documents which
such owner filed, or caused to be filed, with any federal, state and/or
county governmental authorities which provide notice of or relate to
such release, as and when such notices, reports and documents are
required to be filed with such governmental authorities.
C. Copies of all notices, orders, rules, decisions, recommendations,
enforcement actions and similar documentation, as and when received
by or on behalf of such record owner or the occupant of any such lot or
tract of land from any federal, state or county governmental authority
in connection with the enforcement of environmental, pollution control,
hazardous substance and drinking water laws and regulations.
A. The Code Official of the borough is hereby designated as the borough
official responsible for the administration and enforcement of this
chapter. The Zoning Hearing Board of the borough shall hear appeals
from the written decisions, determinations and orders of the Code
Official regarding applications, enforcement notices, cease-and-desist
orders and other matters and shall also hear substantive and
procedural challenges to the validity of this chapter. The Borough
Council shall establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees, charges and
expenses for appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board and for the
administration of this chapter. [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
2-1998; 5-24-2005 by Ord. No. 13-2005]
B. Uses of lots or tracts of land in existence on the date of enactment of
this chapter which are regulated land uses shall be deemed to be
nonconforming uses of land under the terms of this chapter. Such
nonconforming uses of land may be continued by the present or any
subsequent owner so long as:
(1) Such use is and remains otherwise lawful and in compliance with
all federal, state and county environmental, pollution control,
hazardous substance and drinking water laws and regulations;
(2) Such nonconforming use has not been and is not discontinued for a
period of twelve (12) consecutive months;
(3) Such nonconforming use is not, after the date of enactment of this
chapter, materially altered, changed or expanded;
§ 220-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 220-5
220:740
(4) The record owner of the lot or tract of land on which such
nonconforming use is located is in compliance with § 220-4 of this
chapter, regarding reporting requirements; and
(5) Such nonconforming use is not an actual source of groundwater
contamination.
C. A regulated land use shall be deemed to be new or materially altered,
changed or expanded if:
(1) The land use which constitutes the regulated land use was not
previously present and conducted upon the lot or tract of land in
question;
(2) The production and/or storage capacity of the regulated land use is
increased;
(3) The types of any substances which give rise to the regulated land
use are changed;
(4) The number of types of any substances which give rise to the
regulated land use is increased; and/or
(5) The quantity of any substances which give rise to the regulated
land use is materially increased.
D. Following the date of enactment of this chapter, regulated land uses
which are new or which constitute material changes, alterations or
expansions of nonconforming regulated land uses will be prohibited in
accordance with the terms of Exhibit B annexed hereto,203 thereby
prohibiting such regulated land uses or permitting such regulated land
uses only upon the granting of a special permit. Any regulated land use
which is permitted to be conducted within the Wellhead Protection
Overlay District as a result of the granting of a special permit in
accordance with the terms of this chapter shall not be deemed to be a
nonconforming use of land under the terms of this chapter, but shall
without further action be considered a land use which is in conformity
with the terms of this chapter. [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
2-1998]
E. As to any new regulated land use or any proposed material change,
alteration or expansion of a regulated land use which is a
nonconforming regulated land use and as to which such regulated land
use is permitted to be conducted within the applicable wellhead
protection zone upon the granting of a special permit, such special
permit shall only be granted upon the following conditions: [Amended
2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2-1998]
203. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 220-5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 220-5
220:741
(1) Such regulated land use is one which is specifically authorized as a
special permit use in the wellhead protection zone in question, as
set forth on Exhibit B.204
(2) Such regulated land use will not, during construction or thereafter,
cause the average groundwater quality upon or beneath the lot or
tract of land in question or upon or beneath adjacent lots or tracts
of land to violate safe drinking water standards promulgated by
federal or state governmental authorities.
(3) Satisfactory evidence has been provided to the borough's Code
Official, or Zoning Hearing Board, as applicable, that the proposed
regulated land use is in compliance with all federal, state and
county laws and regulations applicable to such regulated land use
and the record owner or occupant has received all necessary
approvals of federal, state and county governmental authorities for
the conduct of such regulated land use.
F. Application for a special permit shall be made to the Code Official of the
borough in writing, on such form as may be prescribed by the Code
Official and approved by resolution of the Council, and such application
shall include, at a minimum, a detailed description of each of the
activities to be conducted upon the lot or tract of land in question which
constitute a regulated land use, including a listing of all substances
which are to be stored, handled, used or produced in connection with
each regulated land use being proposed and which substances are
subject to regulation by federal, state and/or county governmental
authorities. [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2-1998]
G. The Code Official of the borough shall issue a written decision
approving or disapproving the application for a special permit, or
conditioning the granting of the special permit upon adherence to any
or all of the following requirements by the applicant for the special
permit, where the Code Official has found that such adherence is
reasonably necessary to fulfill the groundwater protection purposes of
this chapter: [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2-1998]
(1) The installation of adequate containment facilities and systems so
as to prevent the contamination of groundwater by substances
regulated by federal, state and/or county governmental authorities.
(2) The preparation, filing (with the Borough Code Office) and periodic
revision of an emergency plan addressing the means by which any
potential contamination of groundwater will be controlled,
collected and remediated, including emergency contacts and
identification of potential contaminants.
(3) Regular inspection and/or monitoring of the regulated land use by
the owner, occupant and/or third parties.
204. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 220-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 220-5
220:742
§ 220-6. Subdivision and land development review. [Amended
2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2-1998]
All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development plans to be
located within the Wellhead Protection Overlay District shall be reviewed
by the Code Official and the Borough Planning Commission for compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the Code
Official and the Borough Planning Commission to recommend approval,
disapproval or approval with conditions or modifications, of the proposed
subdivision or development plan, so as to assure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 220-7. General exceptions. [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
2-1998]
The following general exceptions specify those activities that are permitted
by right and do not require a special permit:
(4) Compliance by the applicant with the provisions of the Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance then in effect
pertaining to sanitary sewage disposal, water supply, stormwater
management, utilities and easements and subsurface carbonate
areas.205
H. Applications to the Borough Code Official for a special permit under this
chapter, as well as written decisions of the Code Official and appeals
from the written decisions of the Code Official to the Borough Zoning
Hearing Board and appeals to the courts of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, shall be subject to the same procedure and shall be
processed in the same manner as is applicable to applications for
special permits under the terms of the Zoning Ordinance of the borough
in effect at the time the application is filed.206 [Amended 2-10-1998
by Ord. No. 2-1998]
A. Transit. The transportation of any hazardous or governmentally
regulated substance through the Wellhead Protection Overlay District
shall be exempt from provisions of this chapter, provided that the
transporting vehicle is in transit through the Wellhead Protection
Overlay District, and further provided that such transportation is
conducted in compliance with all applicable federal and state laws and
regulations.
B. Residential. To the extent otherwise permitted or regulated by federal,
state and/or county statutes and regulations, the owners and/or
occupiers of lots and tracts of land which are primarily utilized for the
purpose of single-family or multifamily residential dwellings are
permitted to utilize and store fuels, hazardous chemicals, pesticides,
fertilizers, inflammable liquids and gases, and toxic and regulated
205. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Subdivision and Land Development.
206. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 220-5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 220-7
220:743
§ 220-8. Preventive and enforcement remedies. [Amended
2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2-1998]
For the purpose of preventing violations of this chapter and enforcing the
provisions of this chapter, the borough shall have available to it the same
preventive and enforcement remedies, including civil actions and summary
criminal actions, as are set forth in the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance of the borough in effect from time to time.207 In addition, the
Code Official of the borough is authorized to issue cease-and-desist orders
whenever such Code Official becomes aware of violations of this chapter.
The Code Official is authorized to issue enforcement notices with respect
to violations of this chapter, such enforcement notices to be issued in
accordance with the enforcement notice provisions of Chapter 225, Zoning.
§ 220-9. Interpretation of provisions.
substances in such quantities and in such manner as is associated with
normal consumer, household use, and such limited utilization shall not
be deemed a regulated land use for the purposes of this chapter.
A. Conflicts. Whenever there is a difference between any of the minimum
standards specified in this chapter and any standard included in any
other ordinance, law or regulation of the borough, the more stringent
requirement shall apply. The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
to be supplementary and in addition to the provisions of Chapter 225,
Zoning, and Chapter 195, Subdivision and Land Development.
B. Severability. The provisions of this chapter are severable, and should
any article, section, subsection, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision
of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, such judgment shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a
whole or any part or provision thereof other than the part so declared to
be invalid.
C. Savings clause. This chapter shall not affect any act done or any offense
committed prior to its effective date nor affect any action to enforce any
prior ordinance or to punish any offense against a prior ordinance.
EXHIBIT B
Schedule of Regulated Land Uses
Use Zone 2 Zone 3
Bulk storage of regulated substances X SP
Dry-cleaning establishments; coin or
commercial laundries
X SP
Garage, service station X SP
Heavy-manufacturing uses X SP
207. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 220-7 KUTZTOWN CODE § 220-9
220:744
EXHIBIT B
Schedule of Regulated Land Uses
Use Zone 2 Zone 3
Junkyards X X
Land application of wastewater and sludges X X
Livestock animals in excess of 25 animal
equivalent units per acre in yarding areas
X X
Metal plating establishments X SP
Open burning sites and dumps X X
Quarries and mining operations X X
Road salt stockpiles SP SP
Sales and/or storage of fuels SP SP
Sanitary landfill X X
Sewage treatment facilities with on-site
disposal of primary or secondary treated
effluent in excess of 5,000 gallons per day
X X
Storage and mixing of regulated substances X SP
Storage of inflammable liquids and gases SP SP
Use which involves as a principal activity the
manufacture, storage, use, transpor- tation or
disposal of regulated substances
X X
Use which involves use or storage of regulated
substances in quantities greater than those
associated with normal household use
SP SP
Used motor vehicle sales area SP SP
Notes: X = Not Allowed
SP = Special Permit
As used in this Exhibit B, the term "regulated substances" shall mean
any substances regulated under federal, state or county
environmental, pollution control, hazardous substance and drinking
water laws and regulations.
§ 220-9 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 220-9
220:745
Chapter 225
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 36.
Building construction — See Ch. 77.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 119.
Floodplain regulations — See Ch. 123.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
195.
§ 220-9 KUTZTOWN CODE § 220-9
220:746
ARTICLE I
Title, Application and Purpose
§ 225-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "Borough of
Kutztown Zoning Ordinance of 1990."
§ 225-2. Application of chapter.
Except as hereinafter provided, no building, structure, lot, land or parts
thereof shall be used or occupied, erected, constructed, assembled, moved,
enlarged or structurally altered unless in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 225-3. Purposes; statement of community development objectives.
This Zoning Chapter, including the provisions, requirements, and districts
as hereinafter set forth, is based upon and intended to give effect to the
policies and objectives set forth in the Comprehensive Plan of the Borough
of Kutztown and is intended to promote public health, safety, morals and
the general welfare by achieving, among others, the following purposes and
objectives for the development of the Borough of Kutztown:
§ 225-4. Construal of provisions.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals and/or general welfare of the residents and
inhabitants of the borough.
A. Lessen congestion on the roads and highways.
B. Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers.
C. Provide adequate areas for vehicle parking and loading space.
D. Provide adequate light and air.
E. Promote health and general welfare.
F. Avoid undue congestion of population.
G. Encourage the most appropriate use of land.
H. Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, parks and other public improvements.
I. Conserve the value of land and buildings.
J. Encourage the harmonious and orderly development of land.
§ 225-1 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-4
220:747

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 225-5. Word usage; definitions.
A. Tense, gender and number. Words used in the present tense include the
future; words in the masculine gender include the feminine and the
neuter; and the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the
singular.
B. General terms. The word "shall" or "must" is always mandatory; the
word "may" is permissive. The words "used for" include "designed for,"
"arranged for," "intended for," "maintained for" or "occupied for." The
words "building" and "structure" shall be construed as if followed by the
phrase "or part thereof." The word "person" includes "individual,"
"profit or nonprofit corporation," "organization," "partnership,"
"company," "unincorporated association," "trust," "firm" or other
entities. [Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
C. Terms, phrases and words not defined. When terms, phrases or words
are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings or
such as the context may imply.
D. Specific terms. For the purposes of this chapter, terms or words used
herein, unless otherwise expressly stated, shall have the following
meanings:
ACADEMIC CLINICAL RESEARCH CENTER — An accredited medical
school within this commonwealth that operates or partners with an
acute care hospital licensed within this commonwealth pursuant to the
Act.208[Added 10-16-2018 by Ord. No. 5-2018]
ACCESSORY BUILDING or ACCESSORY STRUCTURE —
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT — A portion of a dwelling utilized as
a separate living arrangement located within a one-family dwelling for
a relative who requires assistance with activities of daily living (ADL),
provided that the area utilized for the separate living arrangement
is subordinate in size to the principal dwelling unit, and that the
appearance of the structure as a one-family dwelling is
maintained.[Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
A subordinate building or structure, the use of which is customarily
incidental to and located on the same lot occupied by the principal
building. No accessory building or structure, or part thereof, shall
be used for living quarters.
(1)
A use customarily incidental and subordinate to and located on the
same lot occupied by the principal use to which it relates.
(2)
208. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
§ 225-5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-5
220:749
THE ACT — The Pennsylvania "Medical Marijuana Act" (PA Act 16,
2016).209[Added 10-16-2018 by Ord. No. 5-2018]
ADVERTISING SIGN — See "sign, advertising."
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION — An enterprise that is actively engaged
in the commercial production and preparation for market of crops,
livestock and livestock products and in the production, harvesting, and
preparation for market or use of agricultural, agronomic, horticultural,
silvicultural and aquacultural crops and commodities; the term includes
an enterprise that implements changes in production practices and
procedures of types of crops, livestock, livestock products or
commodities produced consistent with practices and procedures that
are normally engaged by farmers or are consistent with technological
development within the agricultural industry.[Amended 7-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 14-2006]
AGRICULTURE — The cultivation of the soil and the raising and
harvesting of the products of the soil, including but not limited to
nursery, horticulture, forestry and animal husbandry.
ALTERATION — Any change or rearrangement in the structural parts
or in the existing facilities of a building or structure or any enlargement
thereof, whether by extension on any side or by an increase in height, or
the moving of such building or structure from one location or position
to another.
APARTMENT HOUSE — See "dwelling, multifamily."
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application
for any of the following: permit, development, variance, special
exception or any other relief provided for by this chapter; the term
includes the heirs, successors and/or assignees of the landowner or
developer.[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
ATTACHED BUILDING — See "building, attached."
ATTIC — That part of a building which is immediately below and wholly
or partly within the roof framing.
AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant to the
Act of May 2, 1945, as amended and supplemented, and known as the
"Municipality Authorities Act of 1945."210
BASEMENT — A story partly below the finished grade having less
than 1/2 of its height (measured from finished floor to finished ceiling)
below the average level of the finished grade which abuts the exterior
walls of the building. A "basement" shall be considered as one story in
determining the permissible number of stories.
BASE STATION — Any structure or equipment at a fixed location that
enables FCC-licensed or authorized communications between user
209. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
210. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa. C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 225-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-5
220:750
equipment and a communications network. Includes structures other
than towers that support or house an antenna, transceiver, or other
associated equipment that constitutes part of a "base station" at the
time the relevant application is filed with the state or municipal
authorities, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary
purpose of providing such support, but does not include structures
that do not at the time support or house base station components. The
term includes buildings, light poles, utility poles, water towers, etc., as
well as DAS systems and small cells.[Added 10-17-2017 by Ord. No.
3-2017]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST FACILITY — A detached building containing
overnight sleeping accommodations and bathroom facilities for not
more than 15 transient guests at any one time in not more than five
rooms and wherein breakfast only is provided for said guests; and
wherein guests are not permitted to stay more than 21 consecutive
days. For purposes of Chapter 225, in the event that the bed-andbreakfast
facility is landowner-occupied, it shall also be considered a
boardinghouse and, in such event, the bed-and-breakfast facility shall
only be a permitted use in those zoning districts in which a
boardinghouse is a permitted use; and in the event that the bed-andbreakfast
facility is not landowner-occupied, then said facility shall
also be considered a rooming house and, in such event, the bed-andbreakfast
facility shall only be a permitted use in those zoning districts
in which a rooming house is a permitted use. Moreover, all
supplementary regulations in Chapter 225 pertaining to
boardinghouses shall also apply to a bed-and-breakfast facility that is
landowner-occupied, and all supplementary regulations of Chapter 225
pertaining to a rooming house shall also apply to a bed-and-breakfast
facility that is not landowner-occupied.[Added 3-26-1996 by Ord. No.
3-1996]
BILLBOARD — See "sign."
BLOCK — A tract of land or a lot or group of lots bounded on all sides
by streets, public parks, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses or bodies
of water, boundary lines of the Borough or by any combination thereof.
BLOCK OR LOT FRONTAGE — That portion of a block or lot which
abuts on a single street.
BOARDINGHOUSE — An owner-occupied dwelling in which the owner
lets or provides rooms for compensation for boarders and where the
total number of persons residing in the dwelling exceeds three
persons.[Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996; 7-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 14-2006]
BOARD or ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of
the Borough of Kutztown.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Kutztown, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
§ 225-5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-5
220:751
BOROUGH ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for
the Borough.
BUILDING — Any combination of materials forming any structure
which is erected on the ground and permanently affixed thereto and
designed, intended or arranged for the housing, sheltering, enclosure
or structural support of persons, animals or property of any kind. The
building area shall be the total area taken on a horizontal plane at
the main grade level of all primary and accessory buildings on a lot,
excluding unroofed porches, paved terraces, steps, eaves and gutters,
but including all enclosed extensions and all roofed porches or terraces.
BUILDING, ATTACHED — A building which has two side walls or
portions thereof in common with adjacent buildings.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building surrounded by open space on all
four sides within the same lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The average of the vertical distances from the
average grade at the front of the building and the average grade at the
rear of the building to the highest point of the roof of a flat roof and
to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gabled, hipped and
pitched roofs.
BUILDING LINE or BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line within a
property establishing the minimum required distance between any
building or structure or portions thereof to be erected or altered and an
adjacent right-of-way. Such line shall be measured at right angles from
the front street right-of-way line which abuts the lot upon which said
building or structure is located or to be located and shall be parallel to
said right-of-way line.
BUILDING, SEMIDETACHED — A building which has one adjacent wall
or portion thereof in common with an adjacent building situated on an
adjacent lot. In no event shall any end unit of a group of townhouses be
deemed to be a semidetached building.
BULK — A term used to describe the size, volume, area or shape of
buildings or other structures and their physical relationship to each
other, open space, tracts of land, lot lines or other buildings or
structures.
BYOB CLUB — Any facility operated for profit or pecuniary gain which
is not licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board wherein
patrons may consume alcoholic liquors, alcohol or malt or brewed
beverages which said patrons have carried or brought into the
premises. The term shall not include a licensee under the Liquor Code.
The permissibility of a use of land involving to any extent a BYOB club
shall be determined according to the principal intended use.[Added
10-16-2012 by Ord. No. 4-2012]
§ 225-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-5
220:752
CAREGIVER — The individual designated by a patient to deliver
medical marijuana pursuant to the provisions of the Act.211[Added
10-16-2018 by Ord. No. 5-2018]
CARPORT — A roofed-over structure open on two or more sides and
used in conjunction with a dwelling for the storage of private motor
vehicles.
CELLAR — An area partly below the finished grade having more than
1/2 of its height (measured from finished floor to finished ceiling) below
the average level of the finished grade which abuts the exterior walls of
the building. A cellar shall not be considered a story in determining the
permissible number of stories.
CENTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVICE — The Governor’s
Center for Local Government Services located within the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development.[Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY — A statement, based on an
inspection, signed by the Zoning Officer, setting forth that a building,
structure, sign and/or lot complies with this Zoning Chapter and/or
that a building, structure, sign and/or lot may be lawfully employed for
specific uses, or both, as set forth therein.212
CERTIFIED MEDICAL USE — The acquisition, possession, use or
transportation of medical marijuana by a patient, or the acquisition,
possession, delivery, transportation or administration of medical
marijuana by a caregiver, for use as part of the treatment of the
patient's serious medical condition, as authorized by certification by
the commonwealth pursuant to the Act.213[Added 10-16-2018 by Ord.
No. 5-2018]
CLINICAL REGISTRANT — An entity that:[Added 10-16-2018 by Ord.
No. 5-2018]
COLLOCATION — The mounting of one or more wireless
communication facilities, including antennas, on an existing tower-
Holds a permit both as a grower/processor and a dispensary
pursuant to the Act; and
(1)
Has a contractual relationship with an academic clinical research
center under which the academic clinical research center or its
affiliate provides advice to the entity, regarding among other areas,
patient health and safety, medical applications and dispensing and
management of controlled substances.
(2)
211. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
212. Editor's Note: The former definitions of "commercial communications antenna,"
"commercial communications facility" and "commercial communications tower," added
4-14-1998 by Ord. No. 7-1998, which immediately followed this definition, were repealed
10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017.
213. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
§ 225-5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-5
220:753
based WCF, or on any structure that already supports at least one nontower
WCF.[Added 10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017]
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel(s) of land, an area of water or a
combination of both within a development site designed and intended
for use or enjoyment of residents of a development. "Common open
space" does not include streets, off-street parking areas, parking lots
and areas set aside for public facilities.[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 14-2006]
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.[Added
10-16-2018 by Ord. No. 5-2018]
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which, in accordance with
the provisions of the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act of 1980,
as amended,214 are designated for separate ownership and the
remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the
owners of those portions. Real estate is not a "condominium" unless
the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit
owners.
CONSISTENCY — An agreement or correspondence between matters
being compared which denotes a reasonable, rational, similar
connection or relationship.[Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
CONVALESCENT HOME — An establishment providing nursing,
dietary and other similar personal services to convalescents, invalids
or aged persons, but excluding cases of surgery and other treatments
customarily provided in hospitals, sanitariums and similar institutions.
COUNTY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A land use and growth
management plan prepared by the Berks County Planning Commission
and adopted by the County of Berks Commissioners which establishes
broad goals and criteria for municipalities to use in preparation of their
comprehensive plans and land use regulations.[Added 7-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 14-2006]
DAY-CARE FACILITY[Added 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996;
amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006] —
CHILD DAY CARE — A building or portion thereof used to provide
child care and/or instruction for less than 24 hours a day for seven
or more children who are not related to the caregiver by blood,
marriage, adoption or other degree of legal custody and where
tuition, fees or other form of compensation is charged and which
is subject to licensing and/or approval by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(1)
ADULT DAY CARE — A building or portion thereof used to provide
services to not more than five persons (at any given time) who are
18 years of age or older where fees or other form of compensation
is charged. The adult day-care facility should not provide services
(2)
214. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 225-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-5
220:754
DECISION — Final adjudication of the Zoning Hearing Board or other
body granted jurisdiction under this chapter or any other land use
ordinance of the Borough, either by reason of the grant of exclusive
jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from determinations. All decisions
shall be appealable to the Court of Common Pleas of Berks County.
DETACHED BUILDING — See "building, detached."
DETERMINATION — Final action by an officer, body or agency charged
with the administration of this chapter or any other land use ordinance
of the Borough or applications thereunder, except the following: the
governing body, the Zoning Hearing Board or the Planning Commission,
only if and to the extent that the Planning Commission is charged
with final decision on preliminary or final plans under Chapter 195,
Subdivision and Land Development. Determinations shall be appealable
only to the Zoning Hearing Board or such other board designated as
having jurisdiction for such appeal.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including
a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk
of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of
development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space
and public facilities.
DISPENSARY — A person, including a natural person, corporation,
partnership, association, trust or other entity, or any combination
thereof, which holds a current and valid permit issued by the
Department of Health ("DOH") of the commonwealth to dispense
medical marijuana pursuant to the provisions of the Act.215[Added
10-16-2018 by Ord. No. 5-2018]
DISPENSARY FACILITY — Any building or structure used to dispense
medical marijuana and medical devices and instruments needed to
administer medical marijuana by a licensed dispensary.[Added
10-16-2018 by Ord. No. 5-2018]
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS) — A network of spatially
separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.[Added
10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017]
for chronic, convalescent, medical, or nursing issues beyond care
normally provided in a home setting. This service should provide
for the normal care and safety of those who require supervision for
physical and/or mental disabilities for a period of less than 24 hours
a day.
215. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
§ 225-5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-5
220:755
DISTRICT — A portion of the Borough of Kutztown within which certain
uniform regulations and requirements or combinations thereof apply
under the provisions of this chapter.
DIVIDER — [Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996; 7-20-2006
by Ord. No. 14-2006]
THE DOH — The Pennsylvania Department of Health.[Added
10-16-2018 by Ord. No. 5-2018]
DORMITORY — A detached building, other than a fraternity, sorority,
hotel or motel, occupied by and maintained exclusively for students
affiliated with an accredited academic or professional college or
university or other recognized institution of higher learning.
DWELLING — A building arranged, intended, designed or used as the
living quarters for one or more families living independently of each
other within the building. The term "dwelling" shall not be deemed
to include hotel, motel, rooming house or tourist home.[Amended
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
With respect to an industrial district, a divider shall mean a fivefoot
wide unpaved area along the perimeter of the lot which has
centered in such area either a fence not less than four feet nor
more than six feet in height or a hedge not less than six feet in
height; or
(1)
With respect to a commercial or residential district, a divider shall
mean a three-foot wide unpaved area along the perimeter of the lot
which has centered in such area either a fence not less than four
feet nor more than six feet in height or a hedge not less than four
feet in height.
(2)
SEMIDETACHED — A building situated on two adjacent lots which
has one adjacent wall or portion thereof in common, arranged,
designed and intended for and occupied by two families living
independently of each other and having separate cooking and
sanitary facilities.
(1)
ONE-FAMILY — A building arranged, designed or intended for and
occupied exclusively by one family and having separate cooking
and sanitary facilities for said family.
(2)
TWO-FAMILY and/or DUPLEX — A building situated on one lot
arranged, designed and intended for and occupied by two families
living independently of each other and each having separate
cooking and sanitary facilities therein.
(3)
MULTIFAMILY — A building situated on one lot, arranged,
designed and intended for occupancy by three or more families
living independently of each other and each having separate
cooking and sanitary facilities therein, no more than three stories
in height.
(4)
§ 225-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-5
220:756
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof providing one or
more rooms arranged for the use of one family and having separate
cooking and sanitary facilities for the use of only that family.
EMERGENCY — A condition that (1) constitutes a clear and immediate
danger to the health, welfare or safety of the public, or (2) has caused
or is likely to cause facilities in the right-of-way to be unusable and
result in loss of the service provided.[Added 10-17-2017 by Ord. No.
3-2017]
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or municipalities or other governmental
agencies of underground or overhead gas, electric, sewer or water
transmission or distribution systems or collection, communication,
supply or disposal systems. Commercial communications antennas,
commercial communications towers and commercial communications
facilities are not essential services.[Amended 4-14-1998 by Ord. No.
7-1998]
FAIRGROUNDS — A lot used for periodical gatherings for the exhibition
of agricultural, commercial and industrial goods, which may include the
sale of goods associated with said exhibition. The forenoted activities
may include shows and entertainment.
FAMILY —
LOW-RISE APARTMENT HOUSE — A building not exceeding
three stories in height, containing three or more separate
dwelling units. The term "low-rise apartment house" shall not
be construed to include row houses or townhouses.
(a)
LOW-RISE APARTMENT HOUSE FOR THE ELDERLY — A
building in which at least one resident in each dwelling unit
therein shall be at least 60 years of age.
(b)
HIGH-RISE APARTMENT HOUSE — A detached building four
stories or more in height, containing one or more common
entranceways for all dwelling units contained therein. Said
building shall have a common hallway for each floor. Each
high-rise apartment house must be served between floors by
one or more elevators.
(c)
One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or other
decree of legal custody living together as a single housekeeping
unit and using cooking facilities and certain rooms in common;
(1)
Not more than three persons unrelated, as set forth in Subsection
(1) above, living together as a single housekeeping unit and using
cooking facilities and certain rooms in common; provided, however,
that no related dependent of such unrelated persons shall be
counted in determining the number of unrelated persons living
together;216 or
(2)
§ 225-5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-5
220:757
FARM — An area of land primarily used for agriculture.
FCC RULES — Recent Federal Communication Commission Rules
effective April 8, 2015, which regulate both traditional
telecommunication towers as well as distributed antenna systems and
other small cells. Applicable rules reflected in the requirements as set
forth in § 225-33.2 of this Kutztown Borough Code relate to FCC Rules
47 U.S.C § 1455(a) [also known as § 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax
Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012] and 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7).[Added
10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017]
FENCE — A barrier constructed of wood, metal, chain link or similar
materials designed for the purpose of limiting or excluding access to
a lot or for the purpose of screening a lot or portion thereof from the
exterior of the lot.
FLOOR AREA or GROSS FLOOR AREA — The gross floor space of the
building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls
or from the center line of walls separating buildings.
More than three unrelated handicapped persons living
permanently together as a single housekeeping unit and using
cooking facilities and certain rooms in common; provided, however,
that such persons shall be under the supervision of a
nonhandicapped resident of the dwelling and provided, further,
that the dwelling is owned and operated by a Pennsylvania
nonprofit corporation.
(3)
In particular, the floor area of a building or buildings shall include:
(a) Basement space.
All spaces other than cellar space with structural headroom of
seven feet six inches or more.
(b)
(c) Interior balconies and mezzanines.
Enclosed or roofed porches, terraces, breezeways or other
roofed spaces.
(d)
Attic spaces (with or without a finished floor), provided that
structural headroom of seven feet and six inches or more is
available over 50% of such attic space.
(e)
(f) Accessory buildings.
(1)
However, floor area shall not include:
(a) Cellar space, except that cellar space used for retailing.
Elevator shafts, stairwells, bulkheads, accessory water tanks
or cooling towers.
(b)
(2)
216. Editor's Note: See § 225-29A(1)(a)[1].
§ 225-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-5
220:758
FORESTRY — The harvesting of more than 25 live trees with a trunk
width of six inches or more at a height of 4.5 feet above the average
ground level on any tract or lot within a calendar year. This term shall
not apply to the following, which are permitted by right uses in zoning
districts:[Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
FORM OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA — The characteristics of the medical
marijuana recommended or limited for a particular patient, including
the method of consumption and any particular dosage, strain, variant
and quantity or percentage of medical marijuana or particular active
ingredient.[Added 10-16-2018 by Ord. No. 5-2018]
FRATERNITY HOUSE — A detached building occupied by and
maintained exclusively for students affiliated with an accredited
academic or professional college or university or other recognized
institution of higher learning.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An enclosed space designed primarily for the
storage of one or more private motor vehicles, provided that no
business, occupation or service is conducted nor space therein leased
to a nonresident of the lot.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — A structure, building or area of land
or any portion thereof that is used primarily for the sale of gasoline or
any other motor vehicle fuel, which may or may not include facilities for
lubricating, washing, sale of accessories and otherwise servicing motor
vehicles, but not including body repair or painting thereof. Any business
or industry dispensing gasoline only for its own use and vehicles will
not be deemed to be a "gasoline service station."
GENERAL CONSISTENCY/GENERALLY CONSISTENT — That which
exhibits consistency.[Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
GOVERNING BODY — The Borough Council of the Borough of
Kutztown.
GRADE — The average finished ground elevation, slope or level
adjoining the building or structure.[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
Unroofed porches, terraces, uncovered steps or other open
space.
(c)
Routine thinning of woods involving dispersed selective cutting of
trees that involve less than 20% of all trees on one or more abutting
lots with a trunk width of greater than six inches;
(1)
(2) Cutting of trees with a trunk width less than six inches;
(3) Cutting of fewer than 25 such trees in a calendar year;
(4) Christmas tree farms; or
Clearing of portions of a lot that is clearly the minimum necessary
for construction.
(5)
§ 225-5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-5
220:759
GROWER/PROCESSOR — A person, including a natural person,
corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity, or any
combination thereof, which holds a current and valid permit from the
DOH to grow and process medical marijuana in the commonwealth,
pursuant to the provisions of the Act.217[Added 10-16-2018 by Ord.
No. 5-2018]
GROWER/PROCESSOR FACILITY — Any building or structure used to
grow and process medical marijuana by a licensed grower/processor
that has a current and valid permit from the DOH pursuant to the
Act.[Added 10-16-2018 by Ord. No. 5-2018]
HARD PARKING SURFACE — A hard, homogeneous, all-weather
surface.
HEARING — An administrative proceeding conducted by the Board
pursuant to Article VIII.
HEDGE — A row of closely planted evergreen shrubs, bushes or trees
forming a continuous barrier or fence so as to restrict passage and
visibility.[Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
HEIGHT OF SIGN OR OTHER STRUCTURE — The vertical distance
measured from the grade at the front of the structure or sign to its
highest point. The highest point in the case of a sign shall include the
supporting structure.218
HOME OCCUPATION — A use conducted entirely within a dwelling unit
and carried on by any resident thereof incidental and secondary to the
use of the dwelling unit, which does not change the character or have
any exterior evidence other than a small nameplate sign. The definition
of "home occupation" shall exclude any activity which falls within the
definition of "no-impact home-based business."[Amended 7-20-2006
by Ord. No. 14-2006]
HOTEL — A building or group of buildings containing individual rooms
for rental, primarily for transients, with common hallways for all or a
group of rooms on the same floor.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
(1)
217. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
218. Editor's Note: The former definition of "height of tower," added 4-14-1998 by Ord. No.
7-1998, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 10-17-2017 by Ord. No.
3-2017.
§ 225-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-5
220:760
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he
is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or
other person having a proprietary interest in land.
LANDSCAPED AREA — An area for the planting and arrangement
of trees, shrubs, grass and/or flowers, which may or may not be
continuous on a position of open space.
LET, LETTING, LEASE, RENT, RENTING, RENTAL OR WORDS OF
SIMILAR MEANING — The act of permitting a unit to be used to
provide a living arrangement for one or more persons not the owner
thereof or the owner’s family, whether or not for compensation.[Added
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
LOT — A tract or parcel of land, regardless of size, held in single or joint
ownership, not necessarily a lot or lots shown on a duly recorded map,
which is occupied or capable of being occupied by buildings, structures
and accessory buildings, including such open spaces as are arranged,
designed or required. The term "lot" shall mean parcel, plot, site or any
similar term.
LOT AREA — An area of land which is determined by the limits of
the property lines bounding that area and expressed in square feet or
acres. Any portion of a lot included in a street right-of-way shall not be
included in calculating lot area.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the point of intersection of and abutting on
two or more intersecting streets and which has an interior angle of less
than 135° at the intersection of two street lines.
LOT COVERAGE — A percentage of lot area which may be covered by
principal and accessory buildings and structures (sometimes referred
to as "building coverage").
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot, the sides of which,
other than the front or rear, do not abut a street.
LOT LINE — Any line dividing one lot from another lot, from a right-ofway
or watercourse, or any combination thereof.
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(2) A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.219
(3)
219. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 225-5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-5
220:761
LOT WIDTH — The mean width measured at the building setback line
between side lot lines and parallel to the front lot line, but in no case
shall the street frontage or average lot width between front and rear lot
lines be less than 1/2 of the required lot width in the particular district.
MEDICAL CENTER — An establishment for the care, diagnosis and
treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or injured persons who are not provided
with room or board and are not kept overnight on the premises.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA — Marijuana for certified medical use as legally
permitted by the commonwealth and the provisions of the
Act.220[Added 10-16-2018 by Ord. No. 5-2018]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ORGANIZATION — A dispensary facility or a
grower/processor facility.[Added 10-16-2018 by Ord. No. 5-2018]
MINERALS — Any aggregate or mass of mineral matter, whether or
not coherent. The term includes, but is not limited to, limestone and
dolomite, sand and gravel, rock and stone, earth, fill, slag, iron ore, zinc
ore, vermiculite and clay, anthracite and bituminous coal, coal refuse,
peat and crude oil and natural gas.[Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and
ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations and is constructed so that it may be used without
a permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park
improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile
home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which
have been so designated and improved that they contain two or more
mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MODIFICATION or MODIFY — The improvement, upgrade or
expansion of existing wireless telecommunications facilities or base
stations on an existing wireless support structure or the improvement,
upgrade or expansion of the wireless telecommunication facilities
located within an existing equipment compound, if the improvements,
upgrade, expansion or replacement does not substantially change the
physical dimensions of the wireless support structure.[Added
10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017]
MONOPOLE — A WCF which consists of a single-pole structure,
designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure, to support
220. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
§ 225-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-5
220:762
communications antennas and connecting appurtenances.[Added
10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017]
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings containing individual rooms
or apartment accommodations primarily for transients, each of which is
provided with a separate exterior entrance and offered principally for
rental and use by motor vehicle travelers. The term "motel" includes
but is not limited to auto courts, motor courts, motor inns, motor lodges
or roadside hotels.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — See "authority."
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial
activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly
secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no
customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian,
pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess
of those normally associated with residential use.[Added 7-20-2006
by Ord. No. 14-2006]
The business or commercial activity must satisfy the following
requirements:
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential
use of the property and surrounding residential uses.
(a)
The business shall employ no employees other than family
members residing in the dwelling.
(b)
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no
stockpiling or inventory of a substantial nature.
(c)
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use,
including, but not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
(d)
The business activity may not use any equipment or process
which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical
or electronic interference, including interference with radio or
television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
(e)
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or
sewage discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally
associated with residential use in the neighborhood.
(f)
The business activity shall be conducted only within the
dwelling and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable
floor area.
(g)
(h) The business may not involve any illegal activity.
(1)
Provided, however, that the no-impact home-based business shall
not be deemed to include any use when such use is otherwise
prohibited or restricted by virtue of any deed restriction, covenant
or agreement restricting the use of land, or by any master deed,
(2)
§ 225-5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-5
220:763
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot which does not conform to the
applicable provisions and requirements of the district in which it is
located, either at the time of the enactment of this chapter or as a result
of subsequent amendments thereto.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — A structure or
building, or part thereof, which does not conform to the applicable
provisions and requirements of the district in which it is located, either
at the time of the enactment of this chapter or as a result of subsequent
amendments thereto. "Nonconforming structures" shall include, but are
not limited to, nonconforming signs. However, no existing structure
or building shall be deemed nonconforming solely because of the
existence of less than the required open space.
NONCONFORMING USE — The use of a building, structure, sign or
any land which does not conform to the applicable provisions and
requirements of the district in which it is located, either at the time of
the enactment of this chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments
thereto. However, no existing use shall be deemed nonconforming
solely because of the existence of less than the required off-street
parking spaces and/or required open space.
NON-TOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY (NON-TOWER
WCF) — A non-tower WCF, including but not limited to antennas and
related equipment. Non-tower WCFs shall not include support
structures for antennas or any related equipment that is mounted to the
ground or at ground level.[Added 10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017]
NURSERY SCHOOL — See "day-care facility."[Added 3-26-1996 by
Ord. No. 3-1996]
NURSING HOME — An establishment providing nursing, dietary and
other similar personal services to convalescents, invalids or aged
persons, but excluding cases of surgery and other treatments
customarily provided in hospitals, sanitariums and similar institutions.
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP — The Borough of Kutztown's Zoning Map.
OPEN SPACE — Unoccupied space open to the sky and on the same
lot with the principal use or accessory use and without any artificial
surface thereon, planted with grass or landscaped with trees, shrubs or
hedges.
PARKING LOT — An off-street paved area designed solely for the
parking of four or more motor vehicles, including driveways,
passageways and maneuvering space appurtenant thereto.[Amended
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space, exclusive of driveways,
passageways and maneuvering space.
bylaw or other document applicable to a common interest
ownership community.
§ 225-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-5
220:764
PA UCC — The Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, also known as the
"Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, Act 45 of 1999," as amended
by Act 158 of 2004, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, and its
regulations, as amended, restated, supplemented or replaced from time
to time.[Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
PAVED or PAVING — Concrete, bituminous concrete, asphalt or like
material.
PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE (PCS) — A generation of
wireless phone technology that combines a range of features and
services surpassing those available in analog and digital cellular phone
systems, providing a user with an all-in-one wireless phone, paging,
messaging, and data service.[Added 10-17-2017 by Ord. No.
3-2017]
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Borough of Kutztown Planning
Commission.
PRESERVATION OR PROTECTION — When used in connection with
natural and historic resources, shall include means to conserve and
safeguard these resources from wasteful or destructive use, but shall
not be interpreted to authorize the unreasonable restriction of forestry,
mining or other lawful uses of natural resources.[Added 7-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 14-2006]
PRIME AGRICULTURAL LAND — Land use for agricultural purposes
that contain soils of the first, second or third class as defined by
the United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources and
Conservation Services County Soil Survey.[Added 7-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 14-2006]
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the governing body or Planning Commission, intended to inform and
obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this
chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act
of July 3, 1986, known as the "Sunshine Act," as amended and
supplemented.221
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough.
Such notice shall state the time and place of the public hearing and the
particular nature of the matter to be considered at the public hearing.
The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the public
hearing.
RELATED EQUIPMENT — Any piece of equipment related to, incidental
to, or necessary for the operation of a tower-based WCF or non-tower
WCF. By way of illustration, not limitation, "related equipment" includes
221. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 271 et seq.
§ 225-5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-5
220:765
generators and base stations.[Added 10-17-2017 by Ord. No.
3-2017]
RELATIVE — A person related by blood, marriage, adoption or other
decree of legal custody.[Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
REPLACEMENT — The replacement of existing wireless
telecommunication facilities on an existing wireless support structure
or within an existing equipment compound due to maintenance, repair
or technological advancement with equipment composed of the same
wind loading and structural loading that is substantially similar in
size, weight and height as the wireless telecommunications facilities
initially installed and that does not substantially change the physical
dimensions of the existing wireless support structure.[Added
10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017]
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar
writing made by any body, board, officer or consultant, other than a
solicitor, to any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose
of assisting the recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision
or determination. All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and
advisory only and shall not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer,
body or agency, nor shall any appeal lie therefrom. Any report used,
received or considered by the body, board, officer or agency rendering
a determination or decision shall be made available for inspection to
the applicant and all other parties to any proceeding upon request, and
copies thereof shall be provided at cost of reproduction.
RESTAURANT — A retail food service establishment, with or without
the sale of beer, wine or liquor. Food sales shall account for at least 55%
of gross income.
RETAIL SALES — A building or part thereof which is used for display
and sales that involve stocks of goods, wares and merchandise for
sale to and accessible to the public.[Added 3-26-1996 by Ord. No.
3-1996]
RETAIL SERVICES — Located in a building or part thereof which is
used for the transaction of business, for the rendering of professional
services, or for other services that involve stocks of goods, wares
or merchandise in limited quantities incidental to the purpose of the
service and/or for sample purposes.[Added 3-26-1996 by Ord. No.
3-1996]
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The surface of and space above and below any
real property in the municipality in which the federal government,
commonwealth, municipality or municipal authority has a regulatory
interest, or interest as a trustee for the public, as such interests now
or thereafter exist, including, but not limited to, all streets, highways,
avenues, roads, alleys, sidewalks, tunnels, viaducts, bridges, skyways,
or any other public place, area or property under the control of the
federal government, commonwealth, municipality or municipal
authority, and any nonexclusive public or utility easements established,
§ 225-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-5
220:766
dedicated, platted, improved or devoted for utility purposes. Private
rights-of-way and other government-owned lands not listed above shall
not be considered a right-of-way. The phrase "in the right(s)-of-way"
means in, on, over, along, above and/or under the right(s)-ofway.[
Added 10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017]
ROOMING HOUSE — A building other than a fraternity, sorority, hotel,
motel or one-family dwelling, in which building the owner, provides for
compensation or lets, rooms for lodging of four or more individuals, and
the owner does not reside therein.[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
ROOMING UNIT — A portion of a building providing rooms for
sleeping, cooking and sanitary facilities for not more than five
persons.[Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
ROW HOUSE — See "townhouse."
SEMIDETACHED BUILDING — See "building, semidetached."
SERVICE STREET — A public or private right-of-way, excluding
driveways, intended for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian
circulation which provides a secondary means of access to abutting
properties and where the cartway is identical in width and location to
the right-of-way.[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of stores, four or more in number,
planned and designed as an integrated unit, with off-street parking
provided on the property as an integral part of the unit. "Shopping
center" shall also mean a single store or a group of stores fewer than
four in number where the total gross floor area of the store or stores
exceeds 50,000 square feet.
SHOT CLOCK — Based on the type of WCF under consideration, the
permit processing time frames are 60, 90, or 150 days.[Added
10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017]
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure or part thereof or any
device attached, painted or represented directly or indirectly on a wall,
structure or other surface that shall display or include any letter, word,
insignia, flag or representation used as, or which is in the nature of,
an advertisement, announcement, visual communication or direction or
that is designed to attract the eye or bring the subject to the attention
of the public shall be considered a sign. Flags of any governmental
unit or branch of any charitable or religious organization, interior
signs not visible from a public right-of-way or adjoining property and
cornerstones or commemorative plaques not exceeding nine square
feet shall not be construed to be a sign for purposes of this chapter.
BUSINESS OR IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign which directs
attention to a business, profession, product, service, activity or
entertainment sold or offered upon the lot where such sign is
located.
(1)
§ 225-5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-5
220:767
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign or device intended to direct or point
toward a place or object or one that points out the way to either an
unfamiliar or a known place or object.
(2)
FLASHING SIGN — A sign, the illumination of which is not kept
constant in intensity at all times when in use and which exhibits
sudden or marked changes in lighting effects. Illuminated signs
which indicate time, temperature or date information shall not be
considered a flashing sign.
(3)
(4) FLUSH SIGN — See "parallel sign."
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign supported by, or suspended from,
a freestanding column or other support located in or upon the
ground surface.
(5)
ILLUMINATED SIGN (DIRECTLY) — A sign designed to give forth
artificial light directly (or through transparent or translucent
material) from a source of light within such sign, including but not
limited to neon and exposed lamp signs. Festoon lighting shall be
deemed a directly illuminated sign comprised of either a group of
incandescent light bulbs hung or strung overhead or on a building
or structure or light bulbs not shielded or hooded or otherwise
screened to prevent the direct rays of the light from shining on an
adjacent property or right-of-way.
(6)
ILLUMINATED SIGN (INDIRECTLY) — An illuminated, nonflashing
sign with illumination derived from an external artificial source and
so arranged that no direct rays of light are projected from such
artificial source to areas other than the sign being illuminated.
(7)
NAMEPLATE SIGN — A sign which states the name or address, or
both, of the occupant of the lot where the sign is located.
(8)
PARALLEL SIGN — A sign which is mounted parallel to a wall or
other vertical building surface not extending beyond the edge of
any wall or other surface to which it is mounted and not projecting
more than 12 inches from the wall surface.
(9)
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign which is attached directly to the
structure wall, including awnings, and which extends more than 12
inches from the face of such wall.
(10)
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected upon or above the roof or parapet of
a building.
(11)
SIGN, ON-LOT — A sign which directs attention to a person,
business, profession, home occupation or activity conducted on the
same lot as the sign.
(12)
SIGN, OFF-LOT (BILLBOARD) — A board, panel or tablet used for
the display of printed or painted advertising matter which directs
attention to a person, business, profession, product, service,
(13)
§ 225-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-5
220:768
SITE — For towers other than towers in the public right-of-way, the
current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the
tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site,
and, for other eligible support structures, further restricted to that
area in proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment
already deployed on the ground.[Added 10-17-2017 by Ord. No.
3-2017]
SORORITY HOUSE — A detached building occupied by and maintained
exclusively for students affiliated with an accredited academic or
professional college or university or other recognized institution of
higher learning.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use permitted in a particular district in
accordance with the provisions of § 225-51C of this chapter.
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communication towers, antennas and other facilities which render them
more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the existing
structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally
visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but are not limited
to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted
antennas painted to match the existing structure, and facilities
constructed to resemble trees, shrubs, or light poles.[Added
10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017]
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is not
a floor above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling
next above it. A basement, but not a cellar, shall be deemed to be a
"story." Each level of a split-level building, excluding cellars, shall be
considered a half story.
STORY, HALF — Any space immediately below and wholly or partly
within the roof framing, with or without a finished floor, where the clear
height of not more than 75% of such space has structural headroom of
seven feet and six inches or more. Any space which has more than 75%
of its area having such headroom shall be deemed to be a full story.
In addition, each level of a split-level building, excluding cellars, shall,
regardless of its proximity to the roof framing, be considered a "half
story."
activity or entertainment not conducted, sold or offered upon the
lot where such sign is located.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign which is in place not more than 30
days, except as may otherwise be provided for in § 225-28 of this
chapter.
(14)
WINDOW SIGN — A temporary or permanent sign which is
oriented to the public right-of-way, is legible to persons in vehicles
and is located on the outside or inside of a window to direct
attention to an activity conducted on the same lot as the sign.
(15)
§ 225-5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-5
220:769
STREET — A public or private right-of-way, excluding driveways,
intended for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation
which provides a means of access to abutting property. The word
"street" includes thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, court, drive,
expressway, highway, lane and road or similar terms. The word "street"
shall not include service street.[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the
land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agriculture purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling shall be exempted. The term "subdivision" shall refer, as
appropriate in this chapter, to the process of subdividing land or to
the land proposed to be subdivided. The term "subdivision" includes
resubdivision.[Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE or SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — A
modification to the physical dimensions of a tower or base station, as
measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station inclusive
of any modifications approved prior to the passage of the Spectrum
Act (effective February 22, 2012), if it meets any of the following
criteria:[Added 10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017]
The enumerating of lots shall include as a lot that portion of the
original tract remaining after other lots have been subdivided
therefrom.
(1)
The combining of two or more recorded lots into one lot via the
creation of a new deed shall not constitute subdivision, provided
that no existing lot is divided by any means.
(2)
For towers outside of public right-of-way, it increases the height by
more than 20 feet or 10%, whichever is greater; for those towers in
the right-of-way and for all base stations, it increases the height of
the tower or base station by more than 10% or 10 feet, whichever
is greater;
(1)
For towers outside of public rights-of-way, it protrudes from the
edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of
the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever
is greater; for those towers in the rights-of-way and for all base
stations, it protrudes from the edge of the structure more than six
feet;
(2)
§ 225-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-5
220:770
TAVERN — A retail service establishment which is primarily for the sale
of beer, wine or liquor, with or without food service. The term "tavern"
shall include a nightclub and barroom.
TOWER-BASED WCF — Any structure that is used for the purpose
of supporting one or more antennas, including, but not limited to,
self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers and monopoles, utility poles
and light poles. DAS hub facilities are considered to be tower-based
WCFs.[Added 10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017]
TOWNHOUSE — A building arranged, designed and intended for and
occupied exclusively by one family, said building consisting of one of
a group of not fewer than three nor more than six attached buildings,
with the buildings at each end thereof being included within the
aforesaid minimum and maximum numbers, each such building
separated by unpierced party walls and each such building having
at least one separate entrance from the outside and individual utility
connections. All townhouses, including the end buildings of a group,
shall be deemed to be attached buildings, and in no event shall either
end building be deemed to be semidetached. For a dwelling unit to
be deemed to be a townhouse, such dwelling unit shall be on an
individual lot and shall have individual front and rear yards. A singlefamily
attached building shall not be deemed a townhouse in any
district where regulations provided for in § 225-25 of this chapter
pertain to townhouses.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a sign, structure or
building is designed, arranged or intended or for which it may be
occupied or maintained or any activity, occupation, business or
operation which may be carried on thereon or therein. The term
"permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any
nonconforming use. The existence of a permit or any other
authorization under another chapter of this Code or any other
authorization under any other laws or regulations shall not be deemed
to constitute the actual use or the continuation of use of any land, any
It involves installation of more than the standard number of new
equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed
four cabinets;
(3)
It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site of
the tower or base station;
(4)
It would defeat the existing concealment elements of the tower or
base station; or
(5)
It does not comply with conditions associated with the prior
approval of the tower or base station unless the noncompliance is
due to an increase in height, increase in width, addition of cabinets,
or new excavation that does not exceed the corresponding
"substantial change" thresholds.
(6)
§ 225-5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-5
220:771
structure or any building, whether permitted or nonconforming for the
purposes of this chapter.[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
VARIANCE — Relief granted by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the provisions of § 225-51B of this chapter.
WALL (FREESTANDING) — A barrier constructed of stone, brick,
concrete, masonry or similar materials, designed for the purpose of
limiting or excluding access to a lot or for the purpose of screening a
lot or portion thereof from the exterior of the lot.
WBAC — Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act.[Added
10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017]
WIRELESS — Transmission through the airwaves including, but not
limited to, infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or
radio signals.[Added 10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY (WCF) — The antennas,
nodes, control bases, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals,
electronics and other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting,
receiving, distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless
communication services.[Added 10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017]
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such as
a tower-based WCF or any other support structure that could support
the placement or installation of a wireless communication facility if
approved by the Borough.[Added 10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017]
YARD — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building,
open and unobstructed from the ground upward and without any
artificial surface thereon, except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
and not less in depth or width than the minimum required in each
district.
ZONING CHAPTER or CHAPTER — The Borough of Kutztown Zoning
Ordinance of 1990, as codified in this Chapter 225 and as amended and
YARD, FRONT — The yard that runs the full width of the lot, along
the street right-of-way, and extends from the building or structure
to the line established by the street right-of-way. The minimum
distance between the building or structure and the line established
by the street right-of-way will be determined by setback
requirements in this Code. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
(1)
YARD, REAR — The yard between the rear lot line and a line drawn
parallel thereto at such distance therefrom as may be specified
herein for any district and extending for the full width of the lot.
(2)
YARD, SIDE — The yard between the side lot line and a line drawn
parallel thereto, at such distance therefrom as may be specified
herein for any district, and extending from the front yard to the
rear yard.
(3)
§ 225-5 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-5
220:772
supplemented from time to time.[Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No.
3-1996]
ZONING OFFICER — The agent or official appointed by the governing
body to administrate and enforce this Zoning Chapter of the
Borough.[Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2-1998]
§ 225-5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-5
220:773

ARTICLE III
Zoning Map and Zoning Districts
§ 225-6. Official Zoning Map.
The Borough of Kutztown is hereby divided into zones, or districts, as shown
on the Official Zoning Map, which, together with all explanatory matter
thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this
chapter, together with all future notations, references and amendments.
A. Identification of Official Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map shall be
identified by the signature of the President of the governing body and
attested by the Secretary of the borough, together with the date of the
adoption of this chapter.
B. Changing the Official Zoning Map.
(1) If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as from time to time
amended,222 changes are made in district boundaries or other
matters portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall
be entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the
amendment has been approved by the governing body.
(2) No changes of any nature shall be made on the Official Zoning Map
or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures
set forth in this chapter, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as from time to time amended, or any other applicable state
law. All changes shall be noted on the Official Zoning Map by date
with a brief description of the nature of the change.
C. Location of Official Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map shall be
located in the Code Enforcement Office of the Borough and at any time
shall be the final authority as to the then-current zoning status of land
in the Borough, regardless of unofficial copies which may have been
made or published from time to time.223
D. Replacement of Official Zoning Map.
(1) In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged,
destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or
number of changes and additions, the governing body may, by
resolution, adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall supersede
the prior Official Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map may
correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official
Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of
amending the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent
amendment thereof. The new Official Zoning Map shall be
identified by the signature of the President of the governing body,
222. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
223. Editor's Note: The Official Zoning Map is included in a pocket at the end of this volume.
§ 225-6 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-6
220:775
§ 225-7. Classes of districts. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Borough is hereby divided into classes
of districts which shall be designated as follows:
R-1 — Residential
R-2 — Low-Density Residential
R-3 — Medium-Density Residential
R-4 — Medium-High-Density Residential
R-5 — High-Density Residential
C-C — Business Commercial Central
C-1 — Business Commercial
C-2 — Commercial/Residential
C-3 — Highway Commercial
I — Industrial District
LI — Light Industrial District
MI — Medium Industrial District
HI — Heavy Industrial District
§ 225-8. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
attested by the Secretary of the Borough and bear the following
words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes
and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted September 22, 1987,
as part of Ordinance No. 11-1987 of the Borough of Kutztown,
Berks County, Pennsylvania."
(2) Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost or has been
totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof
remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records
pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
A. Designation of district boundaries. Boundaries indicated as
approximately following the center line of streets, railroad rights-ofway
and streams and existing lot lines or Borough boundary lines shall
be construed to follow such line. Where a district boundary line does
not follow such a line, its position shall be shown on said Official Zoning
Map by a specific dimension expressing its distance, in feet, from a
street right-of-way line or other boundary line as indicated and running
parallel to said line, or by reference to the ordinance describing such
line.
§ 225-6 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-8
220:776
§ 225-9. Designation of floodplain areas.
The areas considered to be flood-prone within the Borough shall be those
areas identified as being subject to the one-hundred-year flood in the Flood
Insurance Study prepared for the Borough of Kutztown, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The
boundary area of the one-hundred-year flood, including both the floodway
and the floodway fringe, is determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, Flood Hazard Boundary Map H-01 and Flood
Boundary Map 01F, both maps having an effective date of May 2, 1977, or
the latest editions or revisions thereof.
§ 225-10. Condominium or cooperative ownership.
§ 225-10.1. (Reserved)225
§ 225-10.2. Medium Industrial Overlay Zoning District. [Added
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 15-2006]
B. Determination of location of boundaries. Where physical or cultural
features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the
Official Zoning Map, or if uncertainty exists as to the true location of a
district boundary line in a particular instance, the Zoning Officer shall
render his determination with respect thereto.
A. Condominium declarations or cooperative ownership agreements shall
be submitted to and approved by the Borough and after such approval
shall be filed with the Recorder of Deeds of the County of Berks and the
Borough. Condominium declarations shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act of 1980, as
amended.224
B. In the case of a building in condominium or cooperative ownership
situated on a parcel of land, the building coverage and paved area
regulations of the applicable zoning district shall apply to the entire
building as it is situated on the entire parcel and shall not be applied to
each unit of occupancy within the building. [Amended 3-26-1996 by
Ord. No. 3-1996]
C. Buildings and/or lots in condominium or cooperative ownership shall
comply with all applicable zoning requirements; furthermore, each unit
of occupancy shall comply with the requirements of all applicable codes
and other ordinances of the Borough of Kutztown as a separate unit of
occupancy. [Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
A. District requirements.
224. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
225. Editor's Note: Former § 225-10.1, Commercial communications facilities overlay districts,
added 4-14-1998 by Ord. No. 7-1998, was repealed 10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017.
§ 225-8 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-10.2
220:777
(1) Requirements for utilization of this overlay district shall be those
set forth for medium industrial districts in § 225-21, entitled "I -
Industrial."
(2) The Medium Industrial Overlay Zoning District herein set forth
shall only be permitted and become applicable upon the
construction and opening for public use and travel of an
interchange between the Kutztown Bypass (U.S. Route 222) and
College Boulevard at the intersection where the Kutztown Bypass
(U. S. Route 222) passes over the aforenoted College Boulevard.
§ 225-10.2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-10.2
220:778
ARTICLE IV
District Regulations
§ 225-11. Permitted uses.
In the regulations of each district, certain permitted uses are listed. Within
each district, the only uses permitted by right in that district are those uses
listed as permitted uses in that district. The supplementary regulations set
forth in Article V of this chapter shall apply when applicable.
§ 225-12. R-1 - Agricultural/Residential.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Single-family dwellings, detached building.
(2) Public structures owned or operated by the Borough or a municipal
authority organized by the Borough.
(3) Public or nonprofit private outdoor recreation areas and facilities,
such as parks (except amusement parks), playgrounds, picnic
grounds and swim clubs.
(4) Agricultural operations. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
(5) Forestry. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
B. Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted
principal use:
(1) Private garages or private parking spaces.
(2) Signs.
(3) Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
(4) Essential services.
(5) No-impact home-based business. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
C. Uses permitted only by special exception issued by the Zoning Hearing
Board:
(1) Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses, convents and
other housing for religious personnel.
(2) Agriculture, horticulture, nurseries and greenhouses.
(3) Accessory uses, buildings or structures not located on the same lot
with the permitted principal use.
(4) Home occupations.
§ 225-11 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-12
220:779
(5) Medical centers, nursing homes, convalescent homes or similar
health care facilities, subject to the following:
(a) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum each side yard: 30 feet.
(e) Minimum rear yard: 80 feet.
(f) Maximum lot coverage, including accessory structures: 30%.
(g) Maximum building height: 35 feet; 2 1/2 stories.
(h) Maximum paved area: 20%.
(6) The requirements of Subsections D, E and F of this section shall
apply to the above uses hereinabove permitted by special
exception, except the uses pertaining to medical centers, nursing
homes, convalescent homes or similar health care facilities as
listed in Subsection C(5) of this section. [Added 2-9-1993 by Ord.
No. 2-1993]
D. Minimum size.
(1) Area: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Width: 150 feet.
E. Minimum yard dimensions.
(1) Front yard: 50 feet.
(2) Each side yard: 30 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 100 feet.
F. Maximum lot coverage, building and structure height and paved area.
[Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 1-1997]
(1) Maximum lot coverage, including accessory structures: 15%.
(2) Maximum building height: 35 feet; 2 1/2 stories.
(3) Maximum paved area or hard parking surface: 10%.
(4) The maximum permitted height of any structure in this district,
other than a building, shall be a maximum height above grade of
the maximum permitted building height for this district plus 15
feet. Where the structure is erected upon or atop or is affixed to any
building, then the maximum height of any such structure erected
upon, atop or affixed to any building shall not exceed 15 feet above
the highest point of the main roof of the existing building; provided,
§ 225-12 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-12
220:780
§ 225-13. R-2 - Low-Density Residential.
however, that in no event shall the maximum height of both the
building and the structure erected upon, atop or affixed thereto
exceed the maximum permitted building height for this district plus
15 feet.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Single-family dwellings, detached building.
(2) Public schools, parochial schools, institutions for higher education
and private schools.
(3) Public parks and playgrounds.
(4) Public structures owned or operated by the Borough or a municipal
authority organized by the Borough.
(5) Fire stations and ambulance facilities.
(6) Boardinghouses.
(7) Day-care facility and nursery school. [Added 3-26-1996 by Ord.
No. 3-1996]
(8) Forestry. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
B. Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted
principal use:
(1) Private garages or private parking spaces.
(2) Signs.
(3) Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
(4) Essential services.
(5) No-impact home-based business. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
C. Uses permitted only by special exception issued by the Zoning Hearing
Board: [Amended 2-9-1993 by Ord. No. 2-1993]
(1) Public or private outdoor recreation areas and facilities, parks
(except amusement parks), playgrounds, swimming clubs, camps
and golf courses (except driving ranges and miniature golf
courses).
(2) Agriculture, horticulture, nurseries and greenhouses.
(3) Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses, convents and
other housing for religious personnel, medical centers, nursing
homes, convalescent homes or similar health care facilities.
§ 225-12 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-13
220:781
(4) All the uses described in Subsection C(1), (2) and (3) above and
permitted by special exception only shall be subject to the
following:
(a) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard: 30 feet.
(e) Minimum rear yard: 80 feet.
(f) Maximum lot coverage, including accessory structures: 30%.
(g) Maximum building height: 35 feet; 2 1/2 stories.
(h) Maximum paved area: 20%.
(5) Accessory uses, building or structures not located on the same lot
as the permitted principal use and home occupations, subject to the
requirements of Subsections D, E and F of this section.
D. Minimum lot size.
(1) Area: 10,000 square feet.
(2) Width: 80 feet.
E. Minimum yard dimensions.
(1) Front yard: 30 feet.
(2) Each side yard: 15 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 40 feet.
F. Maximum lot coverage, building and structure height and paved area.
[Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 1-1997]
(1) Maximum lot coverage, including accessory structures: 30%.
(2) Maximum building height: 35 feet; 2 1/2 stories.
(3) Maximum paved area or hard parking surface: 15%.
(4) The maximum permitted height of any structure in this district,
other than a building, shall be a maximum height above grade of
the maximum permitted building height for this district plus 15
feet. Where the structure is erected upon or atop or is affixed to any
building, then the maximum height of any such structure erected
upon, atop or affixed to any building shall not exceed 15 feet above
the highest point of the main roof of the existing building; provided,
however, that in no event shall the maximum height of both the
building and the structure erected upon, atop or affixed thereto
§ 225-13 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-13
220:782
§ 225-14. R-3 - Medium-Density Residential.
exceed the maximum permitted building height for this district plus
15 feet.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Single-family dwellings, detached building.
(2) Single-family dwellings, semidetached building.
(3) Two-family dwellings, detached building.
(4) Public schools, parochial schools, institutions for higher education
and private schools.
(5) Churches or similar places of worship.
(6) Public structures owned or operated by the Borough, by a
municipal authority organized by the Borough, by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and its agencies and/or by the
federal government of the United States of America and its
departments, agencies and federally chartered corporations.
[Amended 3-28-2000 by Ord. No. 3-2000]
(7) Public parks and playgrounds.
(8) Borough parking facilities.
(9) Boardinghouses.
(10) Day-care facility and nursery school. [Added 3-26-1996 by Ord.
No. 3-1996]
(11) Forestry. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
B. Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted
principal use:
(1) Private garages, parking spaces or parking lots. [Amended
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(2) Signs.
(3) Home occupations pursuant to § 225-23. [Amended 7-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 14-2006]
(4) Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
(5) Essential services.
(6) No-impact home-based businesses. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 14-2006]
§ 225-13 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-14
220:783
C. Uses permitted only by special exception issued by the Zoning Hearing
Board:
(1) Accessory parking not located on the same lot with the principal
structure or use as provided for in § 225-29A. [Amended
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(2) Cemeteries.
(3) Fraternity houses or sorority houses.
(4) Low-rise apartment houses and townhouses, pursuant to § 225-25.
[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(5) Public or private outdoor recreation areas and facilities and parks
(except amusement parks), playgrounds and picnic grounds.
(6) Accessory uses, buildings or structures not located on the same lot
as the permitted principal use.
(7) The requirements of Subsection D(5) pertaining to nonresidential
use, Subsection E(4) pertaining to nonresidential use and
Subsections F and G shall apply to Subsection C(1), (2), (3), (5) and
(6) only. [Added 2-9-1993 by Ord. No. 2-1993]
D. Minimum lot area.
(1) Single-family detached: 6,250 square feet.
(2) Single-family semidetached per dwelling: 3,750 square feet.
(3) Two-family detached per dwelling unit: 3,750 square feet.
(4) Boarding-, fraternity or sorority house: 6,250 square feet.
(5) Nonresidential use: 6,250 square feet.
(6) Low-rise apartment house or townhouse: 1,500 square feet.
[Added 2-9-1993 by Ord. No. 2-1993]
(7) Parking lots: 6,250 square feet. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
E. Minimum lot width.
(1) Single-family detached: 50 feet.
(2) Single-family semidetached per dwelling: 30 feet.
(3) Two-family detached: 60 feet.
(4) Boarding-, fraternity or sorority house and nonresidential use: 50
feet.
(5) Low-rise apartment house: 50 feet. [Added 2-9-1993 by Ord. No.
2-1993]
§ 225-14 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-14
220:784
§ 225-15. R-4 - Medium-High-Density Residential.
(6) Parking lots: 50 feet. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
F. Minimum yard dimensions.
(1) Front yard: 25 feet.
(2) Each side yard: 10 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 30 feet.
G. Maximum lot coverage, building and structure height and paved area.
[Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 1-1997]
(1) Maximum lot coverage, including accessory structures: 35%.
(2) Maximum building height: 35 feet; 2 1/2 stories.
(3) Maximum paved area or hard parking surface: 25%.
(4) The maximum permitted height of any structure in this district,
other than a building, shall be a maximum height above grade of
the maximum permitted building height for this district plus 15
feet. Where the structure is erected upon or atop or is affixed to any
building, then the maximum height of any such structure erected
upon, atop or affixed to any building shall not exceed 15 feet above
the highest point of the main roof of the existing building; provided,
however, that in no event shall the maximum height of both the
building and the structure erected upon, atop or affixed thereto
exceed the maximum permitted building height for this district plus
15 feet.
(5) Parking lot, principal use: [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
(a) Maximum paved area: 75%.
(b) Minimum open space: 25%.
A. Permitted uses: [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(1) Low-rise and high-rise apartments pursuant to § 225-25.
(2) Townhouses pursuant to § 225-25.
(3) Forestry.
B. Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted
principal use:
(1) Private garages, parking spaces or parking lots. [Amended
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(2) Signs.
§ 225-14 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-15
220:785
(3) Home occupations pursuant to § 225-23. [Amended 7-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 14-2006]
(4) Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
(5) Essential services.
(6) No-impact home-based business. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
C. Minimum lot size: see § 225-25.
D. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: see § 225-25.
E. Minimum yard dimensions: see § 225-25.
F. Maximum lot coverage, building and structure height: see § 225-25.
[Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 1-1997]
G. Uses permitted only by special exception issued by the Zoning Hearing
Board:
(1) Convalescent homes, nursing homes or similar health care
facilities, including administrative offices necessary for the
operation thereof and accessory uses such as restaurants, gift
shops, beauty shops, chapels, laundries and classrooms for the use
of the residents and employees of the convalescent home, nursing
home or similar health care facility, subject to the following:
(a) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum Each side yard: 30 feet.
(e) Minimum rear yard: 80 feet.
(f) Maximum lot coverage, including accessory structures: 30%.
(g) Maximum building height: 35 feet; 2 1/2 stories.
(h) Maximum paved area: 20%.
(i) Maximum floor area for accessory uses: 10%.
(2) Low-rise apartment houses for the elderly that shall include one or
more accessory uses such as restaurants, gift shops, beauty shops,
chapels and classrooms which shall be primarily for the use of the
residents of the low-rise apartment houses for the elderly;
provided, however, that in no event shall the accessory uses herein
permitted exceed in area more than 10% of the total floor area of
any low-rise apartment house for the elderly.
§ 225-15 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-15
220:786
§ 225-16. R-5 - High-Density Residential.
(3) Low-rise apartment houses for the elderly in combination with
nursing or convalescent homes, subject to, notwithstanding the
provisions of § 225-25B, C and D, inclusive, of this chapter, the
following:
(a) Maximum lot coverage: 20%.
(b) Minimum parking lot setback from street right-of-way line or
lot line: 10 feet.
(c) Minimum distance between convalescent or nursing home and
low-rise apartment houses for the elderly: 80 feet.
(d) Parking lots shall be a minimum of 10 feet from buildings and
lot lines.
(e) Off-street parking: 1 1/4 space per dwelling unit.
(f) When more than one principal use will be located in a building
on a lot, the total lot shall be used in calculating whether the
area, density and other requirements for each use on the lot
have been met, and the lot shall not be considered as being
divided into more than one parcel for calculation purposes.
H. Maximum structure height. The maximum permitted height of any
structure in this district, other than a building, but including any
structure erected upon or atop any building, shall not exceed the
applicable maximum heights above grade specified in § 225-25B(12)
and (13). [Added 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 1-1997]
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Low-rise and high-rise apartments pursuant to § 225-25.
[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(2) Mobile home parks, pursuant to § 225-32. [Amended 7-20-2006
by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(3) No-impact home-based business. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 14-2006]
(4) Fraternity houses or sorority houses, subject to the following:
(a) Minimum lot size.
[1] Area: 6,250 square feet.
[2] Width: 50 feet.
(b) Minimum yard dimensions.
[1] Front yard: 25 feet.
§ 225-15 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-16
220:787
[2] Each side yard: 10 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 30 feet.
(c) Maximum lot coverage, building and structure height and
paved area and minimum open space. [Amended 1-14-1997
by Ord. No. 1-1997]
[1] Maximum lot coverage: 35%.
[2] Maximum building height: 35 feet; 2 1/2 stories.
[3] Maximum paved area: 25%.
[4] Minimum open space: 40%.
[5] The maximum permitted height of any structure, not a
building, erected in connection with a fraternity house or a
sorority house, shall be a maximum height above grade of
the maximum building height for a fraternity house or
sorority house plus 15 feet. Where the structure is erected
upon or atop or is affixed to any building used as a
fraternity house or a sorority house, then the maximum
height of any such structure erected upon, atop or affixed
to any such building shall not exceed 15 feet above the
highest point of the main roof of the existing building;
provided, however, that in no event shall the maximum
height of both the building used as a fraternity house or a
sorority house and the structure erected upon, atop or
affixed thereto exceed the maximum permitted building
height for this district plus 15 feet.
(5) Dormitories, subject to the following:
(a) Minimum yard dimensions.
[1] Front yard: 100 feet plus one additional foot for each one
foot of building height exceeding 35 feet.
[2] Each side yard: 50 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 200 feet.
(b) Maximum lot coverage, building and structure height and
paved area and minimum open space. [Amended 1-14-1997
by Ord. No. 1-1997]
[1] Maximum lot coverage: 15%.
[2] Maximum paved area: 25%.
[3] Maximum building height: 50 feet; four stories.
[4] Minimum open space: 60%.
§ 225-16 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-16
220:788
§ 225-17. C-C - Business Commercial Central.
[5] The maximum permitted height of any structure, not a
building, erected in connection with a dormitory, shall be a
maximum height above grade of the maximum building
height for a dormitory plus 15 feet. Where the structure is
erected upon or atop or is affixed to any building used as a
dormitory, then the maximum height of any such structure
erected upon, atop or affixed to any such building shall not
exceed 15 feet above the highest point of the main roof of
the existing building; provided, however, that in no event
shall the maximum height of both the building used as a
dormitory and the structure erected upon, atop or affixed
thereto exceed the maximum permitted building height for
this district plus 15 feet.
(c) Minimum lot size.
[1] Area: two acres.
[2] Width: 200 feet.
(6) Forestry. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
B. Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted
principal use:
(1) Private garages, parking spaces or parking lots. [Amended
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(2) Signs.
(3) Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
(4) Essential services.
(5) No-impact home-based business. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Retail sales and retail service establishments, except gasoline
service stations and any other gasoline sales operations which are
conducted separately or as a portion of a convenience store or
other retail sales and service establishment, drive-in
establishments and motor vehicle, recreation vehicle, farm
machinery or industrial machinery sales or service establishments.
[Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
(2) Business, professional or government offices and office buildings.
(3) Banks and savings and loan associations.
(4) Hotels and motels.
§ 225-16 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-17
220:789
(5) Restaurants, taverns or other places serving food and beverages,
except drive-in establishments.
(6) Theaters or motion picture theaters, except drive-ins.
(7) Dwelling units in combination with a commercial use.
(8) Single-family dwellings, detached building.
(9) Single-family dwellings, semidetached building.
(10) Two-family dwellings, attached or detached building.
(11) Single-family dwellings, attached building.
(12) Boardinghouses.
(13) Rooming houses.
(14) Low-rise apartment houses, pursuant to § 225-25. [Amended
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(15) Day-care facilities and nursery school. [Added 3-26-1996 by Ord.
No. 3-1996]
(16) Multifamily dwelling. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(17) Forestry. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
B. Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted
principal use:
(1) Private garages, parking spaces or parking lots. [Amended
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(2) Signs.
(3) Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
(4) Essential services.
(5) No-impact home-based business. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
(6) BYOB club in conjunction with a primary use as set forth in
§ 225-17A(4), (5) and (6), subject to the rules and regulations set
forth in § 62-14 et seq. of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown.
[Added 10-16-2012 by Ord. No. 4-2012]
C. Uses permitted only by special exception issued by the Zoning Hearing
Board:
(1) Accessory parking not located on the same lot with the principal
use, pursuant to § 225-29A. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
§ 225-17 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-17
220:790
(2) Churches or similar places of worship.
(3) High-rise apartment houses, pursuant to § 225-25.
(4) Commercial parking lots, garages or accessory parking as provided
for in § 225-29A. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(5) The requirements of Subsections D(1), E(1), F and G shall apply to
the uses listed in Subsection C(1), (2) and (4). The requirements of
Subsections D(3), E(2), F and G shall apply to the use listed in
Subsection C(3). [Added 2-9-1993 by Ord. No. 2-1993]
D. Minimum lot area.
(1) Commercial.
(a) Area: 5,000 square feet.
(b) Area per use: 2,000 square feet. [Amended 7-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 14-2006]
(2) Commercial and residential building in combination.
(a) Area, commercial: 5,000 square feet.
(b) Area, per commercial use: 2,000 square feet. [Amended
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(c) Area, residential, per dwelling unit in addition to minimum
commercial area: 1,000 square feet. [Amended 7-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 14-2006]
(3) Residential building area per dwelling unit.
(a) Single-family detached: 4,000 square feet.
(b) Single-family semidetached: 4,000 square feet.
(c) Two-family attached or detached: 3,000 square feet.
(d) Single-family attached: 2,000 square feet.
(e) Boardinghouse: 5,000 square feet.
(f) Rooming house: 5,000 square feet, per rooming unit.
[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(g) Low-rise apartment house, pursuant to § 225-25. [Amended
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(h) High-rise apartment house, pursuant to § 225-25. [Amended
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(i) Multifamily: 1,500 square feet. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 14-2006]
§ 225-17 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-17
220:791
(4) Noncommercial/nonresidential building.
(a) Area: 5,000 square feet.
(5) Parking lots as permitted by special exception. [Added 7-20-2006
by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(a) Area: 5,000 square feet.
E. Minimum lot width.
(1) Commercial building and/or use: 40 feet. [Amended 7-20-2006
by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(2) Commercial and residential building in combination: 40 feet.
[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(3) Single-family detached: 30 feet.
(4) Single-family semidetached: 30 feet per dwelling unit. [Amended
3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
(5) Two-family attached or detached: 20 feet per dwelling unit.
[Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
(6) Single-family attached: 20 feet.
(7) Boardinghouse: 50 feet.
(8) Rooming house: 50 feet.
(9) Low-rise apartment house: 50 feet.
(10) High-rise apartment house: 50 feet.
(11) Noncommercial/nonresidential buildings: 50 feet. [Amended
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(12) Parking lots as permitted by special exception. [Added 7-20-2006
by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(a) Width: 50 feet.
F. Minimum yard dimensions.
(1) Front yard: six feet for corner lots, except as otherwise required by
§ 225-22A; none required for other lots.
(2) Side and rear yard: none required; however, no building other than
an accessory building shall extend nearer to any residential district
boundary in the rear than the rear yard required in that residential
district nor nearer the side of the building than the side yard
required in that residential district. For commercial buildings,
commercial and residential buildings in combination and
nonresidential, noncommercial buildings, all lots abutting or facing
§ 225-17 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-17
220:792
§ 225-18. C-1 - Business Commercial.
residential districts shall be provided with a landscaped area at
least five feet in width, or a divider, along the perimeter of the lot
abutting or facing the residential district.
(3) Parking lots shall comply with § 225-29A. [Added 7-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 14-2006]
G. Maximum lot coverage, building and structure height and paved area
and minimum open space. [Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No.
1-1997]
(1) Maximum lot coverage: 45%.
(2) Maximum building height: 50 feet; four stories.
(3) Maximum paved area or hard parking surface: 50%.
(4) Minimum open space: 5%.
(5) The maximum permitted height of any structure, not a building, in
this district shall be a maximum height above grade of the
maximum permitted building height for this district plus 15 feet.
Where the structure is erected upon or atop or is affixed to any
building, then the maximum height of any such structure erected
upon, atop or affixed to any building shall not exceed 15 feet above
the highest point of the main roof of the existing building; provided,
however, that in no event shall the maximum height of both the
building and the structure erected upon, atop or affixed thereto
exceed the maximum permitted building height for this district plus
15 feet.
(6) Parking lots as permitted by special exception: [Added 7-20-2006
by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(a) Maximum paved area: 90%.
(b) Minimum open space: 10%.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Retail sales and retail service establishments, except gasoline
service stations and any other gasoline sales operations which are
conducted separately or as a portion of a convenience store or
other retail sales and service establishment, drive-in
establishments and motor vehicle, recreation vehicle, farm
machinery or industrial machinery sales or service establishments.
[Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
(2) Business, professional or government offices and office buildings.
(3) Banks and savings and loan associations.
§ 225-17 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-18
220:793
(4) Hotels and motels.
(5) Restaurants, except drive-in establishments.
(6) Theaters or motion-picture theaters, except drive-ins.
(7) Boardinghouses.
(8) Dwelling units in combination with commercial use.
(9) Single-family dwellings, detached building.
(10) Single-family dwellings, semidetached building.
(11) Two-family dwellings, attached or detached building.
(12) Single-family dwellings, attached building.
(13) Day-care facility and nursery school, pursuant to § 225-33.1.
[Added 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996; amended 7-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 14-2006]
(14) Forestry. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(15) Multifamily buildings. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
B. Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted
principal use:
(1) Private garages or private parking spaces and parking lots.
(2) Signs.
(3) Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
(4) Essential services.
(5) No-impact home-based business. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
C. Uses permitted only by special exception issued by the Zoning Hearing
Board:
(1) Accessory parking not located on the same lot with the principal
use.
(2) Churches or similar places of worship.
(3) Low-rise apartment houses, pursuant to § 225-25. [Amended
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(4) Rooming houses, provided that any rooming house use may only be
permitted by special exception if the rooming house use will be
located in a detached building. [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
2-1998]
§ 225-18 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-18
220:794
(5) Commercial parking lots or garages.
(6) The requirements of Subsection D(1), E(1), F and G shall apply to
the uses listed in Subsections C(1), (2), (4) and (5). The
requirements of Subsections D(3), E(2), F and G shall apply to the
use listed in Subsection C(3). [Added 2-9-1993 by Ord. No.
2-1993]
D. Minimum lot area.
(1) Commercial.
(a) Area: 5,000 square feet.
(b) Area per use: 2,000 square feet. [Amended 7-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 14-2006]
(2) Commercial and residential building in combination.
(a) Area, commercial: 5,000 square feet.
(b) Area, per commercial use: 2,000 square feet. [Amended
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(c) Area, residential, per dwelling unit in addition to minimum
commercial area: 1,000 square feet. [Amended 7-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 14-2006]
(3) Residential building area per dwelling unit.
(a) Single-family detached: 4,000 square feet.
(b) Single-family semidetached: 4,000 square feet.
(c) Two-family attached or detached: 3,000 square feet.
(d) Single-family attached: 2,000 square feet.
(e) Boardinghouse: 5,000 square feet.
(f) Multifamily: 2,000 square feet. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 14-2006]
(g) Rooming house: 5,000 square feet per rooming unit. [Added
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(4) Noncommercial/nonresidential building, and parking lots.
[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(a) Area: 5,000 square feet.
(5) Parking lots as permitted by special exception: [Added 7-20-2006
by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(a) Area: 5,000 square feet.
§ 225-18 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-18
220:795
(b) Parking lots shall comply with § 225-29A.
(6) Parking lots as permitted by special exception: [Added 7-20-2006
by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(a) Maximum paved area: 90%.
(b) Minimum open space: 10%.
E. Minimum lot width.
(1) Commercial building and/or use: 40 feet. [Amended 7-20-2006
by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(2) Commercial and residential building in combination: 40 feet.
[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(3) Single-family detached: 30 feet.
(4) Single-family semidetached: 30 feet per dwelling unit. [Amended
3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
(5) Two-family attached or detached: 20 feet per dwelling unit.
[Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
(6) Single-family attached: 20 feet.
(7) Boardinghouse: 50 feet.
(8) Rooming house: 50 feet. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
(9) Noncommercial/nonresidential buildings: 50 feet. [Added
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(10) Multifamily: 50 feet. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
F. Minimum yard dimensions.
(1) Front yard: six feet for corner lots, except as otherwise required by
§ 225-22A; none required for other lots.
(2) Side and rear yard: none required; however, no building other than
an accessory building shall extend nearer to any residential district
boundary in the rear than the rear yard required in that residential
district nor nearer the side of the building than the side yard
required in that residential district. For commercial buildings,
commercial and residential buildings in combination and
nonresidential, noncommercial buildings, all lots abutting or facing
residential districts shall be provided with a landscaped area at
least five feet in width, or a divider, along the perimeter of the lot
abutting or facing the residential district.
§ 225-18 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-18
220:796
§ 225-19. C-2 - Commercial/Residential.
G. Maximum lot coverage, building and structure height and paved area
and minimum open space. [Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No.
1-1997]
(1) Maximum lot coverage: 45%.
(2) Maximum building height: 50 feet; four stories.
(3) Maximum paved area or hard parking surface: 50%.
(4) Minimum open space: 5%.
(5) The maximum permitted height of any structure, not a building, in
this district shall be a maximum height above grade of the
maximum permitted building height for this district plus 15 feet.
Where the structure is erected upon or atop or is affixed to any
building, then the maximum height of any such structure erected
upon, atop or affixed to any building shall not exceed 15 feet above
the highest point of the main roof of the existing building; provided,
however, that in no event shall the maximum height of both the
building and the structure erected upon, atop or affixed thereto
exceed the maximum permitted building height for this district plus
15 feet.
(6) Parking lots shall comply with § 225-29A. [Added 7-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 14-2006]
(7) Parking lot as permitted by special exception. [Added 7-20-2006
by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(a) Width: 50 feet.
(8) Maximum paved area parking lot principal use: 90%. [Added
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(9) Minimum open space parking lot principal use: 10%. [Added
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
A. Permitted uses:
(1) (Reserved)226
(2) Fairgrounds.
(3) (Reserved)227
226. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(1), which provided for low-rise apartment houses and
townhouses as permitted uses, was repealed 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006.
227. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(3), which provided for churches or similar places of
worship as permitted uses, added 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996, was repealed 7-20-2006
by Ord. No. 14-2006.
§ 225-18 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-19
220:797
(4) Retail service establishments. [Added 3-26-1996 by Ord. No.
3-1996]
(5) Single-family dwellings, detached buildings. [Added 3-26-1996
by Ord. No. 3-1996]
(6) Single-family dwellings, semidetached buildings. [Added
3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
(7) Business, professional or government offices. [Added 7-20-2006
by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(8) Day-care facilities and nursery schools as provided for in
§ 225-33.1. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(9) Dwelling units in combination with uses permitted by § 225-19A(4),
(7) and (8). [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(10) Forestry. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
B. Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted
principal use:
(1) Private garages or private parking spaces and off-street parking
lots.
(2) Signs.
(3) Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
(4) Essential services.
(5) No-impact home-based business. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
C. Uses permitted only by special exception issued by the Zoning Hearing
Board:
(1) Churches or similar places of worship.
(2) Accessory parking lots not located on the same lot as a principal
use. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(3) Academic clinical research center in accordance with the use
restrictions described in § 225-33.4A. [Added 10-16-2018 by
Ord. No. 5-2018]
(4) Dispensary facility in accordance with the use restrictions
described in § 225-33.4C. [Added 10-16-2018 by Ord. No.
5-2018]
D. Minimum lot size.
(1) Fairgrounds.
§ 225-19 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-19
220:798
(a) Area: five acres
(b) Width: 200 feet.
(2) Churches or similar places of worship. [Added 2-9-1993 by Ord.
No. 2-1993]
(a) Area: 40,000 square feet.
(b) Width: 150 feet.
(3) The requirements of Subsections E and F shall apply to the use
listed in Subsection C(1). [Added 2-9-1993 by Ord. No. 2-1993]
(4) Retail service establishments, business, professional or
government offices. [Added 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996;
amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(a) Area: 5,000 square feet.
(b) Area per use: 1,000 square feet.
(c) Width: 50 feet.
(5) Single-family dwellings, detached building. [Added 3-26-1996 by
Ord. No. 3-1996]
(a) Area: 6,250 square feet.
(b) Width: 50 feet.
(6) Single-family dwellings, semidetached building, per dwelling unit.
[Added 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
(a) Area: 3,750 square feet.
(b) Width: 30 feet.
E. Minimum yard dimensions. [Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No.
3-1996]
(1) Low-rise apartment houses and townhouses, fairgrounds, churches
and retail service establishments.
(a) Front yard: 30 feet.
(b) Each side yard: 30 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(2) Single-family dwellings, detached and semidetached buildings.
(a) Front yard: 25 feet.
(b) Each side yard: 10 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 30 feet.
§ 225-19 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-19
220:799
§ 225-20. C-3 - Highway Commercial.
F. Maximum lot coverage, building and structure height and paved area
and minimum open space. [Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996;
1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 1-1997]
(1) Maximum lot coverage: 45%.
(2) Maximum building height: 50 feet; four stories.
(3) Maximum paved area or hard parking surface: 50%.
(4) Minimum open space: 5%; 25% where the only use on the lot is in
accordance with § 225-19C(2). [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
(5) The maximum permitted height of any structure, not a building, in
this district shall be a maximum height above grade of the
maximum permitted building height for this district plus 15 feet.
Where the structure is erected upon or atop or is affixed to any
building, then the maximum height of any such structure erected
upon, atop or affixed to any building shall not exceed 15 feet above
the highest point of the main roof of the existing building; provided,
however, that in no event shall the maximum height of both the
building and the structure erected upon, atop or affixed thereto
exceed the maximum permitted building height for this district plus
15 feet.
(6) Parking lots principal use. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
(a) Maximum paved area: 90%.
(b) Minimum open space: 10%.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Retail sales and retail service establishments. [Amended
3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
(2) Business, professional or government offices and office buildings.
(3) Banks and savings and loan associations.
(4) Bowling alleys.
(5) Restaurants.
(6) Automobile or mobile home sales with accessory service facilities.
(7) Motels and hotels.
(8) Shopping centers, pursuant to § 225-26. [Amended 7-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 14-2006]
§ 225-19 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-20
220:800
(9) Day-care facility and nursery school, pursuant to § 225-33.1.
[Added 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996; amended 7-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 14-2006]
(10) Forestry. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
B. Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted
principal use:
(1) Off-street parking spaces, or lots. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 14-2006]
(2) Signs.
(3) Storage within completely enclosed buildings.
(4) Accessory uses, buildings and structures.
(5) Essential services.
C. Uses permitted only by special exception issued by the Zoning Hearing
Board:
(1) Gasoline service stations and any other gasoline sales operations
which are conducted separately or as a portion of a convenience
store or other retail sales and service establishments. [Amended
3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
(2) Car washes.
(3) Wholesale businesses and warehouses for wholesale sales.
(4) Accessory uses, buildings or structures not located on the same lot
with the permitted principal use.
(5) Multifamily dwellings and townhouses.
(6) Accessory parking lot not located on same lot as principal use.
[Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(7) Academic clinical research center in accordance with the use
restrictions described in § 225-33.4A. [Added 10-16-2018 by
Ord. No. 5-2018]
(8) Dispensary facility in accordance with the use restrictions
described in § 225-33.4C. [Added 10-16-2018 by Ord. No.
5-2018]
D. Minimum lot size.
(1) Commercial building area.
(a) Per construction site: 20,000 square feet.
(b) Per unit of use: 10,000 square feet.
§ 225-20 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-20
220:801
§ 225-21. I-Industrial. [Amended 2-9-1993 by Ord. No. 2-1993;
3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996; 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 1-1997;
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(2) Width: 100 feet.
E. Minimum yard dimensions.
(1) Front yard: 35 feet.
(2) Each side yard: 25 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 25 feet.
(4) Distance between buildings: 30 feet.
F. All lots abutting or facing residential districts shall be provided with a
landscaped area at least five feet in width, or a divider, along the
perimeter of the lot abutting or facing the residential district.
G. Maximum lot coverage, building and structure height and paved area
and minimum open space. [Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No.
1-1997]
(1) Maximum lot coverage: 45%.
(2) Maximum building height: 50 feet; four stories.
(3) Maximum paved area or hard parking surface: 45%.
(4) Minimum open space: 10%.
(5) The maximum permitted height of any structure, not a building, in
this district shall be a maximum height above grade of the
maximum permitted building height for this district plus 15 feet.
Where the structure is erected upon or atop or is affixed to any
building, then the maximum height of any such structure erected
upon, atop or affixed to any building shall not exceed 15 feet above
the highest point of the main roof of the existing building; provided,
however, that in no event shall the maximum height of both the
building and the structure erected upon, atop or affixed thereto
exceed the maximum permitted building height for this district plus
15 feet.
(6) Parking lot, principal use: [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
(a) Maximum paved area: 90%.
(b) Minimum open space: 10%.
A. Industrial Zoning Districts.
(1) The Industrial Zoning District shall consist of the following three
types of districts:
§ 225-20 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-21
220:802
(a) LI - Light Industrial District.
(b) MI - Medium Industrial District.
(c) HI - Heavy Industrial District.
(2) Each industrial use shall be located in an appropriate industrial
zone based upon the utilization limits set forth in this § 225-21.
(3) An industrial use which exceeds a single limit set forth in § 225-21B
for an industrial district must be located in the next higher
industrial district, except that in an LI District an industrial use
may exceed two limits for the LI District listed in § 225-21B, but
shall not exceed any limits set forth in the MI District.
(4) An industrial use that exceeds any limit set forth in § 225-21B for
the MI District or has any condition meeting the requirements of
the HI District set forth in § 225-21B, shall only be permitted in the
HI District.
B. Industrial utilization regulations:
(1) Limitations.
Condition Light (LI) Medium (MI) Heavy (HI)
Employees Fewer than
100
100 to 250 More than
250
Noise level (dba)
(a) 1/2 hour after
sunrise to 1/2 hour
prior to sunset,
Sundays and
holidays
60 65 70
(b) Other than
noted in
Subsection (a)
above
50 60 70
Water usage 3,000 gpd 7,500 gpd 15,000 gpm
Sewage discharge 2,000 gpd 5,000 gpd 10,000 gpm
Sewage treatment Municipal Municipal/
pretreatment
Pretreatment
Traffic volume
(trips)
250(1) 500 1,000
Air filtration Not required Nontoxic dust
control
Required
3 or more axle
trucks (trips per
day)
10 20(2) More than 20
§ 225-21 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-21
220:803
Condition Light (LI) Medium (MI) Heavy (HI)
Building height
(stories or feet)
2 or 35 4 or 50 4 or 50
Lot size (acres) 2 5 10
Lot width (feet) 150 200 250
Lot coverage 35% 40% 45%
Paved area 35% 40% 45%
Yards
Front (feet) 40 40 30
Side (feet) 30 20 20
Rear (feet) 40 20 20
Open space 30% 20% 10%
Notes:
(1) Three or more axle trucks not included, see below.
(2) Truck terminals excluded.
(2) All industrial uses abutting other zoning districts shall have a
minimum yard of 40 feet abutting such zone and shall provide a
minimum landscape area of five feet.
C. Permitted uses.
(1) Industrial uses in conformity with the regulations of this § 225-21
and which shall be carried on in a completely enclosed building and
which include the storage, manufacture, assembly, fabrication,
packing, testing or other handling of products, excepting related
and customary outdoor storage of raw materials and accessory
loading facilities.
(2) Commercial uses in conformity with the regulations of this § 225-21
and which:
(a) Shall be carried on in a completely enclosed building, except
for accessory loading facilities, including wholesale
businesses, storage and warehousing establishments, truck
and freight terminals, delivery and distribution centers,
mechanical and vehicle equipment repair establishments and
dry-cleaning and dyeing plants; or
(b) The following nonenclosed uses: building materials, new and
used machinery storage and sales, vehicle and trailer sales and
storage, farm equipment and construction machinery
establishments.
(3) Business offices in conformity with the regulations of this § 225-21.
§ 225-21 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-21
220:804
(4) Public structures owned or operated by any federal, state, county
government agency or the Borough or municipal authority
authorized by the Borough.
D. Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot as a permitted use.
(1) Off-street parking facilities.
(2) Signs.
(3) Restaurants, cafeterias, or recreational facilities for employees of
permitted use; not to be open to the general public.
(4) Day-care facilities and/or nursery school operated in conjunction
with and for the sole use by § 225-21C(1), (2) or (3) of this chapter.
(5) Accessory uses, structures or buildings.
(6) Essential services.
E. Uses permitted only by special exception.
(1) Mobile home parks pursuant to § 225-32 of this chapter.
(2) Accessory uses not located on the same lot as the principal use.
(3) Grower/processor facility in accordance with the use restrictions
described in § 225-33.4B. [Added 10-16-2018 by Ord. No.
5-2018]
F. Additional regulations for permitted uses.
(1) Odor. No emission of unpleasant gases or other odorous matter
shall be permitted in such quantities as to be offensive outside the
lot lines of the lot on which such gases or odors originate.
(2) Toxic gases. The emission of noxious, toxic or corrosive gases or
fumes injurious to persons, property or vegetation beyond the lot
lines occupied by the use is prohibited.
(3) Glare and heat. Glare and heat generated from any process shall
not produce glare visible, or objectionable heat, beyond the lot
lines of the lot on which the operation is located. Direct glare from
incandescent exposed lights shall not be visible from adjoining
streets or properties.
(4) Liquid wastes or sewage. No discharge is permitted into a
reservoir, sewage or storm disposal system, stream, open body of
water or into the ground of any materials in such a way or of such
nature or temperature as could contaminate any water supply or
damage or be detrimental to any sewage system or any sewage
treatment plant or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous
objectionable elements unless treated so that thin soluble
substances, such as oils, grease, acids, alkalines and other
§ 225-21 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-21
220:805
chemicals, are in accordance with the standards as approved by
Water Pollution Control Boards, appropriate agencies of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or the United States of
America, other Borough regulations or other agencies having
jurisdiction.
(5) Vibration. Vibration perceptible beyond the lot lines of the lot on or
in which said vibrations originate shall not be permitted.
(6) Noise. No noise shall be audible beyond the lot lines of the lot on
which said noise originates exceeding the noise levels provided for
in § 225-21B(1) of this chapter. Objectionable noises due to
intermittence, heat, frequency or shrillness shall be muffled.
(7) Smoke, soot or dust. The emission of gray smoke at a density
greater than No. 1 on a Ringelmann Chart, published by the United
States Bureau of Mines, shall not be permitted, except that gray
smoke of a shade not darker than No. 2 may be emitted for not
more than four minutes in any thirty-minute period.
(8) Electric or electronic interference. Electric or electronic devices
shall be shielded in such a manner as not to interfere with radio or
television reception or transmissions of any kind.
§ 225-21 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-21
220:806
ARTICLE V
Supplementary Regulations
§ 225-22. Additional regulations.
A. Visibility at intersections in all districts. On a corner lot, nothing shall
be erected (except street signs, utility poles, streetlights, traffic lights
or traffic signs), placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as
to impede vision between a height of 2 1/2 and 10 feet above the centerline
grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street
center line of each such intersecting street and a line joining the street
center line at a distance of 75 feet from the point of intersection, except
that in the case of a service street said line shall be drawn at a distance
of 50 feet along the service street from the point of intersection.
[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
B. Fences, walls and hedges. Except as otherwise required by other
provisions of this chapter, fences, walls, steps, outdoor pole lights and
hedges may be permitted in any required yard; provided, however, that:
(1) Along the sides or front edge of any required front yard, no fence,
freestanding wall, other than retaining walls, or hedge shall be
over four feet in height, except that in an industrial district, where
an industrial use is located on a lot, no fence or freestanding wall
shall exceed six feet in height.
(2) No portion of any fence, freestanding wall, other than retaining
walls, or hedge along the sides of side yards and the sides and rear
of a rear yard shall exceed six feet in height.
(3) The applicable provisions of the Borough's Sidewalk Ordinance No.
14-1972, as amended,228 shall be complied with.
(4) The following types of fences and materials for fences are
specifically prohibited: barbed wire, canvas, cloth, fences having
sharp points and fences that are electrically charged; provided,
however, that barbed wire may be installed on top of any fence or
freestanding wall not less than six feet in height in any commercial
or industrial district, so long as the total height shall not exceed
seven feet.
(5) No portion of any fence, freestanding wall, retaining wall or hedge
shall be placed or permitted to grow within two feet of the right-ofway
line of any street or utility right-of-way within five feet of the
right-of-way line of any service street. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 14-2006]
C. Erection of more than one principal building or structure on a lot. In
any district, more than one building or structure housing a permitted or
permissible principal use may be erected on a single lot, provided that
228. Editor's Note: See Ch. 192, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 225-22 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-22
220:807
yard and other requirements of this chapter shall be met for each
building or structure as though it were on an individual lot. This
subsection shall not apply to multifamily dwellings and townhouses,
which are governed by § 225-25.
D. Buildings to have access. Every building hereafter erected or moved
shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street or a private street approved
by the governing body, and all buildings shall be so located on lots as to
provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and
required off-street parking.
E. Corner lot restriction. Any yard which abuts a street shall meet the
applicable front yard requirements, whether or not the yard is
otherwise considered to be the front yard; provided, however, that,
except in the case of a corner lot located in a Business Commercial
Central (C-C) District and Business Commercial (C-1) District,
whenever the corner lot abuts a service street, then a front yard having
a minimum of 20 feet in depth will be permitted. At the time any
structure or building is erected on a corner lot, the owner thereof shall
designate to the Zoning Officer which of the remaining yards shall be
designated the side and rear yard.
F. Front yard exception. Whenever an unimproved or approved lot is
situated between two improved lots with a front yard setback less than
those required for the zoning district in which the lot is located, the
front yard required may be reduced to a depth equal to the average of
the two adjacent lots. For the purpose of this subsection, an improved
lot shall be one on which a permitted principal building is erected.
[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
G. Lots in two districts. Whenever a district boundary line divides a lot in
single or joint ownership of record at the time such line is established,
the regulations for the less restricted portion of such lot shall extend
not more than 30 feet into the more restricted portion, provided that
the lot has frontage on a street in the less restricted district.
H. Lot area and lot width for lots not served with public water and/or
sanitary sewers. Whenever a lot is not served by a public water supply
and/or sanitary sewerage system and Chapter 195, Subdivision and
Land Development, or other state statute or local ordinance requires a
higher standard for lot area or lot width than this chapter, the more
restrictive regulations of such other statute or ordinance shall apply.
I. Projections into yards. The following projections shall be permitted to
extend into required yards and shall not be considered in the
determination of yard size or lot coverage:
(1) Terraces, patios, decks or open porches, provided that such
terraces, patios, decks or open porches are not roofed or otherwise
enclosed and are not closer than three feet to any adjacent lot line
§ 225-22 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-22
220:808
§ 225-22.1. Exceptions to permit fee requirements. [Added
3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
or as required by the PA UCC. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
(2) Projecting or freestanding features, including but not limited to bay
windows, cornices, eaves, fireplaces, chimneys, window sills, air
conditioners, transformers, antennas or other similar features,
provided that no single feature exceeds 120 square feet in external
area. No such projecting nor freestanding feature shall be placed
or located within three feet of an adjacent lot line or as required by
the PA UCC. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(3) Uncovered stairs and landings, provided such stairs or landings do
not exceed three feet, six inches in height nor closer than three feet
to any adjacent lot line or as required by the PA UCC. [Amended
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(4) Open balconies or fire escapes, provided that such balconies are
not supported on the ground and provided that such balconies or
fire escapes do not project more than five feet into any yard nor
closer than three feet to any adjacent lot line.
J. Divider/fence/landscaping. A plan specifying type, size and location of
existing and placement of proposed dividers, fences, trees, shrubs and/
or grass areas shall be submitted with the application for land
development, excepting subdivisions for the division of land only, not
involving any improvements thereon.
K. No building or structure of any kind shall be constructed within five feet
of any utility easement or other right-of-way, except where such other
right-of-way or utility easement provides direct services to said building
or structure. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
L. More than one principal use shall not be permitted on a single lot unless
the provisions of this chapter applicable to the zoning district in which a
lot is located permit the existence of more than one principal use on
such lot. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
A. The permit fees required pursuant to § 225-45 of this chapter shall not
be required in the following instances:
(1) Any structure not constituting a building or swimming pool that is
intended for recreational purposes by children under the age of 16
years, so long as such structure does not exceed a length of 20 feet,
a width of 10 feet or a height of 12 feet and so long as such
structure is located at least five feet from any lot line or other
structure.
(2) Any walkway, other than a sidewalk, which is less than four feet in
width.
§ 225-22 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-22.1
220:809
§ 225-23. Home occupation regulations.
(3) Any fences (including but not limited to garden fences) and similar
enclosures less than three feet in height and located at least five
feet from any lot line.
(4) Any ground level unroofed patio less than 120 square feet in area
and the closest point of the patio to any lot line being at least five
feet from such lot line.
(5) Any landscape pond less than 120 square feet in area and less than
two feet in depth and located at least five feet from any lot line, so
long as such landscape pond is installed in compliance with all
applicable provisions and regulations of Chapter 107, Electrical
Standards, of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown.
(6) Any temporary above-ground swimming pool less than 12 feet in
diameter and two feet in depth and located at least five feet from
any lot line, so long as such temporary above-ground swimming
pool is installed in compliance with all applicable provisions and
regulations of Chapter 107, Electrical Standards, of the Code of the
Borough of Kutztown.
(7) Any temporary structure intended for seasonal use only and
intended to be removed within 30 days after the erection or
installation of any such structure and located at least five feet from
any lot line.
(8) Any miscellaneous structure such as a bird feeder, bird bath, bird
house, pet enclosure and similar structure, containing not more
than 120 square feet in area and located at least five feet from any
lot line.
(9) As concerns any structure to which any of the above exceptions
would be applicable, which structure is located on a lot containing
a width of 20 feet or less, the above required distance from the lot
line shall be reduced from at least five feet to at least three feet.
A. Standards.
(1) The use of the dwelling or accessory building or structure shall not
change the character thereof or have any exterior evidence of such
use other than a small nameplate as provided for in § 225-28G.
(2) Only a resident of the dwelling unit may practice a home
occupation, and not more than two persons, whether paid or or
unpaid, who may/may not be employed by the practitioner, may be
of assistance that would be required by the practitioner or normally
associated with the home occupation. [Amended 2-9-1993 by
Ord. No. 2-1993]
§ 225-22.1 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-23
220:810
§ 225-24. Accessory uses, buildings or structures.
(3) Two off-street parking spaces, in addition to those required for the
dwelling units, shall be required for any such home occupation.
(4) Home occupations shall be limited to and shall not occupy more
than 25% of the floor area of the first or grade floor of the dwelling
unit and shall not occupy more than 50% of the basement or cellar
or, in the alternative, 50% of the floor area of any accessory
building or structure.
(5) No storage or display of products or materials in areas outside of
buildings shall be permitted.
(6) Not more than one home occupation may be practiced on any one
lot. Home occupations shall be subject to the following limitations:
(a) No emission of unpleasant gases or other odorous matter shall
be permitted.
(b) No emission of noxious, toxic or corrosive gases or fumes
injurious to persons, property or vegetation shall be permitted.
(c) No glare or heat from any home occupation shall be permitted.
(d) No discharge is permitted into a reservoir, sewage or storm
disposal system, stream, open body of water or into the ground
of any materials in such a way or of such nature or temperature
as could contaminate any water supply or damage or be
detrimental to any sewage system or any sewage treatment
plant or otherwise could cause the emission of dangerous
objectionable elements.
(e) No vibration perceptible beyond the dwelling unit or building
in which the home occupation is conducted, whichever shall be
the smaller, shall be permitted.
(f) No noise shall be audible beyond the dwelling unit or building
in which the home occupation is conducted, whichever shall be
the smaller, exceeding the average intensity of street traffic at
the front lot line. Objectionable noises due to intermittence,
heat, frequency or shrillness shall be muffled.
(g) No emission of any smoke shall be permitted.
(h) Electric or electronic devices shall be shielded in such a
manner as not to interfere with radio or television reception or
transmission of any kind.
A. General provisions. [Amended 2-9-1993 by Ord. No. 2-1993]
(1) All accessory buildings and structures shall be securely anchored
to the ground, except as otherwise required by the PA UCC. No
§ 225-23 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-24
220:811
accessory building or structure, and no addition to any accessory
building or structure, shall be erected or placed in any required
front or side yard. No detached accessory building or structure
shall be erected or placed closer than five feet to any other building
or structure located on the same lot except if a greater distance
is required by the PA UCC. Where no side yard is required in
accordance with this chapter, accessory uses, buildings and
structures shall be constructed in accordance with the fire
protection requirements of Chapter 75 of the Kutztown Code.
[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(2) Accessory buildings or structures erected or placed within the rear
yard required for the principal building or structure shall meet the
following requirements:
(a) Accessory buildings or structures not exceeding 150 square
feet in area and 12 feet in height shall not be erected or placed
within five feet of the side or rear lot line, except that in those
districts where no side yard is required, there shall be no
minimum setback from the side lot line, nor shall any such
accessory buildings or structures be erected or placed within
five feet of the rear lot line.
(b) Accessory buildings or structures in excess of 150 square feet
and/or 12 feet in height (but in no event to exceed 768 square
feet in area and 16 feet in height) may be erected or placed at a
minimum distance of 10 feet from the side or rear lot line.
[Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
(c) Accessory buildings or structures exceeding 768 square feet in
area or 16 feet in height may be erected or placed at such a
minimum distance from the side or rear lot line as is provided
for in the particular district for minimum side yards; provided,
however, that no such accessory buildings or structures shall
be erected or placed within five feet of the rear lot line.
[Amended 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995; 7-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 14-2006]
(d) Notwithstanding the above, in the case where the side or rear
lot line abuts a service street, any accessory building or
structure, regardless of size but not exceeding 16 feet in
height, may be erected or placed within five feet of the service
street right-of-way; provided, however, that no such building or
structure shall be placed or erected closer to the side lot line
than as permitted by Subsection A(2)(a), (b) or (c) above,
whichever may be applicable.
(e) Notwithstanding the above, where lots are occupied by
semidetached buildings or attached buildings, no side yard
shall be required for an accessory building or structure along
§ 225-24 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-24
220:812
§ 225-25. Low-rise apartments, high-rise apartments and
townhouse developments.
the lot line or lines where the semidetached or attached
buildings are joined.
(f) Notwithstanding the above, all uses, buildings and/or
structures shall be erected or placed a minimum distance of
five feet from any and all utility easements and/or other rightsof-
way except those serving such uses, buildings or structures.
[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
B. Private noncommercial swimming pools, which are designed to contain
a water depth of 24 inches or more, must be located in the rear or side
yard area only. Such a pool shall be not less than 15 feet from side and
rear lot lines nor occupy more than 25% of the area of the yard in which
the pool is located.
C. No nonresidential uses shall be permitted in any residential district
except no-impact home-based businesses and those permitted by home
occupation regulations, § 225-23 of this chapter. [Amended 7-20-2006
by Ord. No. 14-2006]
D. No agriculture use or individual gardens for home consumption shall
occupy any part of the minimum front yard or more than 1/2 of the
minimum side or rear yard required in the applicable district.
E. No materials shall be stored within five feet of any lot line unless such
materials are stored in an enclosed structure that complies with the
provisions of this chapter.
F. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit other accessory uses,
buildings or structures so long as they are clearly accessory to the
principal permitted use, building or structure on the land and do not
create a threat to the public health, safety and/or welfare of the
community.
A. Permitted uses. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(1) A development or project of low-rise apartments, high-rise
apartments or townhouse developments and accessory buildings
shall consist solely of residential dwelling units and recreational
and parking facilities. However coin-operated washing, drying and
vending machines shall be permitted, provided that these are
located within a building and shall be available only for the use of
the residents.
(2) One office per project for the purpose of administering and renting
the dwelling units in a development and one sample apartment or
townhouse for display purposes shall be permitted for each type to
be constructed.
§ 225-24 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-25
220:813
B. Area and other regulations.
Requirement
High-Rise
Apartment
House Townhouse
Low-Rise
Apartment
House
(1) Minimum gross lot
area area (acres)
5 2 2
(2) Minimum lot width
at building line
(feet)
200 20 per house 200
(3) Maximum building
coverage of gross
land area
12% in the
case of a
building or
buildings 6
stories or less.
For each
additional
story in height
above 6
stories the lot
coverage shall
be reduced
2%.
35% 12%
(4) Minimum rear yard
(feet)
200 30 75
(5) Minimum side yard
(feet)
50 (applicable
to end houses)
30 50
(6) Minimum front yard
(feet)
70, provided
that a building
in excess of 3
stories in
height shall
have an
additional 10
feet of setback
for each
additional
1-story height
30 35
(7) Distance between
buildings (or groups
of attached
buildings in the
case of townhouses)
The horizontal
distance
between
buildings shall
not be less
than the
height of the
highest
building.
See
§ 225-25C
See
§ 225-25C
§ 225-25 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-25
220:814
Requirement
High-Rise
Apartment
House Townhouse
Low-Rise
Apartment
House
(8) Parking lot setback
from street right-ofway
and/or lot lines
when no street
right-of-way exists
20 feet 10 feet 15 feet
(9) Maximum dwelling
units per gross acre
20 8 10
(10) Usable open space
(not including
parking lots)
devoted to
recreational use
0.25 square
feet for every
1 square foot
of gross floor
area
0 0.25 square
feet for every
1 square foot
of gross floor
area
(11) Maximum height
[Amended
7-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 14-2006]
7 stories 75
feet
3 stories 35
feet
3 stories 35
feet
(12) Maximum height of
any structure, other
than a building, not
erected upon, atop
or affixed to any
building [Added
1-14-1997 by Ord.
No. 1-1997]
135 feet 50 feet 50 feet
(13) Maximum height of
any structure
erected upon, atop
or affixed to any
building [Added
1-14-1997 by Ord.
No. 1-1997]
15 feet above
the highest
point of the
main roof of
the high-rise
apartment
house
15 feet
above the
highest point
of the main
roof of the
townhouse
15 feet above
the highest
point of the
main roof of
the low-rise
apartment
house
C. Additional requirements.
(1) The following additional requirements shall also apply and shall
supersede any of the requirements of § 225-25B if the same are in
conflict with any of the following requirements:
(a) Townhouses shall consist of a maximum of six attached
dwelling units. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(b) There shall be at least two different architectural treatments of
townhouses for each group, varying the building materials and
exterior elevation. In addition, no more than three continuous
§ 225-25 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-25
220:815
townhouses shall have the same front setback, and any
variation in front setbacks shall be at least four feet.
(c) The horizontal distance between buildings, except high-rise,
shall be two times the average height of the buildings for front
or rear walls facing front or rear walls, 1 1/2 times the average
height for front or rear walls facing side walls and equal to the
height of the highest building for side walls facing side walls.
(d) The minimum width of any side yard abutting a street,
driveway or parking lot should not be less than 30 feet.
(e) Access and service shall be provided in the front of each
townhouse. Parking shall be provided as hereinafter required
in § 225-25D either on the lot on which the townhouse is
erected or in the nature of a joint parking lot for a group of
townhouses with such deed restrictions that are necessary to
determine ownership and maintenance of common parking lots
and methods of assigning charges for maintaining snow
removal and repairs.
(2) Usable open space devoted to recreational use as required by
§ 225-25B(10) for low-rise and high-rise apartment houses shall be
designed for use by tenants of the development and shall be
improved and equipped by the developer in accordance with plans
submitted to and approved by the Borough Planning Commission.
(3) In the event that a development tract is designed to contain more
than one permitted residential use, i.e., high-rise, low-rise or
townhouses, the plans submitted shall indicate an area designated
for each such residential use, and all density maximums as
required under § 225-25B(9) shall apply to each area so designated,
and minimum side yards as required by § 225-25B(5) shall apply
and be measured from area designation lines.
D. Parking facilities.
(1) Number of spaces. Off-street parking, whether garage or on-lot,
shall be provided on the premises of the development at the rate of
two spaces for each multifamily dwelling unit or townhouse.
(2) Location. Required parking spaces or parking lots shall be provided
as follows:
(a) All outdoor parking spaces and access drives shall be at least
15 feet from any multifamily dwelling building on the lot and
15 feet from all exterior lot lines of the development or project.
(b) Common parking lots shall not be designed or located so as to
require cars to back into a public street in order to leave the
lot.
§ 225-25 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-25
220:816
(c) Entrance- and exitways shall have a minimum width of 12 feet
for each lane of traffic entering or leaving the parking lot but
shall at no time exceed 30 feet in width at the street line.
(d) All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide
sufficient backup area for the end stalls of the parking lot.
(e) Landscaping shall be provided to screen off-street parking lots.
A landscaping plan specifying type, size and location of
existing and proposed planting material shall be submitted
with the application.
(f) All parking lots shall be paved.
(g) Entrance- and exitways and interior accessways shall be
designed so as to prevent the blocking of vehicles entering or
leaving the parking lot.
E. Drainage. All provisions of existing Borough ordinances, including but
not limited to Chapter 195, Subdivision and Land Development,
regarding storm drainage shall be complied with.
F. Construction. All multifamily dwelling buildings and townhouses shall
be built to conform to the building regulations as established by the
State Department of Labor and Industry and all building regulations of
the Borough, including but not limited to Chapter 77, Building
Construction, and, in the case of conflict of such regulations, the more
restrictive shall govern. [Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
G. Lighting. Lighting for buildings, accessways and parking lots shall be so
arranged as not to reflect toward public streets or cause any annoyance
to building occupants or surrounding property owners or residents.
H. Storage of trash and rubbish. Exterior storage areas for trash and
rubbish shall be completely screened by fencing or landscaping five feet
in height, and all trash and rubbish shall be contained in verminproof
containers. Storage areas for trash and rubbish shall at all times be
kept in an orderly and sanitary fashion. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 14-2006]
I. In any case where the occupancy and use of any low-rise apartment,
high-rise apartment or townhouse development is not restricted by
virtue of a deed restriction, covenant or agreement restricting use of
land, or by any master deed bylaw or other document applicable to a
common interest ownership community, so as to prevent such low-rise
apartment, high-rise apartment or townhouse development from being
utilized as a "student home," as defined in § 225-251B, then the
following additional requirements shall be met: [Added 7-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 14-2006]
(1) An on-site property manager shall be present on the property at all
times.
§ 225-25 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-25
220:817
§ 225-25.1. Student home. [Added 5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 5-1995])
(2) An office or other suitable permanent facility shall be provided on
the property.
(3) An appropriate electronic security system shall be sufficient to
permit the on-site manager to monitor the security of the entire
property, both interior and exterior public areas on a real-time
basis.
A. Findings of fact regarding student home use. The Council of the
Borough of Kutztown makes the following findings of fact in support of
and as the basis for the enactment of this § 225-25.1 of the Code of the
Borough of Kutztown, Chapter 225, Zoning:
(1) Immediately adjacent to the boundary of the Borough is Kutztown
University ("university"), an institution of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania system of higher education which offers both
undergraduate and graduate degree programs.
(2) In addition to those university students who live in housing located
upon the university campus, many of the students attending the
university obtain housing accommodations located within the
Borough.
(3) Forty-seven and six-tenths percent of the total dwelling units in the
Borough are currently rental dwelling units.
(4) Approximately 87.6% of the total rental dwelling units in the
Borough are currently utilized to house individual students or
groups of students.
(5) Approximately 41.7% of the total dwelling units in the Borough are
currently utilized as rental dwelling units for the housing of student
groups or individual students.
(6) A comparison of Borough Police Department records of incidents
investigated during the period from December 21, 1990, to
December 21, 1991, with records for the period from December 21,
1993, to December 21, 1994, for the purpose of identifying those
police responses to residential addresses which are known to have
been utilized at that time for student and student group housing
revealed the following:
(a) During the 1990-1991 period, 957 incidents were recorded, of
which 557 were responses to dwelling units housing students
as described above.
(b) During the 1993-1994 period, 749 incidents were recorded, of
which 513 were responses to dwelling units housing students
as described above.
§ 225-25 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-25.1
220:818
(c) A comparison of the two time periods in question indicates that
a twenty-two-percent reduction in overall incidents occurred,
while the percentage of such incidents attributable to dwelling
units housing students increased by 10.5%.
(d) The persistent occurrence at student housing addresses of the
types of incidents studied in this analysis of police records,
particularly incidents of disturbing the peace, public
drunkenness, drinking or possession of open containers of
alcohol in restricted areas, underage drinking, and/or driving
under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances
presents a danger to public health and safety and undermines
the quality of life for the owners and occupants of the other
land uses in the vicinity of such dwelling units housing
students.
(7) The enrolled student population of the university was 4,891 in
1970, 5,154 in 1980, 7,609 in 1990 and 7,762 in 1994, while the
U.S. Census count of the population of the borough was 4,166 in
1970, 4,040 in 1980 and 4,704 in 1990.
(8) The on-campus housing capacity of the university is currently 2,850
students.
(9) Approximately 1,800 university students live in housing in the
borough.
(10) Based upon information received from the university, it is
anticipated that no new on-campus student housing facilities will
be constructed by the university for a period of at least 10 years.
(11) The borough anticipates continued pressure on its housing supply
for the purpose of providing student housing.
(12) The borough previously found it necessary to enact off-street
parking requirements for group dwelling unit uses and permit
parking requirements on borough streets in those areas having the
greatest density of dwelling units housing students and those areas
closest to the university.
(13) In many neighborhoods of the borough, any further increase in the
density of the number of dwelling units devoted to student housing
will detrimentally and irretrievably alter the character of such
neighborhoods and render such neighborhoods to be largely
student dormitory districts which are no longer residential singlefamily
dwelling unit neighborhoods.
(14) The preservation of the character and integrity of the borough's
residential areas, as well as the prevention of undue concentrations
of population and traffic congestion, require the imposition of
restrictions upon any further increase in the density of dwelling
units devoted to student housing.
§ 225-25.1 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-25.1
220:819
(15) The borough has determined that a student housing density
restriction and separation requirement of 500 feet will not prevent
the establishment of a number of additional dwelling units housing
students in the borough.
(16) The borough has determined that application of the student
housing density restriction and separation requirement to portions
of the C-C Business Commercial Central District and C-1 Business
Commercial District bordering the R-1, R-2 and R-3 residential
districts is necessary to prevent a further erosion of the residential
character of those residential districts. [Added 7-10-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001]
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the terms, phrases and
words herein referred to are defined as follows: [Amended 5-23-2005
by Ord. No. 14-2005]
STUDENT HOME — A building, including any dwelling and any
rooming house, boardinghouse, fraternity house, sorority house or
dormitory, but not including any hotel or motel, a use of which is to
provide a living arrangement for two or more natural persons who are
unrelated by blood, marriage, adoption or other decree of legal custody
and who are attending or about to attend part-time or full-time any
college, university or other recognized institution of higher learning; on
a semester, summer or other break from such studies at any college,
university or other recognized institution of higher learning; fulfilling
student teaching or internship requirements as part of a course of
study at a college, university or other recognized institution of higher
learning; or any combination of such natural persons; but excluding any
situation where all such natural persons have previously been granted
an undergraduate degree which is (or is the commonly accepted
equivalent of) a bachelor’s degree. The owner of the property in
question shall, upon the Borough Zoning Officer’s written request, have
the burden and responsibility of establishing the status of any person
as the recipient of a bachelor’s degree by means of providing authentic
copies of official records from a college, university or other recognized
institution of higher learning.
C. Separation requirement. It shall be unlawful to establish a student
home on any lot within a radius of 500 linear feet (measured by the
shortest distance between the lot on which the proposed student home
use will be located and any lot which contains an existing student home
use, including but not limited to each existing student home use located
in any district which is of a different designation than the district in
which the new student home use is proposed) of any other lot on which
is established a student home, where the proposed student home will be
located in any of the following districts: [Amended 7-10-2001 by Ord.
No. 6-2001; 5-16-2018 by Ord. No. 3-2018]
(1) R-1 Residential;
§ 225-25.1 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-25.1
220:820
§ 225-26. Shopping centers.
Shopping centers shall be in single ownership or under a guaranteed unified
management control. Such shopping centers shall consist of a harmonious
selection of uses and groupings of buildings, service and parking lots,
circulation and open space and shall be subject to the following provisions:
(2) R-2 Low-Density Residential;
(3) R-3 Medium-Density Residential;
(4) C-1 Business Commercial; and
(5) Those certain portions of the C-C Business Commercial Central
District consisting solely of those lots having their front yard
adjacent to, abutting, or directly across any street from an R-1
Residential District, an R-2 Low-Density Residential District, an R-3
Medium-Density Residential District and/or a C-1 Business
Commercial District.
D. Other requirements. In addition to fulfilling the requirements of this
section, any student home must also comply with all provisions of this
chapter which are otherwise applicable to the proposed use.
A. Permitted principal uses:
(1) Retail sales and retail service establishments. [Amended
3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
(2) Business, professional or banking offices.
(3) Restaurants, cafes or similar places serving food and/or beverages
except where a special exception is required pursuant to
Subsection C(2).
(4) Parking lots for transient auto vehicles but not for the storage of
new or used motor vehicles for sale.
B. Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted
principal use. Only the customary accessory uses associated with a
commercial district shall be permitted, provided that they are limited to
the same lot as the permitted uses.
C. Uses permitted only by special exception issued by the Zoning Hearing
Board:
(1) Gasoline service stations and any other gasoline sales operations
which are conducted separately or as a portion of a convenience
store or other retail sales and service establishments. [Amended
3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
(2) Drive-in establishments.
D. Area and other regulations.
§ 225-25.1 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-26
220:821
(1) Lot area. The area for development shall be a minimum of five
acres.
(2) Lot coverage: 20% maximum.
(3) Building height: two stories or 35 feet maximum.
(4) Front yard: 200 feet minimum.
(5) Side yards: 100 feet minimum each side.
(6) Rear yard: 100 feet minimum.
(7) Maximum paved area: 90%. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
(8) Minimum open space: 10%. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
E. Supplementary regulations. Off-street parking shall be provided on the
premises at a ratio of three square feet of off-street parking for every
one square foot of gross floor area. Parking shall be permitted in the
areas required for front, side and rear yard setbacks up to a point of 25
feet from any front, side or rear lot line of the shopping center. All
parking lots shall be paved.
F. Access and traffic controls. All means of ingress and egress from the
shopping center to any public street or state highway shall be located at
least 200 feet from any other intersecting street or streets and shall be
designed to conduct traffic in a safe manner. The developer shall be
responsible for the purchase and erection of any necessary traffic
control devices and the construction of additional acceleration or
deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation or by the governing body.
G. Interior circulation. Interior accessways shall be designed so as to
prevent the blocking of vehicles entering or leaving the site. Areas
provided for loading or unloading of trucks and/or other vehicles or for
servicing of shops for rubbish collection or other services shall be
adequate in size and shall be so arranged that they may be used without
blocking or interfering with interior circulation and parking.
H. Lighting. Lighting for buildings, signs, accessways and parking lots
shall be so arranged as not to reflect toward public streets or cause any
annoyance to surrounding property owners or residents.
I. Shopping cart storage. Establishments furnishing carts or mobile
baskets shall provide definite areas on the site for the storage of said
carts. Storage areas shall be clearly marked and designated for the
storage of shopping carts and/or mobile baskets.
J. Screening.
§ 225-26 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-26
220:822
§ 225-27. Agricultural regulations.
(1) All lots which abut residential districts shall be provided with a
landscaped area and/or other enclosure of a minimum height of
four feet and a maximum height of six feet along the perimeter of
the lot abutting or facing the residential district.
(2) If trees, evergreen hedges or other types of year-round plants are
used, a landscaped area shall be provided at least five feet in width.
K. Storage of trash or rubbish. Exterior storage areas for trash and
rubbish shall be completely screened and all trash and rubbish shall be
contained in verminproof containers. Storage areas for trash and
rubbish shall at all times be kept in an orderly and sanitary fashion.
L. Signs. Signs shall conform to § 225-28 of this chapter.
M. Water, sewage and drainage.
(1) All shopping centers shall be required to connect to a public water
and sewage system.
(2) All provisions of existing Borough ordinances, including but not
limited to Chapter 195, Subdivision and Land Development,
regarding storm drainage shall be complied with.
A. Minimum lot size, area, width and yard requirements.
(1) The minimum size of a farm shall be five acres. In the case of
intensive agricultural activities, including but not limited to
mushroom farms, poultry and egg production and dry lot farms,
wherein the character of the activity involves a more intensive use
of land than found in normal farming operations, the minimum lot
size shall be 10 acres.
(2) All nondwelling buildings or structures for the keeping or raising of
livestock and/or poultry shall be set back no less than 200 feet from
all lot lines.
B. Maximum height requirement.
(1) Maximum height shall be 40 feet for all nondwelling buildings or
structures, except that such height may be increased, provided that
for every foot of height in excess of 40 feet there shall be added to
each yard requirement one foot.
(2) The maximum height for any dwelling shall be 35 feet and 2 1/2
stories.
C. Building coverage. Not more than 10% of the area of any lot shall be
occupied by buildings or structures.
D. Prohibited activities.
§ 225-26 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-27
220:823
§ 225-28. Sign regulations.
(1) On-site composting, except that of grass, leaves, vegetables and
similar matter in noncommercial quantities, is prohibited and all
composting storage, except that of grass, leaves, vegetables and
similar materials in noncommercial quantities, is to be conducted
in an enclosed building set back not less than 200 feet from all lot
lines. [Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
(2) All grazing or pasture areas shall be fenced.
(3) No slaughter area or manure storage shall be closer than 500 feet
to any lot line.
(4) No commercial or industrial activities except those permitted by
this § 225-27 shall be permitted. [Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord.
No. 3-1996]
A. Permit requirements for signs.
(1) All permanent and/or temporary on-lot and off-lot signs not
permitted under Subsection B hereinbelow, regardless of size, shall
require the issuance of a zoning permit from the Zoning Officer
before erection or replacement. All signs must comply with all of
the applicable regulations contained herein. A permit is not
required to refurbish any sign, provided that the size, location,
projection and/or illumination of the original sign is not altered.
(2) Permits are not required for the following: "for sale" signs, "for
rent" signs or temporary directional signs under six square feet.
(3) Permits shall be required for A-type (sandwich) signs placed on
sidewalks or public areas.
B. Signs permitted in all districts:
(1) Official traffic or directional signs and other official federal, state,
county or Borough government signs.
(2) Temporary signs announcing a campaign, drive or event of a civic,
philanthropic, educational or religious organization, provided that
such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area and shall be
removed immediately upon the completion of the campaign, drive
or event.
(3) Temporary business signs offering the sale or rental of the lot or
building upon which the sign is erected, provided that the area of
any such sign shall not exceed six square feet and not more than
one such sign shall be placed on the lot unless such lot fronts on
more than one street, in which case one sign may be erected on
each street frontage.
§ 225-27 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-28
220:824
(4) Temporary signs of contractors, architects, engineers, builders and
artisans, erected and maintained on the lot where work is being
performed, provided that the area of each such sign shall not
exceed 12 square feet and provided that such sign shall be removed
upon completion of the work.
(5) Temporary and directional signs indicating the contractors,
consultants and artisans performing services on new construction
sites or renovation sites are permitted, provided that they shall be
removed within seven days after completion of the construction
work, and not more than one sign shall be placed by each
contractor, consultant and artisan on each street frontage of the
construction site. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(6) Promotional signs not to exceed 32 square feet erected in
connection with the development or proposed development of land,
provided that such signs shall be removed within 20 days after the
last building has been initially occupied or within one year after the
signs were erected, whichever shall first occur. The permit for such
signs may be renewed at the end of each twelve-month period.
C. Signs prohibited in all districts:
(1) Signs which in any way simulate official, functional, directional or
warning signs erected or maintained by the United States
Government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, County of Berks
or the Borough or any railroad, public utility or similar agency
concerned with the protection of public health or safety.
(2) Except for promotional devices permitted by Subsection F(6),
banners, spinners, flags, pennants or any moving object used for
commercial advertising purposes, whether containing a message or
not.
(3) Flashing, blinking, twinkling, animated, twirling or moving signs of
any type, except those portions of signs which indicate time and
temperature changes; red, green and amber colored signs.
(4) No sign shall be allowed within street right-of-way lines unless
specifically authorized by other ordinances and regulations of the
Borough and in compliance with the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania regulations, where applicable. No signs shall be
permitted which are posted, stapled, tied or otherwise temporarily
or permanently attached to public utility poles or trees within the
street right-of-way line.
(5) No vehicle to or on which a sign is affixed or upon which a sign is
painted or otherwise displayed shall be parked, placed or stored in
such a manner that the displaying of such sign or signs no longer is
incidental to the vehicle's primary purpose but becomes the
primary purpose.
§ 225-28 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-28
220:825
(6) Roof signs exceeding the lower of the height limit of the district or
four feet above the highest point of the roof.
D. Nonconforming signs. Only lawful signs existing at the time of
enactment of this chapter or subsequent amendments thereto and
which do not conform to the requirements of this section shall be
considered nonconforming signs; provided, however, that any such
nonconforming sign which is otherwise lawful may be repainted,
repaired or refurbished so long as such repainted, repaired or
refurbished sign does not exceed the dimensions of the existing or
replaced sign or alter the location, projection and/or illumination of the
existing or replaced sign. A nonconforming sign once removed and not
replaced within 30 days from the date of removal shall only be replaced
with a sign in conformance with this chapter. [Amended 3-26-1996 by
Ord. No. 3-1996]
E. Area of signs.
(1) The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering,
wording and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the
background, whether opened or enclosed, on which they are
displayed, and the area of any sign shall be computed by
multiplying its greatest height by its greatest length, exclusive of
supporting structures, unless such supporting structures are
illuminated or are in the form of a symbol or contain advertising
copy. In the case of signs that have no definable edges, such as
raised letters attached to a building facade or a sign painted on a
wall or similar surface, the sign area shall be that area within a
rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of the actual message or
copy area.
(2) In computing square foot area of a double-face sign, only one side
shall be considered, provided that both faces are identical. If the
interior angle formed by the two faces of the double-faced sign is
greater than 45°, then both sides of such sign shall be considered
in calculating the sign area, and it shall be considered as a parallel
sign.
(3) If an establishment has walls fronting on two or more streets, the
sign area for each fronting wall shall not exceed the applicable
maximum sign area established by this chapter. Each sign shall be
placed on the side used in the computation. [Amended 7-20-2006
by Ord. No. 14-2006]
F. General regulations.
(1) All signs shall be constructed in accordance with the PA UCC.
[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(2) No sign shall be so located or arranged that it interferes with traffic
through glare, through blocking of reasonable sight lines for
streets, sidewalks or driveways, through confusion with a traffic
§ 225-28 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-28
220:826
control device (by reason of color, location, shape or other
characteristics) or through any other means. No sign shall violate
the corner visibility restrictions outlined in this chapter.
(3) No portion of any freestanding sign shall be located within five feet
of any side lot line, project over any street right-of-way line or be
within 10 feet of any building.
(4) A temporary "for sale" or "for rent" sign may be permitted within or
on the lot lines advertising the prospective or completed sale or
rental of the lot upon which it is located, provided that it shall be
removed within seven days after execution of a lease or an
agreement sale.
(5) Temporary signs indicating the contractors, consultants and
artisans performing services on new construction sites or
renovation sites are permitted, provided that they shall be removed
within seven days after completion of the construction work, and
not more than one sign shall be placed by each contractor,
consultant and artisan on each street frontage of the construction
site.
(6) Special promotional devices, signs and displays, such as
floodlights, flags, banners, pennants or related devices, shall only
be permitted for a business for special occasions not more than
four times a year in a nonresidential district for a period of not
more than a total of 30 days in any one calendar year.
(7) A-type (sandwich-type) sidewalk or curb signs.
(a) A-type (sandwich-type) sidewalk or curb signs and related
devices for a business shall only be permitted during hours of
operation of said business. An unobstructed sidewalk width of
four feet must be maintained.
(b) A-type (sandwich) sidewalk or curb signs shall not exceed six
square feet per face nor be larger than two feet wide and three
feet high.
(8) Projection. No sign shall project more than 12 inches in any
residential district or 72 inches in any commercial or industrial
district from the building facade to which it is attached; provided,
however, that no portion of any projecting sign shall be closer than
four feet from the outer curbline. Except as hereinafter provided in
Subsection H(1)(a), the closest portion of any projecting sign shall
be at least eight feet above the sidewalk (or curb grade if there is
no sidewalk) or any other walkway. No freestanding sign may
project beyond the front lot line except as provided for in
Subsection F(6) and (7). Parallel signs shall not project more than
12 inches in any commercial or industrial district.
§ 225-28 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-28
220:827
(9) Height of freestanding signs. In no event shall the maximum height
of a freestanding sign exceed 25 feet.
(10) Illumination. Signs may be lighted with nonglaring exterior or
interior or shielded floodlights, provided that such lighting is
screened from adjacent properties.
(11) Abandonment. A business or identification sign shall be removed by
the property owner within 30 days of the termination of the use for
which such signage was erected. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
G. Residential districts. In addition to the signs listed in Subsection B of
this section, only the following residential signs shall be permitted:
(1) Signs not to exceed two square feet displaying only the name and
address of the occupant of the lot, provided that not more than one
such sign shall be erected for each occupant of a lot, unless such lot
fronts on more than one street, in which case one such sign may be
erected on each street frontage.
(2) Signs not to exceed 24 square feet erected to identify a major
subdivision, land development, mobile home park or multifamily
complex provided that only one such sign is located at the main
entrance.
(3) Sign, bulletin, announcement board or identification sign for
schools, churches, hospitals, clubs or other principal uses and
buildings other than dwellings on the same lot therewith for the
purpose of displaying the name of the institution and its activities
or services, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed
12 square feet per face and not more than one such sign shall be
erected on any one street frontage.
H. Commercial districts. In addition to the signs listed in Subsection B of
this section, only the following commercial signs shall be permitted:
(1) On-lot parallel and projecting signs, provided that:
(a) Parallel signs attached to a main structural wall of a principal
building shall not be located less than eight feet above the
sidewalk (or curb grade if there is no sidewalk) or any other
walkway, and the height of the sign shall not be more than 25
feet. If not projecting more than two inches from a wall of a
building, the sign may be located less than eight feet above the
curb grade.
(b) Projecting signs shall not project more than 72 inches,
provided that a portion of such sign shall not be closer than 48
inches from the outer curbline and not less than eight feet
above the sidewalk (or the curb grade if there is no sidewalk)
or any other walkway.
§ 225-28 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-28
220:828
(c) The total area of all parallel, projecting and permanent window
signs shall not exceed two square feet of sign area for each
linear foot of horizontal building facade length at ground level
per street frontage. In no case, however, shall the area of
parallel signs exceed 50 square feet and the area of permanent
window and projecting signs exceed 20 square feet; however,
permanent window signs shall not, nevertheless, exceed 30%
of the total window area in which the sign is placed.
[Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
(d) In the case of a shopping center or a group of stores or other
business uses on a lot held in single and separate ownership,
the provisions of this section relating to the total area of
parallel or projecting signs permitted shall apply with respect
to each building, separate store or similar use.
(2) On-lot freestanding signs, provided that:
(a) As to a permanent business or commercial freestanding sign
on the same lot as the use to which it relates, the total area of
such sign shall be limited to 20 square feet per face.
[Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
[1] Freestanding signs not exceeding four feet in height and
placed at least five feet from side lot lines and behind any
street right-of-way lines may be 50 square feet in area per
face.
(b) Sandwich or A-type temporary ground signs.
(c) No permanent sign shall be located to the rear of the rear wall
of the main building when the rear lot line upon which it is
situated abuts a residential district, except signs that convey
information such as parking, entrances and traffic flow
directions. The area on one side of any such sign shall not
exceed eight square feet. The name of the business located on
the lot may appear on such signs.
(d) In the case of a shopping center, only two freestanding signs
indicating the name of the center or similar use may be
erected. No portion of a shopping center freestanding sign
shall be less than eight feet above the ground or have a height
of more than 25 feet above the ground. The area of any one
side of such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet. The location
and orientation of such sign shall be shown on the development
plan.
(e) In the case of a group of business uses other than a shopping
center, on a lot held in single and separate ownership, a single
freestanding sign, including individual signs identifying
different establishments, may be erected on a common
backing, provided that the total area of one side of the sign
§ 225-28 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-28
220:829
does not exceed 30 square feet and that any individual sign
does not exceed four square feet. The structural backing for
all such signs shall be uniform, and no sign may extend, in any
direction, beyond the outside edge of the backing. No portion
of any such backing shall be less than five feet or more than 12
feet above the ground.
(3) Off-lot signs, provided that:
(a) Off-lot signs shall only be permitted in C-3 Districts.
(b) Off-lot signs, including but not limited to commercial
advertising signs, shall be limited to one per lot, unless the lot
shall contain more than five acres, in which event the number
of such signs shall be limited to one per each five acres or
fraction thereof. Each such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet
in area per face.
I. Industrial districts. In addition to signs listed in Subsection B of this
section, only the following industrial signs shall be permitted:
(1) On-lot parallel and projecting signs, provided that:
(a) All parallel and projecting signs shall not exceed a combined
20% of the area of the building face to which they are attached
or painted. There shall be a limit of one sign on each yard
fronting a street.
(b) Projecting signs shall not project more than 72 inches,
provided that a portion of such sign shall not be closer than 48
inches from the outer curbline and not less than eight feet
above the sidewalk (or the curb grade if there is no sidewalk)
or any other walkway.
(2) On-lot freestanding signs.
(a) Freestanding signs shall not exceed one square foot of sign
area to two feet of linear lot frontage. The maximum area of
any freestanding sign shall not exceed 75 square feet, and not
more than one such sign shall be placed on each lot in single
and separate ownership unless such lot fronts on more than
one street, in which case one such sign may be erected on each
street frontage.
(b) Any entrance to an industrial or office park serving five or
more tenants may have a single sign indicating the name of the
park and listing each tenant and having a maximum area of
100 square feet.
(3) Off-lot signs. Off-lot signs, including but not limited to commercial
advertising signs, shall be limited to one per lot, unless the lot shall
contain more than five acres, in which event the number of such
§ 225-28 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-28
220:830
§ 225-29. Parking and truck loading/unloading requirements.
signs shall be limited to one per each five acres or fraction thereof.
Each such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet on area per face.
A. Off-street parking.
(1) Minimum parking requirements.
(a) The minimum parking requirements for the buildings,
structures and uses listed below shall be provided on the lot
upon which such building, structure or use is located or
maintained; provided, however, that the minimum parking
requirements may be provided, subject to the provisions of
§ 225-29A(1)(c) on another lot located within 100 feet of the lot
upon which is located such building, structure or use (such
one-hundred-foot distance to be determined by measuring the
most direct route for pedestrian travel along streets), if such
other lot is owned at all times by the same person or persons
that own the lot upon which is located such building, structure
or use for which such minimum off-street parking is required.
[Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 1-1997; 7-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 14-2006]
[1] Dwellings: two parking spaces for each dwelling unit;
provided, however, that one additional space shall be
provided in the event that said dwelling unit is occupied by
three unrelated persons.
[2] Church, school, public auditorium or theater: one parking
space for every five seats provided.
[3] Hotels and motels: one parking space for each rental unit.
[4] Boardinghouses: one off-street parking space for each
boarder in addition to the parking spaces per dwelling
unit.
[5] Rooming units: one off-street parking space for each
occupant.
[6] Eating establishments: one parking space for every four
seats or one parking space for every 50 square feet of
gross floor area used by the eating establishment,
whichever shall require the more parking spaces.
[7] Retail stores: one parking space for each 100 square feet
of gross floor area. (For shopping center see § 225-26E.)
[8] Wholesale establishments or warehouses: one parking
space for each two owners and each two employees on
maximum shift but at least one parking space for each
5,000 square feet of gross floor area.
§ 225-28 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-29
220:831
[9] Manufacturing, industrial and general commercial uses
not otherwise specified: one parking space for each two
owners and each two employees on maximum shift but at
least one parking space for each 5,000 square feet of gross
floor area.
[10] Offices and retail services: one parking space for each 400
square feet of net floor area.
[11] Bowling alleys: five parking spaces for each lane.
[12] Drive-in establishments: one parking space for each 50
square feet of gross floor area.
[13] Nursing home or convalescent home: one parking space
per bed.
[14] Medical center: six parking spaces for each person
engaged in practice in the medical center plus one parking
space per employee.
[15] Other uses not specified: the same requirement as for the
most similar use listed; provided, however, that in no event
shall there be fewer than two off-street parking spaces
provided.
[16] Size of off-street parking space. An off-street parking
space shall have minimum dimensions of nine feet by 18
feet, except parallel type spaces which shall have
minimum dimensions of nine feet by 22 feet, in each case
exclusive of aisles and driveways. All such spaces on a
paved lot shall be clearly marked on the paved surface.
None of the aforementioned minimum dimensions or
parking spaces shall be closer than five feet to any street
or services street right-of-way line.
[17] Day care must comply with § 225-33.1B.
[18] Home occupations must comply with § 225-23A(3).
(b) The above parking requirements shall not apply to the
permitted uses as described in § 225-17A(1), (2), (3), (5) and
(6), except that a minimum of two parking spaces shall be
provided for such uses.
(c) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, the
minimum parking requirements of Subsection A(1) of this
§ 225-29 shall not be satisfied as to any lot by the provision of
parking on a second lot within 50 feet (measured as provided
in Subsection A(1)(a) of this § 225-29) if the effect thereof is to
reduce the remaining number of parking spaces on the second
lot to a number less than the minimum parking spaces required
for the buildings, structures and uses located on the second lot.
§ 225-29 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-29
220:832
[Added 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 1-1997; amended
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(d) All parking spaces required by this chapter shall have free
access to and from a public street or public service street,
unobstructed by other parked vehicles or spaces available for
parking. End-to-end parking does not constitute a permitted
parking space. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(2) Share parking. One or more parking lots may be designed to
service a multiple number of commercial uses so long as the total
requirements shall be equal to the sum of the requirements of the
component uses computed separately.
(3) Fractional space. When required minimum parking computations
result in a fraction, that fraction shall require an additional full
space. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(4) Reduction of existing parking. Off-street parking spaces existing at
the effective date of this chapter shall not subsequently be reduced
to an amount less than that required under this chapter.
(5) Paving. All parking lots and all access drives for boardinghouses,
rooming houses, multifamily, commercial or industrial uses and all
off-street truck loading/unloading areas shall be paved. The paving
of such parking lots and access drives shall be completed no later
than 12 months after the completion of the rough grading of such
parking lots and access drives. [Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No.
3-1996]
(6) Parking and storage of certain vehicles; obstructions.
(a) Automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without
current license plates and valid inspection shall not be parked
or stored on any public street or public service street, nor on
any residentially zoned or used property other than in a
completely enclosed building. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 14-2006]
(b) In commercial and industrial districts, vehicles or trailers of
any kind or type without current license plates and valid
inspection shall not be parked or stored on any public street or
public service street or on any property, unless parked or
stored within completely enclosed buildings, unless the
vehicles or trailers are for sale at a sales agency dealing in
vehicles or trailers. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
(c) Any parking space which is required to be provided and
maintained in order to fulfill the minimum parking
requirements of this § 225-29 for a particular building,
structure or use located on a particular lot shall remain
§ 225-29 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-29
220:833
available at all times for the purpose of parking vehicles
thereon, from time to time, as provided in this § 225-29 and
shall not be utilized or obstructed by the permanent or
temporary storage or placement of any other property, object
or thing, nor shall any such parking space be rented, let or
otherwise made available for a fee except in connection with
the rental or lease of the lot upon which is located or
maintained the building, structure or use for which the parking
space fulfills the requirements of this § 225-29. [Amended
3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
(7) Parking in yards. [Amended 2-9-1993 by Ord. No. 2-1993]
(a) Required parking shall be permitted within required front
yards, notwithstanding other requirements of this chapter.
Motor vehicles parked within required front yards in
residential districts shall be parked within driveways which are
paved or are a hard parking surface and shall not occupy more
than 25% of the required front yard, except that in the case of
townhouses as regulated in § 225-25, front yard paving or a
hard parking surface may exceed 25% to the extent necessary
to provide access to garages within the townhouses.
(b) Motor vehicles parked within yards in all zoning districts shall
be parked on an area containing a hard parking surface, except
as otherwise provided for or required by this chapter.
(8) Services. No repair to or maintenance of vehicles or trailers if any
kind shall be permitted in any parking space, area or lot except in
such districts where such repairs and maintenance are permitted.
[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(9) Off-street parking lots. Off-street parking lots, for uses other than
for single-family or two-family dwellings or for those uses
permitted by §§ 225-25 and 225-26, shall comply with the following
requirements:
(a) Interior passageways and maneuvering space shall be
provided as follows:
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Passageways and Maneuvering Space
(feet)
90 to 60 22
59 to 45 19
Less than 45 17
Parallel 12
(b) A divider shall be required along the perimeter of a parking lot,
excluding driveways. Such divider shall not occupy or be
§ 225-29 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-29
220:834
permitted within the adjacent street right-of-way. [Amended
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(c) Except in the case of a single-family dwelling or a two-family
dwelling, the closest point of any parking space or parking lot
shall be located at a distance of at least five feet from the
principal building or other structure on the lot or adjacent lot,
but not closer than three feet to an adjacent lot line, unless
such adjacent lot is in common ownership with the lot upon
which the parking lot is located.
(d) Parking lots shall not be designed or located so as to require
cars to back into a public street in order to leave the parking
lot.
(e) Entrance- and exit-ways shall have a minimum width of 10 feet
and maximum width of 12 feet for each lane of traffic entering
or leaving the parking lot. [Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No.
3-1996; 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(f) All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide
sufficient backup area for the end stalls of the parking lot.
(g) A landscaping plan specifying type, size and location of
existing and proposed planting material shall be submitted
with the application for land development.
(h) Entrance- and exitways and interior accessways shall be
designed so as to prevent the blocking of vehicles entering or
leaving the parking lot.
B. Off-street truck loading/unloading. [Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No.
3-1996]
(1) Required loading/unloading spaces. Every building, structure or lot
located in a Business Commercial (C-1) District, a Commercial/
Residential (C-2) District, a Highway Commercial (C-3) District or a
Light Industrial (LI), Medium Industrial (MI), or Heavy Industrial
(HI) District used for commercial or industrial purposes shall
provide one off-street truck loading/unloading space for the first
10,000 square feet or less of gross floor area, plus a minimum of
one additional off-street truck loading/unloading space for each
additional 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. [Amended
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(2) Size of truck loading and/or unloading space. An off-street truck
space shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width, a minimum 55 feet in
depth (length) and have a minimum clear height of 16 feet.
[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(3) Reduction of existing loading/unloading spaces. Off-street truck
loading/unloading spaces existing at the effective date of this
§ 225-29 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-29
220:835
§ 225-30. Control of floodplain.
All requirements of all ordinances and/or regulations of the Borough
relating to the criteria and requirements of Section 1910.3 of the National
Flood Insurance Program Regulations issued by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development, as from time to time
amended and supplemented, shall be complied with.
§ 225-31. Adult bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters, cabarets
and massage parlors.
chapter shall not subsequently be reduced to an amount less than
required under this chapter.
(4) Additional spaces shall be required for the parking and storage of
trucks or trailers in addition to loading and/or unloading spaces as
set forth in § 225-29B(1) and other parking requirements set forth
in § 225-29A(1). [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
A. Definitions for purposes of this section. For the purpose of the within
§ 225-31 of this chapter, the terms, phrases and words herein referred
to are defined as follows:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — A commercial establishment having as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade, books,
magazines, photographs or other materials which are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (as
defined below) or an establishment with a segment or section devoted
to the sale or display of such material.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A building or establishment
used in whole or in part for presenting motion pictures distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (as
defined below) for observation by patrons therein.
CABARET — A club, restaurant, bar, tavern, theater, hall or similar
place or establishment which features male and/or female entertainers,
including but not limited to topless or bottomless dancers, entertainers,
strippers or employees, whose performance or activities include, even
though not limited to, simulated sex acts, live or actual sex acts or other
specified sexual activities (as defined below) and/or reveal or display
specified anatomical areas (as defined below).
MASSAGE — Any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of, the
external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid
of any mechanical electrical apparatus or appliances with or without
such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils,
powder, creams, lotions, ointment or other such similar preparations
commonly used in the practice of massage, under such circumstances
§ 225-29 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-31
220:836
that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is
provided or some third person on his or her behalf will pay money or
give any other consideration or any gratuity therefor.
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any establishment having a source of income
or compensation derived from the practice of massage and which has
a fixed place of business where any person, firm, association or
corporation engages in or carries on the practice of massage; provided,
however, that this definition shall not be construed to include a hospital,
nursing home, medical center or the office of a physician, surgeon,
chiropractor, osteopath or physical therapist duly licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania nor barbershops or beauty salons in
which massages are administered only to the scalp, face, neck or the
shoulders. In addition, this definition shall not be construed to include
a volunteer fire department, a volunteer rescue squad or a nonprofit
organization operating a community center, a swimming pool, tennis
court or other educational, cultural, recreational or athletic facilities
and facilities for the welfare of the residents of the area.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
Less than completely or opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or female breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areola; or
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely or opaquely covered.
(2)
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breast.
(3)
B. Prohibition in residential districts and industrial districts. It shall be
unlawful to establish an adult bookstore, an adult motion-picture
theater, a cabaret or a massage parlor in any residential districts or
industrial districts.
C. One-thousand-foot separation requirement. It shall be unlawful to
establish an adult bookstore, an adult motion picture theater, a cabaret
or a massage parlor within 1,000 linear feet of any other adult
bookstore, adult motion picture theater, cabaret or massage parlor.
D. Allowance of special exception. It shall be unlawful to establish an adult
bookstore, an adult motion picture theater, a cabaret or a massage
parlor within 500 feet of any school, church, playground, any other area
designated as a recreational area or any residential districts, except as
a special exception in accordance with the procedure set forth in Article
VIII of this chapter. The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize the
§ 225-31 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-31
220:837
§ 225-32. Mobile home parks.
establishment of an adult bookstore, an adult motion picture theater,
a cabaret or a massage parlor within 500 feet of a school, church,
playground, any other area designated as a recreational area or any
residential districts as a special exception only if the following findings
are made by the Zoning Hearing Board:
(1) That the applicant has presented to the Zoning Hearing Board a
petition which indicates approval of the proposed use by 51% of the
persons 18 years of age or older owning, residing or doing business
within a radius of 500 feet of the location of the proposed use. The
applicant shall have attempted to contact all eligible locations
within this radius and must supply a list of all addresses at which
no contact was made. The circulator of the petition shall subscribe
to an affidavit to the fact that the circulator personally witnessed
the signatures on the petition and that the same were affixed to the
petition by the persons whose names appear thereon.
(2) That the proposed use will not adversely affect the safe and
comfortable enjoyment of properties in the neighborhood and will
not be detrimental to the general character of the area.
(3) That the establishment of the proposed use in the area will not be
contrary to any program of neighborhood conversion and will not
interfere with any program of urban renewal.
(4) That the conditions set forth in § 225-51C of this chapter relating to
special exceptions will be met.
(5) That all other applicable regulations of this chapter will be
observed.
A. Area and bulk regulations.
(1) Minimum mobile home park area: two acres.
(2) Minimum mobile home lot area: 5,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum mobile home lot width: 40 feet.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions.
(a) Front yard: 25 feet.
(b) Side yard: 10 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(5) Minimum distance between mobile homes: 30 feet.
(6) Minimum setback from public streets and mobile home park
boundaries: 50 feet.
§ 225-31 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-32
220:838
(7) Minimum distance to parking lots: 30 feet.
(8) Maximum mobile homes per acre: five units.
(9) Maximum lot coverage per mobile home lot: 35%.
(10) Maximum paved area per mobile home lot: 25%.
(11) Maximum mobile home park open space: 10%.
B. Parking facilities.
(1) Minimum parking spaces per mobile home: two spaces.
(2) Maximum distance from mobile home to common parking lot: 200
feet.
(3) Parking lots and parking spaces set back from cartway: 20 feet.
(4) Minimum access to parking lots shall be 12 feet per lane.
(5) All access to parking spaces and parking lots shall be paved.
C. Additional requirements.
(1) Curbing shall be required along all cartways and common parking
lots.
(2) Sidewalk shall be required along all streets. The sidewalk shall be a
minimum of four feet in width and shall conform to borough
standards for public sidewalks.
(3) Walkways, with a minimum width of two feet, shall be provided to
each mobile home from the sidewalk.
(4) A concrete patio, which shall be a minimum of 200 square feet in
area, shall be provided for each mobile home.
(5) All mobile homes shall be suitably skirted.
(6) The maximum slope of the mobile home park shall not exceed 25%.
(7) Fuel storage facilities shall be located a minimum of five feet from
mobile homes.
D. Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory structures and uses shall be permitted in accordance
with the provisions of § 225-24.
(2) Accessory buildings shall be permitted which contain laundry,
vending and convenience services, which shall only be available to
the residents of the mobile home park.
(a) Accessory buildings shall meet the minimum requirements of
Subsection A.
§ 225-32 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-32
220:839
(b) Parking shall be provided for accessory buildings in
accordance with the provisions of § 225-29.
(c) No lean-to or attached accessory structure shall be permitted.
E. Utilities.
(1) All utilities shall be underground in compliance with Chapter 195,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(2) Streetlighting shall be provided which will illuminate all streets
and parking lots and be in compliance with Chapter 195,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(3) Each mobile home lot shall be served with individual electric,
sewer and water services.
(4) Fire hydrants shall be provided in each mobile home park. The
maximum distance from a mobile home to a hydrant shall be 250
feet.
F. Streets.
(1) Streets shall have a minimum cartway width of 36 feet.
(2) Grades and construction shall conform to Chapter 195, Subdivision
and Land Development.
G. Drainage.
(1) A stormwater runoff and drainage system shall be installed in
accordance with sound engineering practice.
(2) Plans shall be submitted to the Borough for its review.
H. Trash and rubbish facilities.
(1) On-lot facilities shall comply with Ordinance No. 3-1982229 of the
Borough as from time to time amended or supplemented.
(2) Common facilities shall be permitted, provided that:
(a) Maximum distance from mobile home to facility shall not
exceed 200 feet.
(b) Facility shall be located at a common parking lot or a park
service building.
(c) Screening shall be provided to screen the facility from mobile
homes.
229. Editor's Note: See Ch. 185, Solid Waste.
§ 225-32 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-32
220:840
§ 225-33. Drainage, lighting and refuse.
§ 225-33.1. Day-care facilities and nursery schools. [Added
3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
§ 225-33.2. Wireless communication facilities. [Added 10-17-2017
by Ord. No. 3-2017230]
I. Landscaping. A landscaping plan specifying type, size and location of
existing and placement of proposed trees, shrubs, hedges and/or grass
areas shall be submitted with the application for land development.
A. Drainage.
(1) A stormwater runoff and drainage system shall be installed in
accordance with sound engineering practice.
(2) Plans shall be submitted to the Borough for its review.
B. Lighting. Lighting for buildings, uses, accessways and parking lots shall
be so arranged as not to reflect towards public streets or cause any
annoyance or nuisance to building occupants or adjacent and
surrounding property owners or residents.
C. Storage of trash and rubbish. Storage areas shall be provided for trash
and rubbish and shall be completely screened from adjacent properties
by a minimum visual barrier of five feet in height. The storage area shall
be a minimum of eight feet by eight feet and shall comply with all
setbacks and requirements. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
A. Outdoor play areas shall be enclosed with a fence.
(1) Fences shall be a minimum of 42 inches in height measured from
the adjacent walking surface. Open fences shall have intermediate
rails, balusters or other construction such that a sphere with a
diameter of six inches cannot pass through any opening or under
any fence.
(2) Fences shall not exceed six feet in height.
B. Off-street parking. There shall be one space for each person who serves
as a caregiver or an assistant, plus:
(1) One space per 10 children for the purpose of dropoff or pickup; or
(2) Two adjacent curbside spaces manned by a staff person for the
purpose of dropoff or pickup.
A. Purpose.
230. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 225-33.2, Commercial
communications facilities, added 4-14-1998 by Ord. No. 7-1998, as amended.
§ 225-32 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-33.2
220:841
(1) To accommodate the need for cellular communications antennas
while regulating their location and number in the Borough.
(2) To minimize adverse visual effects of wireless communications
antennas and support structures through proper design, siting and
vegetative screening.
(3) To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from antenna
support structure failure and falling ice, through engineering and
proper siting of antenna support structures.
(4) To encourage the joint use of existing and any new antenna support
structures to reduce the number of such structures needed in the
future.
(5) At the discretion of the Kutztown Borough Council, municipal uses
for the purposes of police protection, fire protection, ambulance
service and road maintenance shall be exempt from these
regulations.
B. Use regulations. This section addresses the various types of wireless
communication facilities (WCFs) permitted in the Borough either as a
use by right or by conditional use in all or selected zoning districts. The
following table presents an overview of the various WCF uses and
where they could be permitted.
WCF Uses Permitted By Zoning District
Permitted By
Zoning District(s)
Permitted
WCF Use Type
Towers on municipal
property
By right All districts
New antenna/existing
structure
By right All nonresidential
districts(4)
Antenna/equipment
replacements
By right All districts
New antenna
collocation on existing
tower(2)
By right All districts
Relocation of existing
tower(1)
Conditional use All districts
New antenna/existing
structure(3)
Conditional use All districts
New communication
tower outside of
public right-of-way
Conditional use All industrial districts
§ 225-33.2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-33.2
220:842
WCF Uses Permitted By Zoning District
Permitted By
Zoning District(s)
Permitted
New communication
tower inside of public
right-of-way
Conditional use All industrial districts
New non-tower WCF
inside public right-ofway
Conditional use All districts (except as
otherwise permitted on
municipal property)
NOTES:
(1) Height increase of existing structure by 20 feet or less.
(2) Compliant with "no substantial change" standards.
(3) Height increase of existing structure in excess of 20 feet.
(4) Residential districts are R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and C-2.
(1) Permitted uses by right. The following wireless communication
facilities are permitted as a use by right in all or selected zoning
districts subject to the specific requirements set forth below:
(a) Towers on municipal property. Antennas and/or towers (towerbased
or non-tower-based WCFs), as regulated and defined by
this chapter, are permitted by right on land owned or
controlled by Kutztown Borough without the need for a
conditional use approval, provided that a license and/or lease
authorizing such antenna and/or tower has been approved by
the Borough.
(b) New antenna/existing structure. A new cell site antenna (nontower
WCFs) may be located on an existing smoke stack, water
tower, farm silo or other tall structure in all nonresidential
zoning districts, provided that:
[1] A zoning permit is submitted for the cell site antenna.
[2] A report is provided from a structural engineer licensed in
the State of Pennsylvania on the structural adequacy of the
existing structure to accommodate the added weight and
wind load of the proposed antenna location.
[3] The height of the antenna shall not exceed the height of
the existing structure by more than 20 feet above the
permitted height of the applicable zoning district.
[4] Building-mounted communications antennas shall not be
located on any single-family dwelling.
[5] Building-mounted communications antennas shall not be
located on any structure appearing on the National
§ 225-33.2 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-33.2
220:843
Register of Historic Places or which is designated by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a historic property.
[6] Omnidirectional or whip communications antennas shall
not exceed 20 feet in height and seven inches in diameter.
[7] Directional or panel communications antennas shall not
exceed five feet in height and three feet in width.
[8] Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be
mounted on a building or other structure shall submit
evidence of agreements and/or easements necessary to
provide access to the building or structure on which the
antennas are to be mounted so that installation and
maintenance of the antennas and communications
equipment building can be accomplished.
[9] Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be
mounted on a building or other structure shall submit
detailed construction and elevation drawings indicating
how the antennas will be mounted on the structure for
review by the Building Code Official (BCO) for compliance
to applicable building codes.
[10] The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations.
[11] The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
(c) Antenna/equipment replacements. Replacements of existing
antennas or existing equipment such as electrical cabinets are
permitted to be replaced in all zoning districts subject to:
[1] Submission of a zoning permit for the antenna/equipment
replacement.
[2] Provisions of a report from a structural engineer licensed
in the State of Pennsylvania on the structural adequacy of
the existing cell tower to accommodate the added weight
and wind load.
[3] Submission of a plan set and other information as
appropriate to show the proposed replacement work.
[4] Compliance of the replacement antenna array(s) with all
applicable FCC and FAA regulations.
[5] Compliance of the replacement array(s) with all applicable
building codes.
(d) New antenna collocation. Location of a new antenna array on
an existing cell tower is encouraged over the construction of a
§ 225-33.2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-33.2
220:844
new tower location. Collocation of new antennas on existing
towers is permitted in all zoning districts subject to:
[1] Submission of a zoning permit for the antenna collocation.
[2] Submission of a plan set and other information as
appropriate to show the proposed collocation work.
[3] Provision of a report from a structural engineer licensed in
the State of Pennsylvania on the structural adequacy of the
existing cell tower to accommodate the added weight and
wind load of the new antenna array.
[4] Review of the proposed antenna collocation to determine if
it is considered as a "substantial change" or one which
"does not substantially change" the wireless support
structure.
[5] Timing of the zoning application for a new collocation
antenna will be approved within the time frames set forth
under Subsection D. Should a zoning variance be required
due to a height conflict, the prescribed review period will
not start until the required zoning approval has been
secured and the application is then deemed to be
complete.
[6] Compliance of the new collocation antenna array with all
applicable FCC and FAA regulations.
[7] Compliance of the new collocation antenna array with all
applicable building codes.
(2) Uses permitted by conditional use. The following wireless
communication facilities are permitted subject to conditional use
approval from the Kutztown Borough Council, in all or specific
zoning districts subject to the specific requirements set forth below
in additional to those presented:
(a) Relocation of an existing tower.
[1] A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the
collocation of an additional antenna may be moved on its
site within 50 feet of its existing location as long as all
other applicable requirements have been met.
[2] After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate collocation, only
one tower may remain on site.
[3] A relocated on-site tower shall not be relocated to less
than 500 feet from a residential dwelling unit.
[4] A relocated on-site tower shall continue to be measured
from the original tower location for purposes of calculating
§ 225-33.2 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-33.2
220:845
separation distances between towers pursuant to these
regulations. The relocation of a tower hereunder shall
in no way be deemed to cause a violation of these
regulations.
[5] The on-site relocation of a tower which comes within the
separation distances to residential units or residentially
zoned land shall only be permitted by variance.
(b) New antenna/existing structure. A new cell site antenna (nontower
WCF) to be located on an existing smoke stack, water
tower, farm silo or other tall structure in all nonresidential
zoning districts where the height of the new antenna will
exceed the height of the existing structure in excess of 20 feet
shall require conditional use approval, provided that:
[1] A zoning permit is submitted for the cell site antenna.
[2] A report is provided from a structural engineer licensed in
the State of Pennsylvania on the structural adequacy of the
existing structure to accommodate the added weight and
wind load of the proposed antenna location.
[3] Building-mounted communications antennas shall not be
located on any single-family dwelling.
[4] Omnidirectional or whip communications antennas shall
not exceed 20 feet in height and seven inches in diameter.
[5] Directional or panel communications antennas shall not
exceed five feet in height and three feet in width.
[6] A new cell site antenna (non-tower WCF) shall not be
mounted on any structure appearing on the National
Register of Historic Places or which is designated by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a historic property.
[7] Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be
mounted on a building or other structure shall submit
evidence of agreements and/or easements necessary to
provide access to the building or structure on which the
antennas are to be mounted so that installation and
maintenance of the antennas and communications
equipment building can be accomplished.
[8] Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be
mounted on a building or other structure shall submit
detailed construction and elevation drawings indicating
how the antennas will be mounted on the structure for
review by the Building Code Official (BCO) for compliance
to applicable building codes.
§ 225-33.2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-33.2
220:846
[9] The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations.
[10] The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
(c) New communication tower outside public rights-of-way. New
communication towers (tower-based WCFs) outside of public
rights-of-way are permitted in the industrial districts subject to
conditional use approval. Consideration for approval would be
subject to compliance with the criteria listed below:
[1] Annual permit fee. The applicant shall pay the Borough an
annual permit fee as set by resolution by the Borough
Council. Applicant shall be required to demonstrate, using
technological evidence, that the tower-based WCF must be
located where it is proposed.
[2] Height. The applicant must demonstrate that the towerbased
WCF is the minimum height required to function
satisfactorily. Maximum height of the tower shall be 150
feet. Accessory facilities shall meet the height
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
[3] Structure design. The applicant shall demonstrate that the
proposed tower-based WCF is safe and that the
surrounding area will not be negatively affected by
support structure failure, falling ice or other debris,
electrometric fields, radio or satellite frequency
interference. A licensed professional engineer shall certify
that the tower can structurally accommodate the number
of shared users being proposed by the applicant and that
the tower meets the setback, requirements, and
separation distances.
[4] Fence. A fence shall be required around the tower-based
WCF and other equipment. The fence shall be eight feet in
height. Any wire on top of the fence shall not be included
in the measurement of the height of the fence.
[5] Landscaping. The following landscaping shall be required
to screen as much of the tower-based WCF support
structure as possible, the fence surrounding the support
structure, and any other ground level features (equipment
cabinets, etc.): An evergreen screen shall be required to
surround the site. The screen can be either a hedge or a
row of evergreen trees. The evergreen screen shall be a
minimum height of six feet at planting, and shall grow to a
minimum height of 15 feet at maturity.
[6] Separation distance. No communication tower shall be
located within 500 feet of a residential dwelling unit.
§ 225-33.2 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-33.2
220:847
[7] In addition, the existing vegetation on and around the site
shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible.
[8] Parking spaces. If the tower-based WCF is fully automatic,
two off-street parking spaces shall be required. If the site
is not automated, the number of required parking spaces
shall equal the number of people in the largest shift, but, in
any event, may not be less than two off-street parking
spaces.
[9] Other permitted uses. All other uses associated with the
tower-based WCF, such as a business office, transmission
studio, maintenance depot, or vehicle storage, shall not be
located on the site unless the use is otherwise permitted in
the zoning district in which the site is located.
[10] Accommodating use. In order to reduce the number of
tower-based WCFs needed in the Borough in the future,
any proposed support structure shall be designed to
accommodate other users, including but not limited to
police, fire and emergency services. Prior to proposing the
construction of a new tower, the applicant shall
demonstrate that a reasonable effort has been made to site
the antenna on an existing tower or structure within close
proximity of the chosen site. Space for Borough
communication systems, if desired by the Borough, shall
be made available at no cost.
[11] Building permit. The applicant shall obtain a building
permit in accordance with Borough requirements prior to
commencement of construction or any modification of any
existing tower-based WCF.
[12] Federal Communication Commission. If the use of a towerbased
WCF requires licensing by any state or federal
agency, including but not limited to the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), the applicant shall
present evidence that it has obtained such license. The
applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed wireless
communication tower and communications antennas
proposed to be mounted thereon comply with all
applicable standards established by the FCC governing
human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
[13] Lighting. No wireless communication towers shall be
artificially lighted except when required by the Federal
Aviation Administration or by state regulations.
Communication towers shall comply with all applicable
Federal Aviation Administration, Commonwealth Bureau
of Aviation and applicable airport zoning regulations.
§ 225-33.2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-33.2
220:848
[14] Lot requirements. A new tower-based WCF may be
permitted as the sole use on a lot, or in combination with
an existing use, except residential, subject to the following
conditions:
[a] The existing use on the property may be any permitted
use in the applicable zoning district, and need not be
affiliated with the WCF.
[b] The minimum lot size shall comply with the applicable
district and shall be the area needed to accommodate
the tower-based WCF, its guy wires, the equipment
building, security fence, and buffer plantings, in
addition to the existing use.
[c] The minimum lot size for a standalone WCF lot shall
be one acre.
[15] Setbacks. The setback of a tower-based WCF from all
property lines and existing street right-of-way lines shall
be no less than the height of the tower. All guy wire
anchors shall be set back a minimum of 40 feet from the
property lot lines and existing street rights-of-way. No
more than one tower shall be permitted on a single lot.
[16] Signs. No portion of any communication tower or antenna
shall be used for a sign or other advertising purpose. No
routine lighting of a tower, antenna, or accessory facilities
shall be permitted.
[17] The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology
in an effort to appropriately blend into the surrounding
environment and minimize aesthetic impact. Application of
the stealth technology chosen by the applicant shall be
subject to approval of the Borough.
[18] Annual certification. In January of each year an inspection
shall be performed by an independent engineer acceptable
to the Borough and paid by the applicant, and verification
shall be provided to the Borough Code Official that there
have been no changes in the operating characteristics of
the commercial tower-based WCF as approved at the time
of conditional use application, including at minimum:
[a] Direction of the signal.
[b] Frequency, modulation and class of service.
[c] Transmission and maximum effective radiated power.
[d] Manufacturer, type and model of equipment.
[e] Height of antenna.
§ 225-33.2 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-33.2
220:849
[f] Name, address and emergency telephone number of
the operator.
[g] Copy of current FCC license.
[h] Review of all reasonable requests of shared use of the
tower.
[19] Geotechnical investigation. The owner shall complete and
submit geotechnical evaluation of the site in which the
communications tower is to be located. The owner shall
demonstrate how the proposed tower and related
infrastructure are to be stabilized and anchored.
[20] Land development plan. A full site plan prepared by either
a registered surveyor or a professional engineer, with
elevations prepared by a professional engineer, shall be
required for tower-based WCF sites showing the
communication tower, buildings, fences, buffering, access,
and any accessory structures. Said plan shall be in
accordance with all applicable subdivision and land
development ordinance requirements of the Borough.231
[21] Occupancy permit. Prior to a certificate of use and
occupancy being issued, the applicant shall provide an
engineer's certification that the tower is constructed as
designed and shall submit the same to the Building Code
Official (BCO).
[22] Access. Access shall be provided to the tower-based WCF
by means of a public street or easement to a public street.
The easement shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width and
shall be improved to a width of at least 10 feet with a dustfree,
all-weather surface for its entire length.
[23] If a tower-based WCF is to be designed as a structure or
natural feature, the communications tower and antenna
shall be disguised and/or camouflaged within the
surrounding area. The type, style, color, design, size and
location of the disguised and/or camouflaged
communications tower and antenna shall be subject to the
approval of the Kutztown Borough Council as part of the
conditional use process.
[24] Removal. The applicant shall submit a plan for the removal
of a tower-based WCF when it becomes functionally
obsolete or is no longer in use. Any antenna or tower that
is not operated, and for which there is no intent or attempt
to operate, for a continuous period of time of 12 months,
shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such
231. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 225-33.2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-33.2
220:850
tower or antenna shall remove the same within 90 days
after receipt of notice from the Borough noting the owner
of such abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned
antenna or tower within said 90 days shall be grounds to
remove the tower or antenna, at the owner's expense. If
there are two or more users of a single tower, then this
provision shall not become effective until all users have
abandoned the tower or antenna.
(d) New communication tower inside public rights-of-way. New
communication towers (tower-based WCFs) of 40 feet or
shorter may be permitted inside the public right-of-way of all
industrial districts within the Borough, provided that they are
compliant with the following:
[1] The location of the proposed tower-based WCF inside
public right-of-way is not located within 50 feet of an area
in which utilities are underground.
[2] Tower-based WCFs inside public right-of-way are
prohibited in residential areas or areas in which utilities
are located underground.
[3] Tower-based WCFs inside public right-of-way shall not be
located in the front facade area of any structure.
[4] The Borough shall determine the time, place and manner
of construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of all
tower-based WCFs in the public right-of-way based on
public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the
right-of-way, and related considerations. For public
utilities, the time, place and manner requirements shall be
consistent with the police powers of the Borough and the
requirements of the Public Utility Code.
[5] Securing of a highway occupancy permit (HOP) from
PennDOT as may be required when the proposed WCF is
within a state highway right-of-way.
[6] Tower-based WCFs inside public right-of-way and related
equipment shall be located as not to cause any physical or
visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to
otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or
motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the
right-of-way as determined by the Borough.
[a] In no case shall ground-mounted related equipment,
walls, or landscaping be located within 18 inches of
the face of curb or a minimum of two feet from edge of
cartway if no curb.
§ 225-33.2 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-33.2
220:851
[b] Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be
placed underground shall be screened, to the fullest
extent possible, through the use of landscaping or
other decorative features to the satisfaction of the
Borough.
[c] Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened
to blend in with the surrounding area to the
satisfaction of the Borough.
[d] Any graffiti on the tower or on any related equipment
shall be removed at the sole expense of the WCF
owner.
[e] Any underground vaults related to tower-based WCFs
shall be reviewed and approved by the Borough.
[f] The WCF shall employ the most current stealth
technology in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic
impact. Application of the stealth technology chosen
by the applicant shall be subject to approval of the
Borough.
[g] To the extent permissible under state and federal law,
any height extensions to an existing tower-based WCF
shall require prior approval of the Borough, and shall
not increase the overall height of the WCF to more
than 40 feet.
[h] Any proposed WCF shall be designed structurally,
electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both
the WCF applicant's antennas and comparable
antennas for future users.
[i] Reimbursement for right-of-way use. In addition to
permit fees as described in this section, every towerbased
WCF in the Borough right-of-way is subject to
the Borough's right to fix annually a fair and
reasonable fee to be paid for use and occupancy of the
right-of-way. Such compensation for right-of-way use
shall be directly related to the Borough's actual rightof-
way management costs including, but not limited
to, the costs of the administration and performance of
all reviewing, inspecting, permitting, supervising and
other right-of-way management activities by the
Borough. The owner of each tower-based WCF shall
pay an annual fee to the Borough to compensate the
Borough for the Borough's cost incurred in connection
with the activities described above. Said fee is to be
set by resolution of the Borough.
§ 225-33.2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-33.2
220:852
[7] The applicant shall have a certificate of public convenience
issued by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission
which grants it the ability to locate new facilities within
the public rights-of-way or be able to cite current
Pennsylvania or federal laws or regulations granting them
the ability to so locate.
[8] Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days
following written notice from the Borough, or such longer
period as the Borough determines is reasonably necessary
or such shorter period in the case of an emergency, an
owner of a non-tower WCF in the right-of-way shall, at its
own expense, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any non-tower
WCF when the Borough, consistent with its police powers
and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or
alteration is reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances:
[a] The construction, repair, maintenance or installation
of any Borough or other public improvement in the
right-of-way.
[b] The operations of the Borough or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way.
[c] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility
easement.
[d] An emergency as determined by the Borough.
(e) New non-tower WCF inside public rights-of-way. New nontower
WCFs located within the public right-of-way shall be
collocated on existing poles, such as utility poles or light poles.
If collocation is not technologically feasible, the WCF applicant
shall locate its non-tower WCFs on existing poles or
freestanding structures that do not already act as wireless
support structures with the approval of the Borough, provided
that they are compliant with the following:
[1] WCF installations located above the surface grade in the
public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, those on
streetlights and joint utility poles, shall consist of
equipment components that are not more than six feet in
height and that are compatible in scale and proportion to
the structures upon which they are mounted. All
equipment shall be the smallest and least visibly intrusive
equipment feasible.
[2] Antenna and related equipment shall be treated to match
the supporting structure and may be required to be
§ 225-33.2 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-33.2
220:853
painted, or otherwise coated to be visually compatible with
the support structure upon which they are mounted.
[3] The Borough shall determine the time, place and manner
of construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of all
non-tower-based WCFs in the public right-of-way based on
public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the
right-of-way, and related considerations. For public
utilities, the time, place and manner requirements shall be
consistent with the police powers of the Borough and the
requirements of the Public Utility Code.
[4] Non-tower WCFs and related equipment shall be located
as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create
safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to
otherwise inconvenience public use of the right-of-way as
determined by the Borough. In addition:
[a] In no case shall ground-mounted related equipment,
walls, or landscaping be located within 18 inches of
the face of curb, within two feet of the edge or cartway
if no curb, or within an easement extending onto a
privately owned lot.
[b] Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be
placed underground shall be screened, to the fullest
extent possible, through the use of landscaping or
other decorative features to the satisfaction of the
Borough.
[c] Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened
to blend in with the surrounding area to the
satisfaction of the Borough.
[d] Non-tower WCFs and related equipment shall not be
located directly in front of a residential dwelling unit.
[e] Any graffiti on the non-tower WCF or on any related
equipment shall be removed at the sole expense of the
WCF owner.
[f] Any underground vaults related to non-tower based
WCFs shall be reviewed and approved by the Borough.
[g] Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days
following written notice from the Borough, or such
longer period as the Borough determines is
reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the
case of an emergency, an owner of a non-tower WCF in
the right-of-way shall, at its own expense, temporarily
or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the
§ 225-33.2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-33.2
220:854
position of any non-tower WCF when the Borough,
consistent with its police powers and applicable Public
Utility Commission regulations, shall have determined
that such removal, relocation, change or alteration
is reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances:
[i] The construction, repair, maintenance or
installation of any Borough or other public
improvement in the right-of-way.
[ii] The operations of the Borough or other
governmental entity in the right-of-way.
[iii] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a
utility easement.
[iv] An emergency as determined by the Borough.
[h] Reimbursement for right-of-way use. In addition to
permit fees as described in this section, every nontower
WCF in the Borough right-of-way is subject to
the Borough's right to fix annually a fair and
reasonable fee to be paid for use and occupancy of the
right-of-way. Such compensation for right-of-way use
shall be directly related to the Borough's actual rightof-
way management costs including, but not limited
to, the costs of the administration and performance of
all reviewing, inspecting, permitting supervising and
other right-of-way management activities by the
Borough. The owner of each tower-based WCF shall
pay an annual fee to the Borough to compensate the
Borough for the Borough's cost incurred in connection
with the activities described above. Said fee is to be
set by resolution of the Borough.
C. Certificate of insurance and bonding.
(1) The applicant shall submit a copy of a certificate of insurance
evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of
$3,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage in the
minimum amount of $3,000,000 per occurrence covering the
proposed communications tower and communications antennas.
Said insurance coverage shall be maintained during the useful life
of the subject antennas and/or support structure. There shall be an
on-going obligation of the property owner where the tower is
located to secure and submit to the Borough proof of insurance on
an annual basis. All support structures shall be fitted with anticlimbing
devices, as approved by the manufacturers.
(2) The owner or operator of communications tower and/or antenna
shall post financial security with the Borough in an amount to cover
§ 225-33.2 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-33.2
220:855
tower and/or antenna removal and site cleanup. The financial
security shall be used by the Borough in the event the owner
or operator fails to remove the tower and/or antenna within six
months of notification by the Borough. The amount of the financial
security and the terms of agreement shall be subject to the
approval of the Borough.
D. Permit processing time frames. Timing of approval for WCF
applications shall be as follows [new section to reflect recent FCC
changes to "shot clocks" (60, 90 150 days) based on the type of WCF
under consideration]:
(1) For a non-tower WCF:
(a) Within 30 calendar days of the date that an application for a
non-tower WCF is filed with the Borough, the Borough shall
notify the WCF applicant in writing of any information that may
be required to complete such application.
(b) Upon submission to the Borough of the additional required
information, the Borough shall within 10 days notify the
applicant if the application is now complete.
(c) For those applications for non-tower-based WCFs that do not
substantially change the physical dimensions of the wireless
support structure to which they are attached as defined by the
WBCA, within 60 days the Borough shall make its final decision
on whether to approve the application.
(d) For those applications for non-tower-based WCFs that do
substantially change the physical dimensions of the wireless
support structure to which they are attached as defined by the
WBCA, within 90 days the Borough shall make its final decision
on whether to approve the application.
(e) The decision of the Borough shall be made in writing and
provided to the applicant.
(f) If additional information was requested by the Borough to
complete an application, the time required by the WCF
applicant to provide the information shall not be counted
toward the Borough's sixty- or ninety-day review periods, as
applicable. These timing requirements in this section shall only
apply to proposed facilities that fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act. (Provision to put clock on
"hold" when additional information has been requested to
make an application complete.)
(2) For a tower-based WCF:
(a) Within 30 calendar days of the date that an application for a
new tower-based WCF is filed with the Borough, the Borough
§ 225-33.2 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-33.2
220:856
§ 225-33.3. Alternative energy systems. [Added 10-17-2017 by Ord.
No. 4-2017232]
shall notify the WCF applicant in writing of any information
that may be required to complete such application (i.e.: the
requirement for a special exception approval from the Zoning
Hearing Board).
(b) Upon submission to the Borough of the additional required
information, the Borough shall within 10 days notify the
applicant if the application is now complete.
(c) All applications for tower-based WCFs shall be acted upon
within 150 days of the receipt of a fully completed application
for the approval of such tower-based WCF and the Borough
shall advise the WCF applicant in writing of its decision.
(d) If additional information was requested by the Borough to
complete an application, the time required by the WCF
applicant to provide the information shall not be counted
toward the one-hundred-fifty-day review period. (Provision to
put clock on "hold' when additional information has been
requested to make an application complete.)
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING —
SOLAR ENERGY — Radiant energy (direct, diffuse, and reflected)
received from the sun.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS — Any solar collector or other solar energy
device, or any structural design feature, mounted on a building's roof
or facade or on the ground, and whose primary purpose is to provide
for the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for space
heating or cooling, for water heating or for electricity.
A subordinate building or structure, the use of which is customarily
incidental to and located on the same lot occupied by the principal
building. No accessory building or structure, or part thereof, shall
be used for living quarters.
(1)
A use customarily incidental and subordinate to and located on the
same lot occupied by the principal use to which it relates.
(2)
SMALL-SCALE SYSTEMS — Solar energy systems installed for
personal use in residences, commercial properties, and
institutions.
(1)
232. Editor's Note: This ordinance reenacted former § 225-33.3, Alternative energy systems,
added 4-19-2011 by Ord. No. 4-2011, which repealed itself by operation of law on
4-19-2016.
§ 225-33.2 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-33.3
220:857
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A device which includes a structure and
associated mechanism(s) and supporting components which are
installed above ground for the purpose of generating electrical energy,
and may include, but not be limited to, wind-driven turbines and
windmills.
LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS — Solar energy systems installed on
large parcels of land for the purpose of generating revenue or
utility-scale systems installed to benefit the community or an entire
institution.
(2)
GROUND-MOUNTED SYSTEM — A wind energy system which is
affixed to a tower or pole which is anchored to a foundation in the
ground.
(1)
ROOF-MOUNTED SYSTEM — A wind energy system, including
wind turbines, which is affixed to a tower or pole which is anchored
to a building's structural system.
(2)
B. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the safe and
orderly construction and locating of wind energy systems and solar
energy systems within the Borough of Kutztown. This section pertains
to small-scale alternative energy systems installed for personal use in
residential, commercial, and institutional properties. It does not pertain
to large-scale systems, including those installed primarily to generate a
profit.
C. Applicable zoning districts.
(1) Wind energy systems and solar energy systems shall be permitted
within all zoning districts of the Borough subject to the regulations
and conditions contained within this chapter.
(2) This section only applies to solar energy systems and wind energy
systems that are accessory uses to a primary use on a lot and solar
energy systems and wind energy systems that are the primary use
of a lot or governed by other sections of Chapters 225 and/or 195233
of the Kutztown Code.
D. Wind energy system conditions.
(1) Setbacks. A wind energy system shall be located no less than 1.1
times the height of the device from a side or rear property line.
Furthermore, no wind energy system shall be located within 1.1
times the height of the device from overhead utility lines, and no
less than 1.1 times the height of the device from a street line.
(2) Location. All wind energy systems shall be located within side or
rear yards.
233. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 225-33.3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-33.3
220:858
(3) Maximum height. The maximum height should be determined by
the setback.
(4) Ground clearance. The minimum distance between the undisturbed
ground at the base of the device in any protruding blade shall be 20
feet, as measured at the lowest point of arc of the blades.
(5) Access. All ground-mounted and electrical and control equipment
shall be labeled or secured to prevent unauthorized access. The
wind energy systems shall not provide steps or a ladder readily
accessible to the public for a minimum height of eight feet above
the ground surface.
(6) Use of guy wires. Wind energy systems shall be standalone
structures that do not require guy wires.
(7) Lighting and advertising. No artificial lighting, unless required by
the Federal Aviation Administration, signage or any forms of
advertising shall be utilized or attached to the wind energy system.
(8) Utility lines. All utility lines, including electrical wires other than
wires necessary to connect the wind generator to the tower wiring,
the tower wiring to the disconnect junction box, and the ground
wires, must be installed underground in accordance with the
prevailing standards of the Borough of Kutztown or other servicing
utility company.
(9) Plan. Prior to the erection of a wind energy system within the
Borough, a plot plan of the parcel in which the facility will be
located shall be submitted to the Borough zoning office, which
identifies the property lines, lot area, location of existing, natural or
man-made features, location of the proposed wind energy system,
ownership information for adjoining properties, setback
measurements from property and street lines. Before any
construction can commence on any alternative energy system, the
property owner must acknowledge that he/she is the responsible
party for owning and maintaining the alternative energy system.
(10) A wind energy system, including the tower, shall comply with all
applicable state construction and electrical codes, and the National
Electrical Code. Prior to the issuance of a building/zoning permit
for installation of a wind energy system, the applicant must submit
to the Borough all documentation required by the Borough Building
Code Official to verify that the design of the device complies with
the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, including, but not
limited to, documentation of the structural integrity of the
foundation, base tower, and all pertinent structures; and electrical
design. Design information must be certified by a licensed
professional engineer in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. Solar energy system conditions.
§ 225-33.3 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-33.3
220:859
(1) Solar energy systems constructed prior to the effective date of this
section shall not be required to meet the requirements of this
section; provided that any structural change, upgrade or
modification to an existing solar energy system that materially
alters the size or placement of the existing solar energy system
shall comply with the provisions of this section.
(2) The height of roof-mounted systems on the principal or accessory
buildings shall not extend more than 10 feet above the finished roof
to which it is mounted. In no instance shall any part of the system
extend beyond the edge of the roof and shall be contained within
footprint of roof.
(3) The height of ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not
exceed 20 feet in height.
(4) Solar energy systems must satisfy the minimum zoning district
setback requirements.
(5) There is no limit to the number of modules and arrays installed on
each property that comprise a solar energy system except for the
restrictions contained herein in Subsection E(6), (7) and (10). Solar
energy systems that are the primary use of a lot or governed by
other sections of Chapters 225 and/or 195 of the Kutztown Code.
(6) Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not be categorized as
accessory buildings.
(7) Installation of a solar energy system shall not commence until both
a zoning permit and a building permit that comply with the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code (UCC), Act 45 of 1999, as
amended, and the regulations adopted by the Department of Labor
and Industry have been issued.
(8) No more than 20% of a lot may be covered with a ground-mounted
solar energy system and total lot coverage must not exceed the
maximum permitted within the underlying zoning district and any
additional stormwater runoff created by the installation of the solar
energy system shall comply with Chapter 189234 of the Kutztown
Code.
(9) Solar panels shall be placed such that concentrated solar radiation
or glare shall not be directed onto nearby properties and roadways.
(10) Building-integrated photovoltaic solar energy systems shall be
allowed regardless of visibility, provided that the building
component in which this system is integrated meets all required
setback, land use or performance standards for the district in
which the building is located.
234. Editor's Note: See Ch. 189, Stormwater Management.
§ 225-33.3 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-33.3
220:860
§ 225-33.4. Uses permitted by special exception. [Added 10-16-2018
by Ord. No. 5-2018]
The following uses are permitted by special exception subject to the
following conditions:
(11) Property owners wishing to install side-mounted panels to the
facade of a structure must present a letter from an engineer
attesting that the structure can support the panels and that the
system for mounting the panels, i.e., awning, is sound.
F. Noise. The noise standard for wind energy systems and solar energy
systems shall not exceed 55 decibels as measured at the exterior of any
occupied building on a nonparticipating landowner's property.
G. Abandonment. A wind energy system or solar energy system that has
been abandoned (meaning not having been in operation for a period
exceeding six months) or is defective or that is deemed to have been
unsafe by the Borough Building Code Official shall be required to be
repaired by the owner to meet federal, state and local safety standards,
or be removed by the property owner within the time period allowed by
the Borough's Building Code Official. If the owner fails to remove or
repair the defective wind energy system, the Borough may pursue a
legal action to have the system removed at the owner's expense.
H. Public inquiries and complaints. The Borough's Zoning office will
handle public inquiries and complaints regarding alternative energy
systems.
I. Requests for exceptions. Property owners seeking exceptions to any of
the requirements set forth in this section must submit a letter to the
Borough's Zoning office detailing the reasons for the exception.
J. Sale of electricity to the Borough. Sales of electricity to the Borough
shall be in conformity with Chapter 107, Article III, of the Code of the
Borough of Kutztown, found in §§ 107-55 through 107-66 of the Code of
the Borough of Kutztown, entitled "Customer Generation."
K. Review of section. No less than every five years from the date of
enactment of this section the Planning Commission of the Borough of
Kutztown shall conduct a review of this section to determine if new
technologies should be integrated and make recommendations to the
Borough Council regarding amendments, if any, to the section.
A. Academic clinical research centers, when permitted as a special
exception use in a zoning district, are subject to the following
conditions:
(1) Special design requirements.
(a) Parking requirements will follow the parking regulations found
in § 225-29 of the Borough of Kutztown Zoning Ordinance.
§ 225-33.3 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-33.4
220:861
Parking and truck loading/unloading requirements shall utilize
those listed for commercial school and high schools as
appropriate.
(b) An academic clinical research center may only grow medical
marijuana in an indoor, enclosed, and secure building which
includes electronic locking systems, electronic surveillance
and other features required by the DOH. The portions of the
academic clinical research center where the medical
marijuana is grown shall not be located in a trailer, cargo
container, mobile or modular unit, mobile home, recreational
vehicle or other motor vehicle.
(c) All external lighting serving the academic clinical research
center must be shielded in such a manner not to allow light to
be emitted skyward or onto adjoining properties.
(d) A divider consisting of a hedge is required where an academic
clinical research center adjoins a residential use or district, as
defined in § 225-5 of the Borough of Kutztown Zoning
Ordinance.
(e) Any and all other provisions contained in the Act235 affecting
the construction, use and operation of an academic clinical
research center.
(f) The academic clinical research center shall require a site plan
review and approval if it is utilizing an existing facility and land
development review and approval if a new facility is being built
and utilized pursuant to the provisions of the Borough of
Kutztown Code of Ordinances.
B. A grower/processor facility, when permitted as a special exception use
in a zoning district, is subject to the following conditions:
(1) Special design requirements.
(a) A grower/processor facility which grows and processes
medical marijuana must be owned and operated by a grower/
processor legally registered with the commonwealth and
possess a current and valid medical marijuana permit from
DOH pursuant to the Act.
(b) A grower/processor facility which grows and processes
medical marijuana can only do so in an indoor, enclosed, and
secure building which includes electronic locking systems,
electronic surveillance and other features required by the
DOH. The grower/processor facility shall not be located in a
trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular unit, mobile home,
recreational vehicle or other motor vehicle.
235. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
§ 225-33.4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-33.4
220:862
(c) There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, odors, or
waste into the environment from any grower/processor facility
where medical marijuana growing, processing or testing
occurs.
(d) Marijuana remnants and byproducts shall be secured and
properly disposed of in accordance with the DOH policy or
policies and shall not be placed within any unsecure exterior
refuse containers.
(e) The grower/processor facility shall provide only wholesale
products to other medical marijuana facilities. Retail sales and
dispensing of medical marijuana and related products is
specifically prohibited at grower/processor facility.
(f) All external lighting serving a grower/processor facility must
be shielded in such a manner to not allow light to be emitted
skyward or onto adjoining properties.
(g) Parking requirements will follow the parking regulations found
in § 225-29 of the Borough of Kutztown Zoning Ordinance. Offstreet
parking regulations shall utilize those listed for
industrial, wholesaling or warehousing.
(h) A grower/processor shall be considered a manufacturing use
and not an agricultural use.
(i) A divider consisting of a hedge is required where a grower/
processor facility adjoins a residential use or district, as
defined in § 225-5 of the Borough of Kutztown Zoning
Ordinance.
(j) Entrances and driveways to a grower/processor facility must
be designed to accommodate the anticipated vehicles used to
service the facility.
(k) The grower/processor facility shall require a site plan review
and approval if it is utilizing an existing facility and land
development review and approval if a new facility is being built
and utilized pursuant to the provisions of the Borough of
Kutztown Code of Ordinances.
(l) Any and all other provisions contained in the Act236 affecting
the construction, use and operation of a grower/processor
facility.
(2) The grower/processor facility owner shall submit a copy of its initial
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania issued medical marijuana permit to
the Borough of Kutztown. Annual medical marijuana renewal
permits shall also be submitted to the Borough of Kutztown.
236. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
§ 225-33.4 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-33.4
220:863
C. A dispensary facility, when permitted as a special exception use in a
zoning district, is subject to the following conditions:
(1) Special design requirements.
(a) A dispensary facility must be owned and operated by a legally
registered dispensary in the commonwealth and possess a
current and valid medical marijuana permit from the DOH
pursuant to the Act.
(b) A dispensary facility may only dispense medical marijuana in
an indoor, enclosed, permanent, and secure building and shall
not be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular
unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle or other motor vehicle.
(c) A dispensary facility may not operate on the same site that a
grower/processor facility is located.
(d) A dispensary facility shall have a single secure public entrance
and shall implement appropriate security measures to deter
and prevent theft of medical marijuana and unauthorized
entrance into areas containing medical marijuana, all of which
shall be in accordance with the Act.
(e) A dispensary facility shall:
[1] Not have a drive-through service;
[2] Not have outdoor seating areas;
[3] Not have outdoor vending machines;
[4] Prohibit the administering of, or the consumption of
medical marijuana on the premises; and
[5] Not offer direct or home delivery service.
(f) A dispensary facility may dispense only medical marijuana to
certified patients and caregivers as set forth in the Act and
shall comply with all lawful, applicable health regulations,
including those of DOH.
(g) A dispensary facility may not be located within 1,000 feet of a
property line of a public, private or parochial school or daycare
center. This distance shall be measured in a straight line
from the closest exterior wall of the building or portion thereof
in which the business is conducted or proposed to be
conducted, to the closest property line of the protected use,
regardless of municipality in which it is located.
(h) Any dispensary facility lawfully operating pursuant to the Act
shall not be rendered in violation of these provisions by the
subsequent location of a public, private or parochial school or
day-care center.
§ 225-33.4 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-33.4
220:864
(i) All external lighting serving dispensary facility must be
shielded in such a manner to not allow light to be emitted
skyward or onto adjoining properties.
(j) Parking requirements will follow the parking regulations found
in § 225-29 of the Borough of Kutztown Zoning Ordinance. Offstreet
parking regulations shall utilize those listed for medical,
veterinarian, dental and paramedical offices as appropriate.
(k) A divider consisting of a hedge is required where a dispensary
facility adjoins a residential use or district, as defined in
§ 225-5 of the Borough of Kutztown Zoning Ordinance.
(l) Entrances and driveways to a dispensary facility must be
designed to accommodate the anticipated vehicles used to
service the facility.
(m) The dispensary facility shall require a site plan review and
approval if it is utilizing an existing facility and a land
development review and approval if a new facility is being built
and utilized pursuant to the provisions of the Borough of
Kutztown Code of Ordinances.
(n) Any and all other provisions contained in the Act affecting the
construction, use and operation of a dispensary facility.
(2) A dispensary facility owner shall submit a copy of its initial
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania issued medical marijuana permit to
the Borough of Kutztown. Annual medical marijuana renewal
permits shall also be submitted to the Borough of Kutztown.
§ 225-33.4 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-33.4
220:865

ARTICLE VI
Nonconforming Lots, Uses, Structures and Buildings
§ 225-34. Statement of intent.
§ 225-35. Nonconforming lots of record.
A. Within the districts established by this chapter or subsequent
amendments thereto, there exist or will exist certain nonconformities
which, if lawful before this chapter was passed or amended, may be
continued, subject to certain limitations, although such
nonconformities would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the
terms of this chapter or subsequent amendments thereto.
B. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any
building or structure on which actual construction was lawfully begun
prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter and
on which building construction has been diligently carried on in
conformity with § 225-43B of this chapter.
A. Except as hereinafter provided for in this section, structures or
buildings and uses permitted in the district may be erected or
established on any nonconforming lot, notwithstanding limitations
imposed by other provisions of this chapter. This provision shall apply
even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width,
or both, that are applicable in the district, provided that yard
requirements, other than those applying to area or width, or both, shall
conform to the requirements of the district in which the lot is located.
B. In those districts requiring different minimum lot requirements for
different permitted uses, when a nonconforming lot does not comply
with any minimum lot requirements for the district in which the lot is
located, then only the use which requires the minimum deviation from
the existing nonconforming lot dimensions may be used by right under
this provision. Any other use on a nonconforming lot or any variance of
yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Zoning
Hearing Board.
C. If two or more lots, combination of lots and portions of lots with
continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of
passage or amendment of this chapter, and if all or part of the lots does
not meet the requirements established for lot width and/or area, the
land involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the
purpose of this chapter, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or
sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and/or
area requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of
any parcel be made which creates a lot with width and/or area below
the requirements stated in this chapter. No division of any parcel shall
be made which creates a lot with a width or area below the
requirements stated in this chapter, as from time to time amended.
§ 225-34 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-35
220:867
§ 225-36. Nonconforming uses of land.
Lawful use of land which at the effective date of this chapter or as a result of
subsequent amendments thereto becomes nonconforming, and when such
use involves no individual structure or building with a replacement cost
exceeding $1,000, may be continued by the present or any subsequent
owner so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
§ 225-37. Nonconforming structures or buildings.
A structure or building which at the effective date of this chapter or
subsequent amendments thereto becomes nonconforming by reason of
restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot or
other requirements concerning the building or structure may be continued
to be used so long as such structure or building remains otherwise lawful,
subject to the following provisions:
D. When an application for approval of a subdivision, whether preliminary
or final, has been approved, or approved subject to conditions
acceptable to the applicant, no subsequent amendment to this chapter
shall be applied to affect adversely the right of the applicant to
commence and to complete any aspect of the approved subdivision in
accordance with the terms of such approval within five years of such
approval. When final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the
five-year period shall be counted from the date of preliminary approval.
A. Extension. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased
or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was owned or leased
by the user at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
chapter; provided, however, that no extension of a nonconforming use
of land shall exceed 50% of the area occupied by said nonconforming
use of land at the time such nonconforming use of land became
nonconforming.
B. Discontinuance. Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued
for a period of 12 consecutive months, such use shall not thereafter be
reestablished. Any further use shall be in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter.
C. Changes of use. A nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use,
shall not thereafter be changed back to any nonconforming use. A
nonconforming use may, by special exception, be changed to another
nonconforming use, provided that the Zoning Hearing Board shall find
that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate in the
district than the existing nonconforming use.
D. Additional structures or buildings. No additional structures or buildings
shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land.
§ 225-35 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-37
220:868
A. Enlargement. No such nonconforming structure or building may be
enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but any
structure or building or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its
nonconformity.
B. Damage or destruction. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006;
6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 4-2015]
(1) Any nonconforming building or structure which is totally or
partially destroyed by any means may not be rebuilt, unless said
structure or building is reconstructed pursuant to the requirements
herein below set forth.
(2) A nonconforming building or structure which is partially destroyed
by any means may be reconstructed as long as the basic structural
elements of the original building are retained. Such determination
shall be made by the Borough Building Code Official. The
reconstructed portions of a nonconforming building or structure
shall not increase the nonconformity with the zoning district in
which it is located.
(3) A nonconforming building or structure which is totally destroyed by
fire, explosion, acts of God or acts of the public enemy shall be
permitted to be reconstructed pursuant to the following provisions:
(a) The reconstruction of the nonconforming building or structure
shall begin within one year of the destruction of said building
or structure and continue uninterrupted until such building or
structure is completely rebuilt.
(b) The reconstruction of the building or structure will not
increase the nonconformity of the building or structure from
the way it existed before it was destroyed.
(c) Based on plans and evidence submitted to the Building Code
Official and the Zoning Officer, the size, architecture and
design of the reconstructed building or structure is not
appreciably changed from the way it existed before it was
destroyed.
(d) Unless the building or structure is determined to be a
significant building that could be reconstructed under the
Historic Building Code or is otherwise determined by the
Building Official, the structure shall meet the current Uniform
Construction Code requirements in place at the time that a
building permit for the reconstruction of the building or
structure is sought.
C. Moving of structure or building. No nonconforming structure or
building shall be, for any reason, moved for any distance unless it shall
thereafter conform to the zoning regulations for the district in which it
is located after it is moved.
§ 225-37 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-38
220:869
§ 225-38. Nonconforming uses of structures or buildings.
Lawful uses of structures or buildings, which uses at the effective date
of this chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments thereto become
nonconforming, may be continued so long as such use remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. Extension. A nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part
of an existing structure or building or a new addition may be
constructed, provided that any extension or addition shall comply with
all provisions of this chapter with respect to height, area, width, yard
and lot coverage requirements for the district in which the structure or
building is located and that such addition shall not exceed 50% of the
gross floor area of the existing building or structure.
B. Change of use. A nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use,
shall not thereafter be changed back to any nonconforming use. A
nonconforming use may, by special exception, be changed to another
nonconforming use, provided that the Zoning Hearing Board shall find
that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate in the
district than the existing nonconforming use.
C. Discontinuance. Whenever a nonconforming use of a structure or
building or portion thereof has been discontinued or abandoned for 12
consecutive months, such structure or building or portion thereof shall
not thereafter be used for a nonconforming use.
D. Removal, destruction or renovation. [Amended 6-16-2015 by Ord.
No. 4-2015]
(1) Any building or structure which is totally or partially destroyed by
any means may not be rebuilt and used for a nonconforming use,
unless said structure or building is reconstructed pursuant to the
requirements herein below set forth.
(2) A building or structure in which a non-conforming use exists which
is partially destroyed by any means may be reconstructed and used
for the same nonconforming use as long as the basic structural
elements of the original building or structure are retained. Such
determination shall be made by the Borough Building Code Official.
The reconstructed portions of the building or structure shall not
increase the nonconforming use of the building or structure with
the zoning district in which it is located.
(3) A nonconforming building or structure which is totally destroyed by
fire, explosion, acts of God or acts of the public enemy shall be
permitted to be reconstructed pursuant to the following provisions:
(a) The reconstruction of the building or structure shall begin
within one year of the destruction of said building or structure
and continue uninterrupted until such building or structure is
completely rebuilt.
§ 225-38 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-38
220:870
§ 225-39. Nonconformance parking requirements. [Amended
3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996; 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, where § 225-29 of this
chapter requires a certain minimum number of off-street parking spaces for
a particular use, then the use, whether permitted or nonconforming, shall
not be enlarged or expanded unless the required number of parking spaces
is provided for such use. Whenever the use is changed, § 225-29 shall apply
to such new use.
§ 225-40. Unsafe or unlawful structures or buildings.
If a nonconforming structure or building or portion thereof becomes
physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs or maintenance and is
declared by the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough or any other duly
authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition,
such structure or building shall not thereafter be restored, repaired or
rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is
located.
§ 225-41. Special exception uses not deemed nonconforming uses.
Any use which is permitted as a special exception in a district under the
terms of this chapter (other than a change through Zoning Hearing Board
action from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use) shall not
be deemed a nonconforming use in such district but shall without further
action be considered a conforming use.
(b) The reconstruction of the building or structure will not
increase the nonconformity of the building or structure from
the way it existed before it was destroyed.
(c) Based on plans and evidence submitted to the Building Code
Official and the Zoning Officer, the size, architecture and
design of the reconstructed building or structure is not
appreciably changed from the way it existed before it was
destroyed.
(d) Unless the building or structure is determined to be a
significant building that could be reconstructed under the
Historic Building Code or is otherwise determined by the
Building Official, the structure shall meet the current Uniform
Construction Code requirements in place at the time that a
building permit for the reconstruction of the building or
structure is sought.
§ 225-38 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-41
220:871

ARTICLE VII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 225-42. Enforcement.
A. Zoning Officer. A Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the governing
body to administer and enforce this Zoning Chapter. The Zoning Officer
shall not hold any elective office in the Borough, shall meet
qualifications established by the borough and shall be able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the borough a working knowledge of
municipal zoning.
B. Duties and powers of Zoning Officer. It shall be the duty of the Zoning
Officer to enforce literally the provisions of this chapter, as from time to
time amended, and he shall have such duties and powers as are
conferred on him by this chapter and as are reasonably implied for that
purpose. The Zoning Officer's duties shall include but are not limited to
the following:
(1) Receive applications for and issue zoning permits as permitted by
the terms of this chapter.
(2) Keep an official record of all business and activities, including
complaints of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and
of the action taken consequent on each such complaint. All such
records shall be open to public inspection, but only to the extent
required by law. File copies of all applications received, permits
issued, reports and inspections made in connection with any
structure, building, sign and/or land shall be retained as long as
they remain in existence.
(3) Make inspections as required to fulfill his duties. He shall have the
right to enter any building or structure or enter upon any land at
any reasonable hour in the course of his duties.
(4) Issue permits for special exception uses or for variances only after
such uses and/or buildings have been approved by the Zoning
Hearing Board in accordance with the regulations of this chapter.
(5) Be responsible for keeping this chapter and the Official Zoning Map
up to date so as to include all amendments thereto.
(6) Issue certificates of use and occupancy in accordance with the
terms of this chapter.
(7) Provide preliminary opinions in accordance with § 225-47 of this
chapter.
C. Enforcement notice.
(1) If it appears to the borough's Zoning Officer that a violation of this
Zoning Chapter has occurred, the Zoning Officer, in the name of the
§ 225-42 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-42
220:873
§ 225-43. Zoning permit.
No building, structure or sign, unless excepted by § 225-28A of this chapter,
shall be erected, constructed, moved, added to or structurally altered,
nor shall land be put to any use, without a permit therefor issued by
the Zoning Officer. No such permit shall be issued except in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter or upon written order from the Zoning
Hearing Board in the form of a special exception, variance or as otherwise
provided for by this chapter, any applicable laws or any court of competent
jurisdiction.
borough, shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an
enforcement notice as provided in this section.
(2) The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
lot on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that lot
and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of
record.
(3) An enforcement notice shall include the following:
(a) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Zoning Officer intends to take action.
(b) The location of the lot or property in violation.
(c) The specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of this Zoning Chapter.
(d) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(e) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days after the enforcement
notice shall have been mailed by certified United States mail,
postage prepaid.
(f) That failure to comply with the notice within the aforesaid
thirty-day period, unless extended by appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board, constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions
clearly described.
A. Form of application.
(1) All applications shall be made in writing and shall be accompanied
by two sets of plans showing at least the following information if
applicable:
(a) Actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon.
§ 225-42 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-43
220:874
(b) The exact size and location on the lot of buildings, structures or
signs, existing, proposed and/or proposed extensions thereto.
(c) The number of dwelling units, if applicable.
(d) Parking spaces provided and/or loading facilities.
(e) Statement indicating the existing or proposed use.
(f) Height of structure, building or sign.
(g) All other information necessary for such Zoning Officer to
determine conformance with and provide for enforcement of
this chapter.
(h) A detailed scale drawing of the signs showing intended
location and stating how it shall be affixed.
(i) A statement indicating the type of construction and the manner
of installation for signs, together with the materials to be used.
(j) Approved permit for sewage disposal (when connection to the
borough's public sewer system is not available or required by
the borough).
(2) One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the
Zoning Officer after he shall have marked such copies either as
approved or disapproved and attested to the same by his signature
on such copy.
(3) One copy of all such plans shall be retained by the Zoning Officer
for the permanent records of the borough.
(4) The zoning permit shall be issued or refused within 30 days from
the date of application. In case of refusal, the applicant shall be
informed of his rights of appeal. The issuance or refusal of the
zoning permit by the Zoning Officer shall be done in the following
manner: [Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
(a) If a zoning permit is to be issued, the application filed by the
applicant shall be marked "approved" and the zoning permit
shall be issued.
(b) If the zoning permit is refused, the application filed by the
applicant shall be marked "not approved" and no zoning permit
shall be issued.
(c) The Zoning Officer may mark the application filed by the
applicant "approved as noted" and may, in conjunction
therewith, note upon such application conditions and changes
which are in the determination of the Zoning Officer, required
by this chapter. If the applicant shall, in writing, accept the
conditions and notations set forth on the application by the
Zoning Officer, then the zoning permit shall be issued, subject
§ 225-43 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-43
220:875
§ 225-44. Certificate of use and occupancy.
A certificate of use and occupancy shall be required upon the completion
of the work contemplated. It shall be unlawful to use and/or occupy any
structure, building and/or lot or portions thereof or extensions thereto in
any manner until a certificate of use and occupancy has been issued.
to such conditions and notations. If the applicant shall fail
or refuse to accept, in writing, the conditions and notations
placed upon the application by the Zoning Officer, then the
Zoning Officer shall change the notation placed upon the
application to "not approved" and shall refuse to issue the
zoning permit.
B. Expiration of application and zoning permit. [Amended 2-10-1998 by
Ord. No. 2-1998]
(1) An application shall be deemed to have been abandoned and
withdrawn if the applicant fails to pay all necessary fees, charges
and expenses required by this Chapter 225 and take delivery of a
zoning permit within six months after the date of the final approval
of such application by the Zoning Officer, or the issuance of a final
decision on the application by the Zoning Hearing Board or the
courts of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, whichever occurs
later.
(2) A zoning permit shall expire at the conclusion of the six-month
period following the date of issuance, if work described in the
zoning permit has not begun. If work described in the zoning
permit has begun, said zoning permit shall expire two years from
the date of issuance thereof. However, an extension of time may be
granted by the Zoning Officer, for good cause shown.
(3) When an application for a special exception which would constitute
a land development or a subdivision is approved, the applicant is
entitled for a period of six months, or a longer period of time if
approved, to proceed with the submittal of plans in accordance
with the regulations of the Subdivision Chapter237 as they stood at
the time the application was filed.
A. Form of application. The application for a certificate of use and
occupancy shall be submitted in such form as the Zoning Officer may
prescribe.
B. Issuance of certificate of use and occupancy.
(1) Prior to the issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy, the
Zoning Officer shall inspect any structure, building, sign and/or lot
or portions thereof or extensions thereto and shall determine the
conformity thereof with this chapter, the permit issued and all
237. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 195, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 225-43 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-44
220:876
§ 225-45. Schedule of fees, charges and expenses.
§ 225-46. Amendments.
The provisions of this chapter and boundaries of districts as set forth on
the Official Zoning Map may from time to time be amended or changed by
the governing body of the Borough, in accordance with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.239
other applicable ordinances, rules and/or regulations of the
Borough. If the Zoning Officer is satisfied that the completed work
is in such conformity, the certificate of use and occupancy shall be
issued. [Amended 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996]
(2) A certificate of use and occupancy shall be granted or refused in
writing, within 10 days from the date that the application is
submitted to the Zoning Officer, unless said time period is extended
in writing by the applicant.
(3) In districts in which performance standards are imposed, no
certificate of use and occupancy shall become permanent until 30
days after the facility is fully operating and only after, upon
reinspection by the Zoning Officer, it is determined that the facility
is in compliance with all performance standards. After said
reinspection, the Zoning Officer shall notify the applicant that the
facility is in full compliance with all performance standards and
that the certificate of use and occupancy is permanent or that the
facility does not comply and that the certificate of use and
occupancy is still temporary and will be revoked by the Zoning
Officer if such facility is not in compliance within an additional
thirty-day time period, unless, because of the particular
circumstances, said additional time period is extended in writing by
the Zoning Officer.
A. The governing body shall establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees,
charges and expenses and collection procedures for zoning permits,
certificates of use and occupancy, special exceptions, variances and
appeals and other matters pertaining to this chapter.
B. The schedule of fees shall be available for inspection in the office of the
Zoning Officer and may be altered or amended by the governing body
by resolution.238
C. Until all application fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full,
no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
A. Procedure. The following procedures shall be observed prior to making
any amendment to or change of this chapter or the Official Zoning Map:
238. Editor's Note: See Ch. A231, Fees.
239. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 225-44 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-46
220:877
(1) Every such proposed change not initiated by the Planning
Commission shall be referred to the Planning Commission at least
30 days prior to the governing body holding a public hearing to
provide the Planning Commission opportunity to submit
recommendations.
(2) The recommendations of the Planning Commission shall be
submitted in writing to the governing body.
(3) At least 30 days prior to the public hearing, the governing body
shall submit the proposed ordinance to the Berks County Planning
Commission for recommendation.
(4) Public hearing; notice. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
(a) Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Borough
Council shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public
notice. In addition, if the proposed amendment involves a
change on the Official Zoning Map, notice of said public
hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the Borough at points
deemed sufficient by the Borough along the perimeter of the
tract to notify potentially interested citizens. The affected tract
or area shall be posted at least one week prior to the date of
the public hearing.
(b) In addition to the requirement that notice be posted, where the
proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice of
the public hearing shall be mailed by the Borough at least 30
days prior to the date of the hearing by first class mail to the
addressees to which real estate tax bills are sent for all real
property located within the area being rezoned, unless the
rezoning constitutes a comprehensive rezoning as evidenced
by tax records within the possession of the Borough. The notice
shall include the location, date and time of the public hearing.
A good-faith effort and substantial compliance shall satisfy the
requirements of this subsection. Proposed action shall not be
taken until Planning Commission and Berks County Planning
Commission recommendations are made. If, however, the
Planning Commission and Berks County Planning Commission
fail to act within 30 days, the governing body shall proceed
without such recommendation.
(5) Procedure for landowner curative amendments.
(a) A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds
the validity of this Zoning Chapter or the Official Zoning Map
or any provision thereof which prohibits or restricts the use or
development of land in which he has an interest may submit a
curative amendment to the governing body with a written
request that his challenge and proposed amendment be heard
§ 225-46 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-46
220:878
and decided as provided in Section 916.1 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.240 The governing
body shall commence a public hearing thereon within 60 days
of the request, as provided for in Section 916.1 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. The
curative amendment and challenge shall be referred to the
Berks County Planning Commission and the Planning
Commission, and notice of the hearing thereon shall be given
as provided in Section 610 and Section 916.1 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.241
(b) The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with
Section 908 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code,242 as amended, and all references therein to the Zoning
Hearing Board shall, for purposes of this section be references
to the governing body; provided, however, that the deemed
approval provisions of Section 908(9) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, shall not apply and
the provisions of Section 916.1(f)243 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, shall control. If the
Borough does not accept a landowner's curative amendment
brought in accordance with this subsection and a court
subsequently rules that the challenge has merit, the court’s
decision shall not result in a declaration of invalidity for the
entire Zoning Ordinance and Official Zoning Map, but only for
those provisions which specifically relate to the landowner's
curative amendment and challenge. Section 908(1.2) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,
pertaining to hearing procedures, and Section 908(9) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,
pertaining to decision, findings and deemed approval, shall not
apply to landowner curative amendments and that the
corresponding provisions in Section 916.1(c), (d) and (f) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, shall
control. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(c) If the governing body determines that a validity challenge has
merit, the borough may accept a landowner's curative
amendment, with or without revisions, or may adopt an
alternative amendment which will cure the challenged defects.
The governing body shall consider the curative amendment,
plans and explanatory material submitted by the landowner
and shall also consider:
240. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.1.
241. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10610 and 10916.1.
242. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
243. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.1(f)
§ 225-46 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-46
220:879
[1] The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities,
water supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
[2] If the proposal is for residential use, the impact of the
proposal upon regional housing needs and the
effectiveness of the proposal in providing housing units of
a type actually available to and affordable by classes of
persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by the challenged
provisions of this Zoning Chapter and Official Zoning Map;
[3] The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed
by the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands,
floodplains, aquifers, natural resources and other natural
features;
[4] The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and
natural features, the degree to which these are protected
or destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to
development and any adverse environmental impacts;
[5] The impact of the proposal on the preservation of
agriculture and other land uses which are essential to
public health and welfare; and
[6] The impact of the proposal upon existing conditions within
the area; the health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the residents and occupants within the forenoted area; and
the essential character of the neighborhood or district.
(6) Procedure for borough curative amendments. If the Borough
determines that this Zoning Chapter or any portion thereof is
substantially invalid, it shall take the following actions:
(a) The Borough shall, by formal action, declare this Zoning
Chapter or appropriate portions thereof substantively invalid
and propose to prepare a curative amendment to overcome
such invalidity. Within 30 days following such declaration and
proposal the governing body of the borough shall:
[1] By resolution, make specific findings setting forth the
declared invalidity of this Zoning Chapter or applicable
portions thereof, which may include:
[a] References to specific uses which are either not
permitted or not permitted in sufficient quantity;
[b] Reference to a class of use or uses which require
revision; or
[c] Reference to this Zoning Chapter which requires
revisions.
§ 225-46 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-46
220:880
§ 225-47. Procedure to obtain preliminary opinion.
In order not to unreasonably delay the time when a landowner may secure
assurance that this Zoning Chapter or Official Zoning Map is free from
challenge, and recognizing that the procedure for preliminary approval
[2] Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to
this Zoning Chapter to correct the declared invalidity.
(b) Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal,
the borough shall enact a curative amendment to validate, or
reaffirm the validity of, this Zoning Chapter pursuant to the
provisions required by Section 609 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,244 in order to cure
the declared invalidity of this Zoning Chapter.
(c) Upon the initiation of the procedures as set forth in Subsection
A(6)(a) above, the governing body shall not be required to
entertain or consider any landowner's curative amendment
filed under § 225-46A of this Zoning Chapter, nor shall the
Zoning Hearing Board be required to give a report requested
under Sections 909.1 and 916.1 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,245 subsequent to
the declaration and proposal based upon the grounds identical
to or substantially similar to those specified in the resolution
required by Subsection A(6)(a)[1] above. Upon completion of
the procedures as set forth in Subsection A(6)(a) and (b) above,
no rights to a cure pursuant to the provisions of Sections 609.1
and 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended,246 shall, from the date of the declaration and
proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis of the
substantive invalidity of the unamended Zoning Ordinance for
which there has been a curative amendment pursuant to this
section.
(d) The borough, having utilized the procedures as set forth in
Subsection A(6)(a) and (b) above, may not again utilize said
procedure for a thirty-six-month period following the date of
the enactment of a curative amendment, or reaffirmation of the
validity of this Zoning Chapter, pursuant to Subsection A(6)(b)
above; provided, however, that if after the date of declaration
and proposal there is a substantially new duty or obligation
imposed upon the borough by virtue of a change in statute or
by virtue of a Pennsylvania Appellate Court decision, the
borough may utilize the provisions of this section to prepare a
curative amendment to this Zoning Chapter to fulfill said duty
or obligation.
244. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.
245. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10909.1 and 10916.1.
246. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1.
§ 225-46 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-47
220:881
of his development may be too cumbersome or may be unavailable, the
landowner may advance the date from which time for any challenge to this
Zoning Chapter or Official Zoning Map will run under § 225-52B(2) of this
Zoning Chapter by the following procedure:
§ 225-48. Publication, advertisement and availability of
amendments.
A. The landowner may submit plans and other materials describing his
proposed use or development to the Zoning Officer for preliminary
opinion as to their compliance with this Zoning Chapter and other
applicable ordinances and Official Zoning Map. Such plans and other
materials shall not be required to meet the standards prescribed for
preliminary, tentative or final approval or for the issuance of a building
permit so long as they provide reasonable notice of the proposed use or
development and a sufficient basis for a preliminary opinion as to its
compliance.
B. If the Zoning Officer's preliminary opinion is that the use or
development complies with this Zoning Chapter and other applicable
ordinances and Official Zoning Map, notice thereof shall be published
once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the borough. Such notice shall include a general
description of the proposed use or development and its location, by
some readily identifiable directive, and the place and time where the
plans and other materials may be examined by the public. The favorable
preliminary approval under § 225-52B(2) of this Zoning Chapter and the
time therein specified for commencing a proceeding with the Zoning
Hearing Board shall run from the time when the second notice thereof
has been published.
A. Proposed amendments to this Zoning Chapter shall not be enacted
unless notice of proposed enactment is given in the manner set forth in
this section, and shall include the time and place of the meeting of the
governing body at which passage will be considered and a reference to
a place within the borough where copies of the proposed amendment
may be examined without charge or obtained for a charge not greater
than the cost thereof. The governing body shall publish the proposed
amendment once in one newspaper of general circulation in the
borough not more than 60 days nor less than seven days prior to
passage. Publication of the proposed amendment shall include either
the full text or the title and a brief summary, prepared by the borough's
Solicitor and setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail. If the
full text is not included:
(1) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the borough at the time the public notice is
published.
(2) An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the
Berks County Law library or other county office designated by the
§ 225-47 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-48
220:882
Berks County Commissioners, who may impose a fee no greater
than that necessary to cover the actual costs of storing said
ordinance.
B. In the event that substantial amendments are made in the proposed
amendment, before voting upon enactment the governing body shall, at
least 10 days prior to enactment, readvertise, in one newspaper of
general circulation in the borough, a brief summary setting forth all the
provisions in reasonable detail together with a summary of the
amendments.
§ 225-48 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-48
220:883

ARTICLE VIII
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 225-49. Creation; appointment; organization.
A. Creation of the Zoning Hearing Board. The governing body hereby
creates a Zoning Hearing Board, herein referred to as the "Board,"
consisting of three residents of the borough appointed by the governing
body, by resolution, pursuant to Article IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,247 who shall perform all the
duties and have all the powers prescribed by said Code and as herein
provided.
B. Appointment.
(1) The three residents of the Borough serving as members of the
Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to this Zoning Chapter of the
borough in effect at the time of the adoption of this Zoning Chapter
shall continue to serve as members of the Board for the balance of
their respective appointed terms. Upon the expiration of each such
term, said person or his or her replacement shall be appointed for a
term of three years. Members of the Board shall hold no other
elected or appointed office in the Borough nor shall any member be
an employee of the Borough. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No.
14-2006]
(2) The governing body may appoint, by resolution, not more than
three residents of the Borough to serve as alternate members of the
Board, whose terms of office shall be for three years and who shall
serve as provided for in Article IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.248 Alternates shall hold
no other elected or appointed office in the Borough, including
service as a member of the Planning Commission or as the Zoning
Officer, nor may any alternate be an employee of the Borough.
[Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
C. Removal. Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance,
misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a
majority vote of the governing body, taken after the member has
received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A
hearing shall be held, if the Board member requests one in writing.
D. Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the governing
body for the unexpired portion of the vacated term.
E. Compensation and expenditures for service.
(1) The members of the Board and the alternate members of the Board
may receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the governing
247. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
248. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
§ 225-49 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-49
220:885
§ 225-50. Hearings.
body, by resolution, but in no case shall it exceed the rate of
compensation authorized to be paid to the members of the
governing body.249
(2) Within the limits of funds appropriated by the governing body, the
Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel,
consultants and other technical and clerical services.
F. Organization. The Board may promulgate such rules and forms for its
procedure, not inconsistent with this chapter and other ordinances of
the Borough and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as it may
deem necessary to the proper performance of its duties and to the
proper exercise of its powers. Such rules shall be continued in force and
effect until amended or repealed by the Board or by law. The Board
shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve annual
terms as such and may succeed themselves.
G. Meetings. Meetings and hearings of the Board shall be held at the call
of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board, by majority vote,
may determine.
H. Minutes and records. The Board shall keep full public records of its
business and other official action, which records shall be the property
of the Borough. The Board shall submit reports of its activities to the
governing body, as requested by the governing body.
A. Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the Zoning Officer, the Planning Commission, adjacent
property owners (including those owners of property directly across a
street or alley from the subject property), the governing body and the
Solicitor of the Borough. Written notice by first class United States mail
with postage paid shall be given by the Board, or such person
designated by the Board, not less than seven days prior to the
scheduled hearing. In addition to the written notice provided for herein,
written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the
affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing. The first
hearing shall be commenced within 60 days from the date of the
applicant’s request, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time. Each subsequent hearing shall be held within 45 days
of the prior hearing, unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant in
writing or on the record. Any party aggrieved by the schedule or
progress of the hearings may apply to the Court of Common Pleas for
judicial relief. The hearing shall be completed no later than 100 days
after the completion of the applicant's case-in-chief, unless extended for
good cause upon application to the Court of Common Pleas. [Amended
7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
249. Editor's Note: See Ch. 43, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 225-49 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-50
220:886
B. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum
shall be not less than a majority of all members of the Board. The Board
shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the
following requirements:
(1) The hearing shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may
appoint any member or an independent attorney as a hearing
officer. The decision or, when no decision is called for, the finding
shall be made by the Board; however, the appellant or the
applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the Borough, may prior
to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings by the
Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as
final. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(2) The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of
record before the Board and any other person, including civic or
community organizations, permitted to appear by the Board. The
Board shall have power to require that all persons who wish to be
considered parties enter appearances in writing on forms provided
by the Board for that purpose.
(3) The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing
officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses
and documents requested by the parties.
(4) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
and argument and cross-examine all adverse witnesses on all
relevant issues.
(5) Formal rule of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
(6) The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings, and copies of graphic or
written material received in evidence shall be made available to
any party at cost.
(7) The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with
any issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all
parties to participate, shall not take notice of any communication,
reports, staff memoranda or other materials, except advice from its
solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest
the material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its
surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party
or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to
be present.
§ 225-50 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-50
220:887
§ 225-51. Functions of Zoning Hearing Board.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
(8) The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing
before the Board or hearing officer. When the application is
contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by the
findings of fact and conclusions based thereon together with the
reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,250 as amended, or of
this Zoning Chapter or of any other ordinance, rule or regulation of
the Borough shall contain a reference to the provisions relied on
and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the
light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing
officer, and there has been no stipulation that his decision or
findings are final, the Board shall make his report and
recommendations available to the parties within 45 days, and the
parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to
the Board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the
Board's decision shall be entered no later than 30 days after the
report of the hearing officer, except for challenges filed under
Section 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended, where the Board fails to render the decision within the
period required by this subsection or fails to commence, conduct or
complete the required hearing as provided for in § 225-50A, the
decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing to or on record
to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in favor
of the applicant because of the failure of the Board to meet or
render a decision as hereinabove provided, the Board shall give
public notice of said decision within 10 days from the last day it
could have met to render a decision in the same manner as
provided in Subsection A of this section. If the Board shall fail to
provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this
subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the
application to appeal the decision to a court of competent
jurisdiction. [Amended 7-20-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
(9) A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to
him not later than the day following its date. To all other persons
who have filed their names and addresses with the Board not later
than the last day of the hearing, the Board shall provide, by mail or
otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement
of the place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.
250. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 225-50 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-51
220:888
A. Appeals and challenges.
(1) Substantive challenges to the validity of this Zoning Chapter and
any other land use ordinances, except those brought before the
governing body pursuant to Sections 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.251
(2) Challenges to the validity of this Zoning Chapter and any other land
use ordinance, procedural questions or alleged defects in the
process of enactment or adoption, which challenges shall be raised
by an appeal taken within 30 days after effective date of said
ordinance.
(3) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including but
not limited to the granting or denial of any permit or failure to act
on the application therefor or issuance of any cease and desist
order.
(4) Appeals from a determination by the Borough Engineer or the
Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of any
floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within this
Zoning Chapter or any other land use ordinance.
(5) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under § 225-47 of
this Zoning Chapter.
(6) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Borough
Engineer in the administration of this Zoning Chapter or any other
land use ordinance or provision thereof with reference to
sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater management
insofar as the same relates to development not involving
subdivision and land development.
(7) Applications for variances from the terms of this Zoning Chapter
and any flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use
ordinance, pursuant to § 225-51B of this chapter.
(8) Applications for special exceptions under this Zoning Chapter or
any floodplain or flood hazard ordinances or such provisions within
this Zoning Chapter or any other land use ordinance, pursuant to
§ 225-51C of this chapter.
B. Variances.
(1) The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that
the provisions of this Zoning Chapter inflict unnecessary hardship
upon the applicant. The Board may by rule prescribe the form of
application and may require preliminary application to the Zoning
Officer. The Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the
following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
251. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1(a)(2).
§ 225-51 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-51
220:889
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size, of
shape or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of this Zoning Chapter in the neighborhood or
district in which the property is located.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Chapter
and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary
to enable the reasonable use of the property.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulations in issue.
(2) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended,252 and this Zoning Chapter.
(3) No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or
buildings in the same district, and no permitted or nonconforming
use of land, structures or buildings in other districts, shall be
considered grounds for the granting of a variance.
(4) The jurisdiction of the governing body shall not be infringed upon
by action of the Board in any matter which should appropriately be
the subject for an amendment to this Zoning Chapter or Zoning
Map. No variance shall be granted under this section to allow a
structure or use in a district restricted against such structure or
use.
C. Special exceptions.
(1) The Board shall grant or deny such special exceptions to the terms
of this Zoning Chapter which the Board by the provisions of this
Zoning Chapter is specifically authorized to issue. The granting of a
252. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 225-51 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-51
220:890
special exception when specifically authorized by the terms of this
Zoning Chapter shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a) Such use shall be one which is specifically authorized as a
special exception use in the district.
(b) Such special exception shall only be granted subject to any
applicable conditions and safeguards as required by this
Zoning Chapter.
(c) Such special exception may be granted subject to additional
reasonable conditions and safeguards as may be deemed by
the Board to be advisable and appropriate.
(d) Such use shall be found by the Board to be in harmony with the
general purposes and intent of this Zoning Chapter.
(e) Such use shall not adversely affect the character of the district,
nor the conservation of property values nor the health and
safety of residents or workers on adjacent properties and in the
general neighborhood.
(f) Such use shall be of such size and so located and laid out in
relation to its access streets that vehicular and pedestrian
traffic to and from such use will not create undue congestion or
hazards prejudicial to the general neighborhood.
(g) Such use shall not conflict with the direction of building
development in accordance with any Comprehensive Plan or
portion thereof which has been adopted by the governing body.
(h) When application for a special exception has been filed with
the Zoning Hearing Board and the subject matter of such
application would ultimately constitute either a land
development or subdivision as defined in § 225-5, no change or
amendment of the zoning, subdivision or other governing
ordinance or plans shall affect the decision on such application
adversely to the applicant, and the applicant shall be entitled
to a decision in accordance with the provisions of the
governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the
application was duly filed; provided, further, that should such
an application be approved by the Zoning Hearing Board, the
applicant shall be entitled to proceed with the submission of
either land development or subdivision plans within a period of
six months or longer or as may be approved by the Zoning
Hearing Board following the date of such approval in
accordance with the provisions of the governing ordinances or
plans as they stood at the time the application was duly filed
before the Zoning Hearing Board. If either a land development
or subdivision plan is so filed within said period, such plan shall
subject to the provisions of Section 508(1) through (4), and
specifically to the time limitations of Section 508(4), of the
§ 225-51 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-51
220:891
§ 225-52. Procedures for application to Zoning Hearing Board.
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, , as amended,
which shall commence as of the date of filing such land
development or subdivision plan. [Added 7-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 14-2006]
A. The Board shall act in strict accordance with the procedure specified by
Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended,253 and by this Zoning Chapter. All appeals and applications
made to the Board shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by the
Board. Every appeal or application shall refer to the specific provision
of this Zoning Chapter involved and shall exactly set forth the
interpretation that is claimed, the grounds for any challenges to the
validity of this Zoning Chapter, the use for which a special exception is
sought or the details of the variance that is applied for and the grounds
on which it is claimed that the variance should be granted, as the case
may be. In the event that the procedures set forth in this Zoning
Chapter shall be in conflict with or contrary to the procedures set forth
in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, then
and in such event the procedures set forth in the latter shall prevail.
B. Applications and appeals, together with the required filing fee, as
established by the governing body, shall be submitted to the Secretary
of the Zoning Hearing Board or other person designated by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
(1) Parties appellant before the Zoning Hearing Board. Appeals under
§ 225-51A(1) through (8), inclusive, of this Zoning Chapter may be
filed with the Board or other person designated by the Zoning
Hearing Board in writing by the landowner affected, by any officer
or agency of the borough or by any person aggrieved. Requests for
a variance under § 225-51B of this Zoning Chapter and for a special
exception under § 225-51C of this Zoning Chapter may be filed with
the Board or other person designated by the Zoning Hearing Board
by any landowner or any tenant with the permission of such
landowner.
(2) Time limitations; persons aggrieved.
(a) No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the
Board or other person designated by the Board later than 30
days after any application for development, preliminary or
final, has been approved by an appropriate officer of the
borough, agency or body if such proceeding is designed to
secure reversal or to limit the approval in any manner unless
such person alleges and proves that he had no notice,
knowledge or reason to believe that such approval had been
given. If such person has succeeded to his interest after such
253. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
§ 225-51 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-52
220:892
§ 225-53. Stay of proceedings.
approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his
predecessor in interest. The failure of anyone other than the
landowner to appeal from an adverse decision on a tentative
plan pursuant to Section 709 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,254 or pursuant to
Chapter 195, Subdivision and Land Development, or from an
adverse determination by the Zoning Officer on a challenge
to the validity of this Zoning Chapter or Official Zoning Map
pursuant to § 225-47 of this Zoning Chapter shall preclude an
appeal from a final approval except in the case where the final
submission substantially deviates from the approved tentative
approval.
(b) All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall
be filed by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the
determination is issued.
A. Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in § 225-51 of this Zoning
Chapter and during its pendency before the Board, all land
development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval
of the Zoning Officer or of any agency or body, and all official action
thereunder, shall be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or any other
appropriate agency or body certifies to the Board facts indicating that
such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case
the development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by
a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board or by the court
having jurisdiction of zoning appeals, on petition, after notice to the
Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or body. When an
application for development, preliminary or final, has been duly
approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the approval are
filed with the Board by persons other than the applicant, the applicant
may petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order
such persons to post bond as a condition to continuing the proceedings
before the Board.
B. Court hearings and determinations for posting of bonds shall be in
accordance with Section 915.1(b), (c) and (d) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.255
254. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10709.
255. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10915.1(b), (c) and (d).
§ 225-52 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-53
220:893

ARTICLE IX
Miscellaneous
§ 225-54. Appeals.
Proceedings for securing review of this Zoning Chapter or any decision,
determination or order of the governing body, the Zoning Officer, the Board
or any hearing officer adopted or issued pursuant to this Zoning Chapter
shall be in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
as amended.256
§ 225-55. Causes of action.
In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is or is proposed to be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used
in violation of this Zoning Chapter, the governing body or, with the approval
of the governing body, the Zoning Officer or any aggrieved owner or tenant
of real property who shows that his property or person will be substantially
affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute
any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate
such building, structure, landscaping or land or to prevent, in or about such
premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When
any such action is instituted by a landowner or a tenant, notice of that action
shall be served upon the borough at least 30 days prior to the time the
action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the governing body.
No such action may be maintained until such notice has been given.
§ 225-56. Enforcement remedies.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this Zoning Chapter shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the borough, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus
all court costs, including reasonable attorneys fees incurred by the
borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of a determination of the
violation by the District Justice before whom the civil enforcement
proceeding is instituted. If the defendant in the civil enforcement
proceeding neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the borough
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice determining that there
has been a violation further determines that there was a good faith
basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this Zoning
Chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of the violation by
the District Justice, and thereafter each day that a violation continues
256. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 225-54 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § 225-56
220:895
§ 225-57. Public utilities corporations and municipal exemptions.
[Amended 4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 4-2002]
shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and
reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of this Zoning
Chapter shall be paid over to the borough.
B. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
A. This Zoning Chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed
buildings, or extension thereof, used or to be used by a public utility
corporation if, upon petition of the corporation, the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present
or proposed situation of the building in question is reasonably
necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission to ensure that both the public utility corporation and the
borough receive notice of any hearing and are granted an opportunity
to appear, present witnesses, cross-examine witnesses presented by
other parties and otherwise exercise the rights of a party to the
proceedings.
C. This Zoning Chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed
buildings, structures and land uses and any extensions and alterations
thereof, owned, used or to be used by the borough, or by any authority
created solely by the borough, for the convenience and/or welfare of the
public after review by the governing body.
§ 225-56 KUTZTOWN CODE § 225-57
220:896
Appendix
Chapter A230
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A230-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Kutztown Borough
Cable Television Franchise Ordinance."
§ A230-2. Grant of franchise.
§ A230-3. Future franchise agreements.
Any future franchise agreements negotiated with providers of cable
television services to be provided within the Borough of Kutztown shall
contain the terms and conditions set forth in the agreements incorporated
by reference into § A230-2 of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown.
Chapter A231
FEES
§ A231-1. Schedule established.
The following schedule of fees is hereby established with respect to
licenses, permits and activities required or regulated under the provisions
of various chapters of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown. Applications
for and the issuance of such licenses and permits shall be subject to the
provisions of the specific chapter of the Code which is indicated for each
type of license or permit. The business, activity or operation for which the
license or permit is required shall be subject to all regulations set forth
in the chapter to which reference is made. These fees may be adopted or
revised by the Borough Council from time to time.
§ A231-1.1. Ch. 12, Appeals Boards. [Added 7-13-1999 by Res. No.
9-1999; amended 7-20-2005 by Res. No. 20-2005]
A. The Borough of Kutztown does hereby grant and approve the cable
franchise agreement negotiated with Service Electric Cablevision, Inc.,
incorporated herein by reference and to be kept on file with the
Borough Secretary.
B. The Borough of Kutztown does hereby grant and approve the cable
franchise agreement negotiated with CSI Digital, Inc., incorporated
herein by reference and to be kept on file with the Borough Secretary.
A. Article I, Code Appeals Board, § 12-8A, Appeals, hearings and
procedure. The appeal fee for an appeal to or request for hearing before
§ 225-57 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-1.1
220:897
§ A231-1.2. Ch. 60, Alarm Systems.
the Code Appeals Board shall be the sum of $200. An application for
hearing to the Code Appeals Board shall be accompanied by the above
noted appeal fee. An additional fee in the amount of $175 shall be
charged the appellant for the scheduling of any special hearing on a
date other than the regularly scheduled monthly meeting dates of the
Code Appeals Board, in order to reimburse the Borough for additional
advertising and legal costs. No such special hearing shall be scheduled
and advertised until the fee is received. Upon the payment by the
Borough of all allowable costs associated with the appeal, any unused
portion of such fees shall be returned to the appellant. In the event that
the allowable costs exceed the amount of such fees, the appellant shall
be billed for such costs, and in the absence of payment of the excess
allowable costs by the appellant, such excess allowable costs may be
collected by the Borough from the appellant in the manner provided by
law.
B. Article II, Housing License Appeals Board, § 12-28A, Appeals, hearings
and procedure. The appeal fee for an appeal to or request for hearing
before the Housing License Appeals Board shall be the sum of $200. An
application for hearing to the Housing License Appeals Board shall be
accompanied by the above noted appeal fee. An additional fee in the
amount of $175 shall be charged the appellant for the scheduling of any
special hearing on a date other than the regularly scheduled monthly
meeting dates of the Housing License Appeals Board, in order to
reimburse the Borough for additional advertising and legal costs. No
such special hearing shall be scheduled and advertised until the fee is
received. Upon the payment by the Borough of all allowable costs
associated with the appeal, any unused portion of such fees shall be
returned to the appellant. In the event that the allowable costs exceed
the amount of such fees, the appellant shall be billed for such costs, and
in the absence of payment of the excess allowable costs by the
appellant, such excess allowable costs may be collected by the Borough
from the appellant in the manner provided by law.
A. Section 60-2E, initial issuance of an alarm device: $10.
B. Section 60-5B, false alarm charges for each false alarm shall be as
follows: [Amended 4-21-2009 by Res. No. 15-2009]
(1) Thirty-day testing period: no charge.
(2) First false alarm: no charge.
(3) Second false alarm: $50.
(4) Third false alarm: $150.
(5) Fourth and subsequent false alarms (each occurrence: $300.)
§ A231-1.1 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-1.2
220:898
§ A231-1.3. Ch. 66, Animals.
§ A231-1.4. Ch. 77, Building Construction. [Amended 1-5-1998 by
Res. No. 2-1998; 4-25-2000 by Res. No. 9-2000; 6-15-2004 by Res.
No. 13-2004; 4-19-2005 by Res. No. 13-2005; 10-17-2006 by Res.
No. 25-2006; 1-18-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2011]
NOTE: 75% of revenues collected from false alarm fees will be
distributed to the Kutztown Fire Department.
A. Section 66-2, seizure and detention. The charges for the seizure and
detention of dogs shall be as follows:
(1) The charge for seizure and delivery to the owner or the Borough
holding pens is (in accordance with Pennsylvania Statutes Title 3
P.S. Agriculture, 3 P.S. § 459-302, Seizure and detention of dogs;
costs; destruction of dogs): $50. [Amended 1-15-2019 by Res.
No. 3-2019]
(2) The charge for detention in the Borough holding pens, not to
exceed five days, per day, including the day of seizure and the day
of discharge: $5.
A. Building permits, residential one- and two-family dwellings:
(1) New construction includes mechanical, electrical and plumbing
permits. (Gross square footage shall include basement, each floor
level, garage, decks and porches. Measurements shall be from
exterior face of wall to exterior face of wall.)
(a) Up to 3,500 gross square feet: $595.
(b) Per 100 gross square feet or fraction thereof above 3,500:
$8.50.
(2) Additions (mechanical, electrical, and plumbing permit fees
additional):
(a) Up to 500 gross square feet: $225.
(b) Per 100 gross square feet or fraction thereof above 500 square
feet: $ 8.50.
(3) Alterations (based on two inspections): $125. Additional
inspections charge re-inspection fees. Mechanical, electrical, and
plumbing permit fees additional.
(4) Decks/accessory and utility buildings:
(a) Up to 500 gross square feet: $120.
(b) Per 100 gross square feet or fraction thereof above 500 square
feet: $8.50.
§ A231-1.2 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-1.4
220:899
(5) Manufactured homes (HUD certified) (includes mechanical,
electrical and plumbing permits): $200.
(6) Roof (re-roof, nonstructural): $75.
(7) Swimming pools (includes electric permit):
(a) Aboveground (one visit): $95.
(b) In-ground (two visits): $190.
(8) Reinspection fees:
(a) First reinspection: $35.
(b) Each additional reinspection: $70.
(9) Demolition permit: $100.
(10) Miscellaneous construction (cell towers, retaining walls, etc.): 2%
of total cost of construction (materials and labor). Minimum fee:
$70.
(11) Consulting rate: $72 per hour.
(12) Application fee, per permit: $35.
B. Building permits, nonresidential (commercial and residential other than
one- and two-family dwellings):
(1) Plan review (includes building, energy, accessibility, mechanical,
electrical and plumbing reviews):
(a) New construction/additions: $10.65 per 100 gross square feet
($500 minimum).
(b) Renovations/alterations changes of use: $9.55 per 100 gross
square feet ($285 minimum).
(2) New construction per 100 gross square feet or fraction thereof
(includes mechanical, electrical and plumbing permits): $23.
Minimum fee: $500. (Gross square footage shall include basement,
each floor level, garage, decks and porches. Measurements shall be
from exterior face of wall to exterior face of wall.) Plan review fees
additional.
(3) Additions per 100 gross square feet or fraction thereof: (includes
mechanical, electrical and plumbing permits): $23. Minimum fee:
$500.
(4) Alterations: 1.5% total cost of construction (includes mechanical,
electrical and plumbing permits). Minimum fee: $360. Plan review
fees additional.
(5) Demolition: $100.
§ A231-1.4 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-1.4
220:900
(6) Roof (re-roof, nonstructural): $75.
(7) Swimming pools (includes electric permit):
(a) Above-ground (one visit): $95.
(b) In-ground (two visits): $190.
(8) Signs:
(a) Signs requiring final inspection only: $50.
(b) Signs requiring footing and final inspections: $100.
(9) Miscellaneous construction (cell towers, retaining walls, etc.): 2%
of total cost of construction (materials and labor). Minimum fee:
$70.
(a) Re-inspection (per reinspection): $70.
(10) Consultant rate: $72 per hour.
(11) Application fee, per permit: $35.
C. Mechanical permits, residential one- and two-family dwellings:
(1) First individual appliance, including associated ductwork/piping:
$70.
(2) Each additional individual appliance including associated
ductwork/piping: $35.
(3) Reinspection fees:
(a) First reinspection: $35.
(b) Each additional reinspection: $70.
(4) Consulting rate: $72 per hour.
(5) Application fee, per permit: $35.
D. Mechanical permits, nonresidential (commercial and residential other
than one- and two-family dwellings):
(1) Mechanical Code review: ICC formula times 0.60.
(2) First individual appliance including associated ductwork/piping:
$100.
(3) Each additional individual appliance including associated
ductwork/piping): $50.
(4) Reinspection (per reinspection): $70.
(5) Hood and duct systems (per system): $300.
§ A231-1.4 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-1.4
220:901
§ A231-1.5. Ch. 107, Electrical Standards.
(6) Fire sprinkler systems:
(a) One to 200 heads: $350.
(b) Each additional head over 200: $0.50 each.
(7) Fire detection/alarm system:
(a) Up to 15,000 square feet: $150.
(b) Each additional square foot: $0.01 each.
(8) Alternate fire suppression system: 1.5% the total cost of
construction.
(9) Consulting rate: $72 per hour.
(10) Application fee, per permit: $35.
E. Pennsylvania municipal officials training fee applied to each permit
issued: $4.
A. Section 107-4, Licensing of electricians. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Res.
No. 2-1998; 4-25-2000 by Res. No. 9-2000; 10-19-2004 by Res.
No. 36-2004257]
(1) Master license commercial: $25.
(2) Master license residential: $25.
(3) Journey license: $10
(4) Installer license: $20.
(5) Apprentice license: $10.
(6) Late fees after February 15: $10.
(7) Application for electrical examination: as per ICC rates.
B. Section 107-6, Borough permit inspection fees. [Amended
12-26-1995 by Res. No. 25-1995; 1-5-1998 by Res. No. 2-1998;
4-25-2000 by Res. No. 9-2000; 1-15-2008 by Res. No. 5-2008;
1-18-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2011]
(1) Electrical permits, residential and nonresidential:
(a) Rough wiring:
[1] One to 20 outlets: $30.
257. Editor's Note: This resolution also provided that license and late fees are payable upon
submission of applications.
§ A231-1.4 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-1.5
220:902
[2] Each additional 20 outlets: $5.
(b) Final wiring:
[1] One to 20 outlets: $30.
[2] Each additional 20 outlets: $5.
(c) Residential (new construction), based on two inspections:
[1] Single-family, up to 200 amp: $90.
[2] Over 200 amp: $100.
(d) Townhouses, based on groups of five or more units per visit,
roughs and services to be inspected in one visit: $55 each unit.
(e) Mobile homes:
[1] Service fee: $55.
[2] Feeder: $25.
(f) Services:
[1] Not over 200 amp: $55.
[2] Not over 350 amp: $65.
[3] Not over 1,000 amp: $90.
[4] Not over 1,500 amp: $175.
[5] Over 1,500 amp: $250.
(g) Feeders and panel boards:
[1] Not over 200 amp: $20.
[2] Not over 400 amp: $30.
[3] Not over 1,000 amp: $35.
[4] Up to 1,500 amp: $40.
(h) Heating and air conditioning:
[1] Thirty Kw or less: $45.
[2] Over 30 Kw: $65.
(i) Protective signaling systems:
[1] Residential: $50.
[2] Other than residential: $60.
[3] Telephone other than residential: $60.
§ A231-1.5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-1.5
220:903
[4] One hundred fifteen volt detectors: $20.
(j) Swimming pools, spas, etc.:
[1] Aboveground (single visit): $45.
[2] In-ground (two visits): $90.
[3] Three-year state certification: $180.
[4] Spa, hot tub, etc.: $45.
(k) Motors, generators, transformers:
[1] One hp to 30 hp or Kv: $35; each additional: $10.
[2] Fifty hp to 100 hp or Kv: $45; each additional: $10.
(l) Transformers, vaults, enclosures:
[1] Not over 200 Kv: $70.
[2] Not over 500 Kv: $100.
[3] Not over 1,000 Kv: $140.
[4] Over 1000 Kv: $200.
(m) Minor alterations and additions:
[1] Up to 25 outlets and a service (up to 200 amp); one visit
only: $65.
(n) Signs:
[1] First sign: $35.
[2] Each additional sign: $5.
(o) Reinspections:
[1] First reinspection: $35.
[2] Each additional reinspection: $70.
(p) Nonresidential electrical plan review fee: ICC formula times
0.60.
(q) Consulting rate: $72 per hour.
(r) Application fee, per permit: $35.
(2) Pennsylvania municipal officials training fee applied to each permit
issued: $4.
C. Section 107-7, rate schedule. [Amended last 12-20-2011 by Res. No.
20-2011]
§ A231-1.5 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-1.5
220:904
(1) Rate Schedule RGMS: Customer-Generated Net Electricity
Purchase Buyback Rate.
(a) Application. This rate schedule is for purchase by the Borough
of net customer-generated electricity at month end when the
customer-generated kilowatt hours exceed the kilowatt hours
of electricity supplied by the Borough.
(b) Net monthly buyback rate: $0.4061 per kwh for each kwh.
(c) Application provisions. This rate schedule applies to all
customer classes.
(2) Rate Schedule RG: General Residential Service.
(a) Application. This rate schedule is for single-phase residential
service in accordance with the application provisions hereof.
(b) Net monthly rate.
[1] $10.13 per month plus:
[a] $0.1848 per kwh for the first 200 kwh.
[b] $0.1503 per kwh for all additional kwh.
[2] The energy charge applies to all kwh supplied under this
rate.
[3] The net monthly rate minimum is $10.13.
(c) Water heating service. When a customer has an electric water
heater which meets all the requirements of this provision, a
block of 400 kwh is billed at $0.1503 per kwh after the first 200
kwh is billed. All additional kwh are billed at $0.1459 per kwh.
(d) Levelized budget billing. Levelized budget billing is available
at the option of the customer. When a customer elects budget
billing, the Borough will bill the customer each month an
amount approximately equal to 1/11 of the estimated annual
billing with appropriate periodic adjustments made, and a
twelfth-month payment sufficient to cover the balance owing
for a full year so the total for each twelve-month billing cycle
will equal the actual charges under the rate for the same
twelve-month billing period. In order to qualify for levelized
budget billing, the customer must have a twelve-month billing
history at the same service location with the Borough. At the
discretion of the Borough Manager, if customers are late or
delinquent in paying bills or are determined to be a credit risk,
customers may be removed or denied the option of levelized
budget billing.
(e) Application provisions:
§ A231-1.5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-1.5
220:905
[1] This rate schedule is for single-phase electric service for:
[a] A single-family dwelling and appurtenant detached
buildings.
[b] A separate dwelling unit in an apartment house.
[c] A single farm dwelling and general farm uses.
[2] This rate schedule does not apply to:
[a] Residential service that includes more than 2,000
watts of connected load attributable to commercial or
professional use exclusive of space heating and air
conditioning in common with the residence.
[b] Residential service combined with any commercial or
professional use outside the residence or in a section
of a multi-use building that is separate from the
dwelling unit.
[c] Service which includes common use for halls,
basement or other portions of an apartment building.
[d] Establishments recognized by name, notice or
advertisement, such as hotels, clubs, fraternities,
boardinghouses, institutions, orphanages, rest homes,
tourist homes and rooming houses with more than
three rooms available for such use and rectories and
convents with accommodations for more than five
adults.
[3] Where any use of service at a residence is not eligible for
the application of this rate schedule, the customer has the
option to provide separate circuits so that the portion that
is applicable can be metered and billed separately
hereunder and the remaining portion can be billed under
the applicable general service rate schedule. When
separate circuits are not provided, the entire service is
billed under the applicable general service rate schedule.
[4] Water heaters shall be automatic with a tank capacity of 30
gallons or more, equipped with noninductive heating
elements, each thermostatically controlled and so
connected that not over 5,000 watts can operate at one
time. The water heater shall be the exclusive source of hot
water at all times. The Borough may check the installation
if and when it deems necessary.
(3) Rate Schedule RH: Residential Service With All Electric House
Heating.
§ A231-1.5 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-1.5
220:906
(a) Application of schedule. This rate schedule is for single-phase
residential service in accordance with the application
provisions hereof, when electricity is the sole source of energy
for space heating, cooking and water heating.
(b) Net monthly rate:
[1] $10.13 per month plus:
[a] $0.1848 per kwh for the first 200 kwh.
[b] $0.1503 per kwh for the next 400 kwh.
[c] $0.1382 per kwh for all additional kwh.
[2] The energy charge applies to all kwh supplied under this
rate.
[3] The net monthly rate minimum is $10.13.
(c) Space heating requirements. Electric space heating units and/
or electrically operated central year-round air-conditioning
equipment shall be permanently installed and shall be the sole
means of heating the dwelling unit. Fireplaces are the only
supplementary heating source permitted in conjunction with
electric heating.
(d) Water heating requirements. Water heaters shall be automatic
with a tank capacity of 30 gallons or more, equipped with
noninductive heating elements, each thermostatically
controlled and so connected that not over 5,000 watts can
operate at one time. The water heater shall be the exclusive
source of hot water at all times. The Borough may check the
installation if and when it deems necessary.
(e) Levelized budget billing. Levelized budget billing is available
at the option of the customer. When a customer elects budget
billing, the Borough will bill the customer each month an
amount approximately equal to 1/11 of the estimated annual
billing with appropriate periodic adjustments made, and a
twelfth-month payment sufficient to cover the balance owing
for a full year so the total for each twelve-month billing cycle
will equal the actual charges under the rate for the same
twelve-month billing period. In order to qualify for levelized
budget billing, the customer must have a twelve-month billing
history at the same service location with the Borough. At the
discretion of the Borough Manager, if customers are late or
delinquent in paying bills or are determined to be a credit risk,
customers may be removed or denied the option of levelized
budget billing.
(f) Application provisions:
§ A231-1.5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-1.5
220:907
[1] This rate schedule is for single-phase electric service for:
[a] A single-family dwelling and appurtenant detached
building.
[b] A separate dwelling unit in an apartment house.
[c] A single farm dwelling and general farm use.
[2] This rate schedule does not apply to:
[a] Residential service that includes more than 2,000
watts of connected load attributable to commercial or
professional use exclusive of space heating and air
conditioning in common with the residence.
[b] Residential service combined with any commercial or
professional use outside the residence or in a section
of a multi-use building that is separate from the
dwelling unit.
[c] Service which includes common use for halls,
basement or other portions of an apartment building.
[d] Establishments recognized by name, notice or
advertisement, such as hotels, clubs, fraternities,
boardinghouses, institutions, orphanages, rest homes,
tourist homes and rooming houses with more than
three rooms available for such use and rectories and
convents with accommodations for more than five
adults.
[3] Where any use of service at a residence is not eligible for
the application of this rate schedule, the customer has the
option to provide separate circuits so that the portion that
is applicable can be metered and billed separately
hereunder and the remaining portion can be billed under
the applicable general service rate schedule. When
separate circuits are not provided, the entire service is
billed under the applicable general service rate schedule.
(4) Rate Schedule CD: Small General Service at Secondary Voltage or
Higher.
(a) Application of Rate Schedule CD. This rate schedule is for
small general service at secondary voltage or at a higher
available voltage at the option of the Borough. The billing
demand is limited to three KW for nonprofit entities where no
portion of the building is rented or leased for activities not
sponsored by the nonprofit
(b) Net monthly rate:
§ A231-1.5 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-1.5
220:908
[1] Demand: $2.12 per kilowatt for all billing kw.
[2] Kwh charge:
[a] $0.2262 per kwh for the first 100 kwh per kilowatt of
the billing kw.
[b] $0.1601 per kwh for the next 100 kwh per kilowatt of
the billing kw.
[c] $0.1354 per kwh for all additional kwh.
[3] The energy charge applies to all kwh supplied under this
rate.
[4] The net monthly rate minimum is $3.67 per kilowatt of the
minimum billing demand of three kw.
[5] Pennsylvania state sales tax is applied as required by the
Pennsylvania Department of Revenue.
(c) Billing kw:
[1] Where no demand meter is installed, billing kw is three kw.
[2] The Borough installs a demand meter when it estimates
that the demand exceeds three kw. The billing kw is the
average number of kilowatts supplied during the fifteenminute
period of maximum use during the current billing
period taken to the nearest 1/2 kilowatt, but not less than
three kw.
(5) Rate Schedule IG: General Industrial Service at Secondary Voltage
or Higher.
(a) Application of Rate Schedule IG. This rate schedule is for
general industrial service, served at a secondary voltage, or at
a higher available voltage at the option of the Borough. Where
necessary, the Borough furnishes and maintains one
transformation from line voltage to a lower Borough standard
service voltage.
(b) Net monthly rate:
[1] Demand:
[a] $15.36 per kilowatt for the first 125 kilowatts of the
billing kw.
[b] $12.68 per kilowatt for all additional kilowatts of the
billing kw.
[2] Kwh charge:
§ A231-1.5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-1.5
220:909
[a] $0.1216 per kwh for the first 150 kwh per kilowatt of
the billing kw.
[b] $0.1029 per kwh for the next 100 kwh per kilowatt of
the billing kw.
[c] $0.0883 per kwh for the next 50 kwh per kilowatt of
the billing kw.
[d] $0.0803 per kwh for all additional kwh.
[3] The energy charge applies to all kwh supplied under this
rate.
[4] The minimum monthly billing demand is 25 kw.
[5] The net monthly rate minimum is $15.36 per kw per the
minimum billing demand of 25 kw.
[6] The Pennsylvania state sales tax is applied as required by
the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue.
(c) Billing kw. The billing kw is the average number of kilowatts
supplied during the fifteen-minute period of maximum use
during the current billing period.
(6) Rate Schedule IS: Institutional Service Rate.
(a) Application of schedule. This rate schedule is for three-phase
service for a load in excess of 50 kw serving an institution of
public, charitable or educational character, excluding
industrial and commercial facilities.
(b) Two rates. The all-electric rate applies to those facilities where
electricity is the sole source of energy for space heating,
ventilating, air conditioning, cooking, water heating, lighting
and power requirements. The not-all-electric rate applies to
those facilities where only a portion of the energy needs are
supplied by electrical energy.
(c) Monthly rate:
Monthly
Consumption
(kwh)
All-Electric
Rate
(cents per
kwh)
Not-All-Electric
Rate
(cents per kwh)
15,000 and less 15.08 17.00
30,000 14.89 16.83
45,000 14.72 16.65
60,000 14.54 16.47
75,000 14.36 16.13
§ A231-1.5 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-1.5
220:910
Monthly
Consumption
(kwh)
All-Electric
Rate
(cents per
kwh)
Not-All-Electric
Rate
(cents per kwh)
90,000 14.20 15.95
105,000 13.84 15.78
120,000 12.63 15.60
135,000 13.49 15.42
150,000 13.32 15.26
165,000 13.15 15.08
180,000 and more 12.97 14.89
(d) Minimum charge: $330.89.
(7) Rate Schedule IP-H: Large General Service at 13,800 Volts or
Higher.
(a) Application of rate schedule.
[1] This rate schedule is for large general service supplied
from available lines of 13,800 volts or higher when the
customer furnishes and maintains all equipment necessary
to transform the energy from line voltage and when
electricity is the principal source of all the customer's
energy requirements, including space heating in
accordance with the application provision hereof.
[2] Electric space heating facilities shall be permanently
installed and operated for personal comfort.
(b) Net monthly rate:
[1] Demand:
[a] $14.46 per kilowatt for the first 125 kilowatts of the
billing kw.
[b] $12.96 per kilowatt for all additional kilowatts of the
billing kw.
[2] Kwh charge:
[a] $0.1153 per kwh for the first 150 kwh per kilowatt of
the billing kw.
[b] 0.1018 per kwh for the next 100 kwh per kilowatt of
the billing kw.
[c] $0.0870 per kwh for the next 50 kwh per kilowatt of
the billing kw.
§ A231-1.5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-1.5
220:911
[d] $0.0803 per kwh for all additional kwh.
[3] The energy charge applies to all kwh supplied under this
rate.
[4] The minimum billing demand is 25 kw.
[5] The net monthly rate minimum is $14.46 per kw per the
minimum billing demand of 25 kw.
[6] The Pennsylvania state sales tax is applied as required by
the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue.
(c) Billing kw. The billing kw is the average number of kilowatts
supplied during the fifteen-minute period of maximum use
during the current billing period.
(d) Application provisions:
[1] This rate schedule applies to single meter service for all of
the customer's energy requirements, under the following
conditions:
[a] The facilities for electric space heating are, in the
Borough's judgment, a significant and integral portion
of the customer's total energy requirement to be
supplied hereunder.
[b] Service supplied hereunder includes all energy
requirements on the customer's premises in a
building.
[c] All service in one building is supplied at one voltage
from one service connection.
[d] Another form of energy may be used for emergency
lighting generators and, upon Borough approval, for
other similar uses.
[e] When the customer occupies an entire building,
service hereunder may include uses of service outside
the building only when they are directly incident to
the principal use of service in the building.
[2] Supplemental use of renewable energy sources such as
wood, solar, wind and water is permitted in conjunction
with service supplied hereunder without violating the total
electric energy requirement of the rate. Any customer
system of this type that produces electric energy may not
be operated concurrently with service supplied by the
Borough except under written agreement setting forth the
conditions of such operation.
(8) Rate Schedule KF: Large General Service at 69,000 Volts or Higher.
§ A231-1.5 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-1.5
220:912
(a) Application of Rate Schedule KF. This rate schedule is for large
general service supplied from available three-phase lines of
69,000 volts or higher, with the customer furnishing and
maintaining all equipment necessary to transform the energy
from the line voltage.
(b) Net monthly rate:
[1] The KF rate shall be a block rate consisting of three rate
levels:
[a] Level I: $0.0820 per kwh.
[b] Level II: $0.0887 per kwh.
[c] Level III: $0.1239 per kwh.
[2] The rate levels shall be applied as follows. The numbers
listed with the schedules are time and based on a twentyfour-
hour clock.
[a] Schedule A: Monday through Friday, during the
months of April, May, June, July, August, September
and October:
[i] Level I rate shall apply: 23:00:00 through 6:59:59.
[ii] Level II rate shall apply: 7:00:00 through 10:59:59
and 19:00:00 through 22:59:59.
[iii] Level III rate shall apply: 11:00:00 through
18:59:59.
[b] Schedule B: For Monday through Friday, during the
months of January, February, March, November and
December:
[i] Level I rate shall apply: 23:00:00 through 6:59:59.
[ii] Level II rate shall apply: 12:00:00 through
16:59:59 and 20:00:00 through 22:59:59.
[iii] Level III rate shall apply: 7:00:00 through
11:59:59 and 17:00:00 through 19:59:59.
[c] Schedule C: For all Saturdays and Sundays and the
holidays of New Years Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas Day:
[i] Level I rate shall apply: 0:00:00 through 24:00:00.
[d] Or alternatively, at the Borough's sole discretion, the
Borough may charge a blended rate of $0.1000 per
kwh for all kwh energy charges. The blended rate
§ A231-1.5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-1.5
220:913
energy charge would apply to all kwh supplied under
this rate.
[3] The monthly rate minimum is $4,197.44.
(c) Reliability pricing model supply capacity charge. [Amended
5-15-2012 by Res. No. 11-2012; 5-23-2013 by Res. No.
11-2013]
[1] In addition to the other charges, a supply capacity charge
shall apply to Rate Schedule KF. The charge shall be based
on the customer’s peak load contribution to the Borough’s
PJM planning year peak load determinant for PJM
reliability pricing model capacity charges. The charge
shall be the product of the customer’s fixed peak load
contribution, as determined by the Borough, and the
Borough’s reliability pricing model capacity charge,
incurred by the Borough, expressed in dollars per kilowattmonth.
[2] The customer’s fixed peak load contribution shall be
determined using load data from the previous planning
year. In the event the load data is not available, the
Borough will estimate the customer fixed peak load
contribution.
[3] For June 1, 2013, through May 31, 2014, the reliability
pricing model capacity charge shall be $6.88 per kwmonth
and the fixed peak load contribution shall be 1,443
kw.
(d) The Pennsylvania state tax is applied as required by the
Pennsylvania Department of Revenue.
(e) Advanced meter monitoring service fee: If the Borough offers
and the customer subscribes to an advanced meter monitoring
service, the fee shall be $78 per month.
(9) Rate Schedule DD: Private Area Lighting Service.
(a) Application of Rate Schedule DD. This rate schedule is for the
lighting of yards, private roadways, alleys and other areas
supplied from existing overhead secondary distribution.
(b) Net monthly rate:
[1] Per light:
[a] One-hundred-seventy-five-watt mercury vapor: $15.82
[b] One-hundred-fifty-watt high pressure sodium: $15.82.
[c] Two-hundred-fifty-watt high pressure sodium: $26.93.
§ A231-1.5 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-1.5
220:914
[2] The Pennsylvania state sales tax is applied as required by
the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue.
(c) Equipment and service:
[1] The Borough installs and maintains the bracket, luminaire,
lamp and photoelectric control on a Borough-owned wood
pole. The lamp is lighted from dusk to dawn or for
approximately 4,300 hours per annum.
[2] A mercury vapor lamp of a nominal 6,650 lumens (175
watts), a high-pressure sodium lamp of a nominal 16,000
lumens (150 watts) or a high-pressure sodium lamp of a
nominal 25,500 lumens (250 watts) is installed in a
luminaire on a bracket. Lamp replacements are normally
made on the first working day after outage notification by
the customer to the Borough office. There is no credit for
outages.
[3] The Borough installs up to one span of secondary not
exceeding 150 feet from an existing secondary voltage
supply and one pole for each lamp, provided the location of
the pole is accessible by a service truck for the installation
and maintenance of the lamp and provided the Borough is
furnished a suitable right-of-way.
[4] Upon request and at the Borough's discretion, the
Borough may install an area light fixture on a suitable
customer-owned support.
[5] Where a secondary supply is not available at the desired
lamp location and/or where the distance is more than one
span, the Borough may furnish the service, provided the
customer reimburses the Borough for the Borough's
estimated added investment required to supply the service
in each case.
(10) Payment schedule and contract period for all rate schedules.
(a) Payment. The above net rates apply when bills are paid on or
before the due date specified on the bill. After the due date, the
Borough may initiate collection procedures. A late payment
charge of 10% will be applied on the unpaid balance of the
current monthly bill if payment is not received on or before the
due date.
(b) Contract period: not less than one year.
D. Section 107-8, guaranty of payment. [Amended 3-15-2005 by Res.
No. 11-2005258]
258. Editor's Note: This resolution provided it become effective retroactively to July 20, 2004.
§ A231-1.5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-1.5
220:915
(1) Amount of deposits.
(a) In the case of a consumer owning or using the premises for
commercial purposes: equivalent to the gross bill for a period
of one month as estimated by the Borough.
(b) In the case of a consumer in a residential property that is
either all electric or contains electrical heat: $200.
(c) In the case of a consumer in a residential property that has an
electric water heater therein: $100.
(d) Any other consumer in a residential property: $75.
E. Section 107-18, meter tests. [Amended 3-15-2005 by Res. No.
11-2005259]
(1) Estimated Borough labor expended.
(a) Technician's labor: 1/2 hour labor rate (as established by
§ A231-2, as amended from time to time by resolution).
(b) Vehicle: 1/4 hour equipment rate (as established by § A231-2,
as amended from time to time by resolution).
(c) Borough Hall Office personnel: 1/2 hour labor rate (as
established by § A231-2, as amended from time to time by
resolution).
(2) Testing fee to be refunded should test find meter to be inaccurate
according to the prescribed tolerances as per Section 18 of the
Electrical Code Ordinance No. 13-1991.
F. Section 107-23, reconnections; total amount due prior to reconnection.
[Amended 3-15-2005 by Res. No. 11-2005; 12-19-2006 by Res.
No. 34-2006]
(1) Reconnection during working hours, the sum total of:
(a) Reconnection fee of $15.
(b) Utilities Division labor: one-half-hour labor rate (as established
by § A231-2, as amended from time to time by resolution).
(c) Truck time (using pickup truck): one-half-hour equipment rate
(as established by § A231-2, as amended from time to time by
resolution).
(d) The sum total of Subsection F(1)(a), (b) and (c) shall be
rounded up to the nearest whole dollar.
(e) Plus delinquent bill (if any).
259. Editor's Note: This resolution provided it become effective retroactively to July 20, 2004.
§ A231-1.5 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-1.5
220:916
(2) Reconnection after hours (exception: as per policy manual):
(a) Reconnection fee of $15.
(b) Utilities Division labor: two hours of labor at the overtime rate
(as established by § A231-2, as amended from time to time by
resolution).
(c) Truck time (using pickup truck): one-half-hour equipment rate
(as established by § A231-2, as amended from time to time by
resolution).
(d) The sum total of Subsection F(2)(a), (b) and (c) shall be
rounded up to the nearest whole dollar.
(e) Plus delinquent bill (if any).
G. Section 107-26, temporary service for construction from overhead
facilities (120/240 volt single phase) (All temporary service charges
shall be paid in advance.)
(1) New home construction where meter and service loop can be
transferred to new home from temporary location: $8.
(2) Install new service loop and remove temporary service loop plus
transfer meter: $15.
(3) If secondary must be run to supply temporary service or if poles
and guys are required: as determined by Borough Manager and
shall be based upon an estimate of the costs to be incurred.
H. Section 107-27, temporary service for construction from underground
facilities (120/240 volt single phase). (All temporary service charges
shall be paid in advance.)
(1) New home construction where meter and underground service can
be transferred to new home: $8.
(2) Install new underground service and remove temporary
underground service plus transfer meter: $15.
(3) If secondary must be run to supply temporary service or if poles
and guys are required: as determined by Borough Manager and
shall be based upon an estimate of the costs to be incurred.
I. Section 107-28, underground for secondary service, 400 amperes or
less.
(1) Service lateral (new).
(a) Single phase.
[1] Service charge: $70.
§ A231-1.5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-1.5
220:917
[2] Additional charge, per foot of service line in excess of 75
feet: $0.35.
(b) Three phase.
[1] Service charge: $125.
[2] Additional charge, per foot of service line in excess of 75
feet: $0.70.
(2) Service lateral replacement.
(a) Existing overhead service in the judgment of the Borough
Electric Department of inadequate capacity or physical
reliability.
[1] Single phase.
[a] Service charge: $70.
[b] Additional charge, per foot of service line in excess of
75 feet: $0.35.
[2] Three phase.
[a] Service charge: $125.
[b] Additional charge, per foot of service line in excess of
75 feet: $0.70.
(b) Existing overhead service in the judgment of the Borough
Electric Department of adequate capacity and physical
reliability.
[1] Single phase.
[a] Service charge: $100.
[b] Additional charge, per foot of service line in excess of
75 feet: $0.35.
[2] Three phase.
[a] Service charge: $165.
[b] Additional charge, per foot of service line in excess of
75 feet: $0.70.
J. Section 107-31, provisions pertaining to subdivisions.
(1) Per house lot.
(a) Lot charge per 100 foot frontage: $200.
(b) Additional charge, per foot of average front footage in excess
of 100 feet: $1.
§ A231-1.5 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-1.5
220:918
§ A231-1.6. (Reserved)260
§ A231-1.7. Ch. 123, Floodplain Regulations. [Added 4-8-1997 by
Res. No. 8-1997; amended 4-19-2005 by Res. No. 12-2005]
§ A231-1.8. Ch. 135, Housing Standards. [Amended 6-24-2003 by
Res. No. 12-2003; 7-20-2005 by Res. No. 20-2005]
(c) Additional charge, per foot of service line in excess of 75 feet:
$1.
(2) Per apartment house lot and row house lot: the amount by which
the estimated cost of underground facilities exceeds the estimated
cost of overhead facilities for serving the lot, as determined by the
Borough after applicant has submitted his or her plans for
placement, layout, voltage and factors affecting such costs.
K. Section 107-32, dusk-to-dawn area lighting.
(1) Monthly rental fee, per light.
(a) One hundred fifty high-pressure sodium vapor: $9.26.
(b) Two hundred fifty high-pressure sodium vapor: $15.85.
(c) One hundred seventy-five mercury vapor: $9.26.
L. Municipal Code official training fee: $2. [Added 6-15-2004 by Res.
No. 13-2004]
A. Section 123-17, Schedule of fees.
(1) Application fee/deposit for appeal to Zoning Hearing Board: $500.
(2) An application for an appeal shall be accompanied by the above
noted fee/deposit. Upon payment by the Borough of all costs
associated with the appeal, any unused portion of the fee/deposit
shall be returned to the applicant. In the event that the costs
exceed the fee/deposit, the applicant shall be billed for such costs,
and in the absence of payment of the excess costs by the applicant,
such costs may be collected by the Borough from the applicant in
the manner provided by law.
A. Section 135-4A(1), annual license for lease for occupancy. Annual
license fees in connection with the lease for occupancy of the following
living units shall be as follows: [Amended 12-18-2007 by Res. No.
44-2007; 1-6-2014 by Res. No. 1-2014261]
260. Editor's Note: Former § A231-1.6, Ch. 110, Fiber-optic communications network, added
7-16-2002 by Res. No. 14-2002, as amended, was repealed 8-18-2009 by Ord. No. 6-2009.
Current rates, charges and fees are on file in the Borough offices.
261. Editor’s Note: This resolution also provided that the amended fees would become effective
upon issuance of the 2014-2015 housing licenses.
§ A231-1.5 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-1.8
220:919
§ A231-1.9. Ch. 156, Parks and Recreation.
§ A231-1.10. Ch. 160, Peddling and Soliciting.
(1) Single let dwelling, apartment or efficiency apartment: $63.
(2) Boardinghouse: $63.
(3) Rooming house:
(a) Per unit: $63.
(b) Per sleeping room within unit: $53.
B. Section 135-4A(3), fee for failure to permit inspection at time agreed
upon in advance: $30.
A. Section 156-41, Fees in lieu of dedication of land.
(1) Amount of fees. In those instances where the payment of a fee in
lieu of dedication of land for recreational purposes is required and/
or permitted by the terms of Chapter 195, Subdivision and Land
Development, and Chapter 156, Article III, Recreation and Parks
Plan, the applicable fee shall be as follows:
(a) Residential development. The developer of a subdivision or
land development shall be required to pay a fee in lieu of
dedicating land, such fee to be in the amount of $1,000 per
dwelling unit, for all such dwelling units authorized as part of
the approval of the subdivision and/or land development under
the terms of Chapter 195, Subdivision and Land Development.
(b) Nonresidential development. No fee shall be required with
respect to a nonresidential development or the nonresidential
portion of any development.
(c) Mixed uses. In those instances where the proposed subdivision
and/or land development involves a mixture or combination of
residential and nonresidential uses, the applicable fee shall be
the amount determined by the application of the formula set
forth in Subsection A(1)(a) hereinabove to the residential
portion.
(2) Calculation of fees. The basis for the fees required by Subsection
A(1) above is set forth on the fee calculation page annexed hereto,
incorporated herein and marked as "Exhibit A."262
A. Section 160-5, licenses.
(1) If license issued on a daily basis, per day: $3.
(2) If license issued on a monthly basis, per month: $15.
262. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ A231-1.8 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-1.10
220:920
§ A231-1.11. Ch. 163, Plumbing. [Amended 12-26-1995 by Res. No.
2-1995; 1-5-1998 by Res. No. 2-1998; 4-25-2000 by Res. No. 9-2000]
§ A231-1.12. (Reserved)263
(3) If license issued on an annual basis, per year: $75.
A. Section 163-3A, permits. Permit fees in connection with the Plumbing
Code shall be as follows: [Amended 6-15-2004 by Ord. No. 13-2004;
10-17-2006 by Res. No. 25-2006; 1-18-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2011]
(1) Residential one- and two family dwellings.
(a) First seven fixtures; minimum fee: $70.
(b) Each additional fixture: $10.
(c) Reinspection fees:
[1] First reinspection: $35.
[2] Each additional reinspection: $70.
(2) Nonresidential (commercial and residential other than one- and
two-family dwellings):
(a) Plumbing Code review: ICC formula times 0.60.
(b) First seven fixtures; minimum fee: $100.
(c) Each additional fixture: $15.
(d) Reinspection (per reinspection): $70.
(3) Consulting rate: $72 per hour.
(4) Application fee, per permit: $35.
(5) Pennsylvania municipal officials training fee applied to each permit
issued: $4.
B. Section 163-3A, licensure. [Added 10-19-2004 by Res. No. 36-2004]
(1) Master license commercial: $25.
(2) Master license residential: $25.
(3) Journey license: $10.
(4) Apprentice license: $10.
(5) Installer license: $20. [Added 11-16-2004 by Res. No 38-2004]
(6) Late fees after February 15: $10.
(7) Application for plumbing examination: as per ICC rates.
§ A231-1.10 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-1.13
220:921
§ A231-1.13. Ch. 185, Solid Waste. [Amended 4-9-1996 by Res. No.
17-1996; 1-5-1998 by Res. No. 2-1998; 12-28-2000 by Res. No.
23-2000; 1-16-2007 by Res. No. 3-2007; 2-20-2007 by Res. No.
5-2007; 12-20-2011 by Res. No. 19-2011; 12-17-2013 by Res. No.
16-2013; 12-20-2016 by Res. No. 20-2016; 10-17-2017 by Res. No.
14-2017; 12-18-2018 by Res. No. 18-2018; 12-17-2019 by Res. No.
11-2019]
A. Effective January 2020 (payment due and payable on and after February
25, 2020), the fees and charges for the collection and disposal of refuse
or large items shall be as follows:
(1) Except as hereinafter provided, per month per dwelling unit:
$38.50.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions above, if any dwelling unit is
occupied by any person or his or her spouse (if a member of the
household) shall be 62 years of age or older, per month per such
dwelling unit: $21.
(3) Additional charge for collection of containers in excess of three per
collection period, per additional container per collection: $2.50.
(4) Additional charge for collection of refuse, large items or dumpsters
not accessible during a scheduled collection where a return to the
premises is required for the purpose of collecting same, per
collection: as established in § A231-2 of Chapter A231.
(5) Dumpsters.
(a) From dumpsters rented from the Borough of Kutztown having
a capacity of:
[1] One-and-one-half cubic yards, per month: $200.
[2] Two cubic yards, per month: $239.
[3] Four cubic yards, per month: $359.
[4] Six cubic yards, per month: $516.
(b) To purchase a dumpster from the Borough of Kutztown:
Borough cost plus $60.
(c) From dumpsters not owned by the Borough of Kutztown or for
pick-up in excess of the standard collection for dumpsters
owned by the Borough of Kutztown, per cubic yard per
collection, based upon the entire capacity of the dumpster:
$15.
263. Editor's Note: Former § A231-1.12, Ch. 177, Sewers, added 5-14-2002 by Res. No. 10-2002,
as amended, was repealed 8-18-2009 by Ord. No. 8-2009. Current rates are on file in the
Borough offices.
§ A231-1.13 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-1.13
220:922
§ A231-1.14. Ch. 189, Stormwater Management. [Added 4-25-2000
by Res. No. 9-2000]
§ A231-1.15. Ch. 192, Streets and Sidewalks.
B. Additional charge for the collection and disposal of large items, as
follows:
(1) Large stuffed chair or recliner, sofa or loveseat and/or large table:
$30. (NOTE: Sectional sofas will be charged per piece.)
(2) Large appliances such as refrigerator [with door off and
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) removed by a person certified to do
work], air conditioner (CFCs removed by a person certified to do
work), stove, washer/dryer and/or electronic equipment, (excluding
televisions): $30.
(3) Televisions: $50.
(4) Mattress, box spring, small table, kitchen chair (small): $7.
(5) Rugs, any size (except nine by 12 and larger): $3.
(6) Rugs, nine by 12 and larger: $6.50.
(7) Christmas trees: $10.
(8) Any other large items not specified above, excluding tires: cost to
be determined by the Borough.
C. All fees charged shall be paid monthly.
D. Any item used herein that has been defined in Chapter 185 shall have
the meaning applicable to such term in Chapter 185.
A. Section 189-13, Fees and expenses.
(1) Review of stormwater drainage plan:
(a) Filing fee: $700, plus $50 per area of total drainage area.
(b) Inspections: $50.00 per inspection.
A. Section 192-3, Violations and penalties. [Added 10-24-2000 by Ord.
No. 6-2000; amended 3-16-2011 by Ord. No. 2-2011]
(1) Snow removal notice: $25.
(2) Snow removal citation: $50 minimum to $600 maximum.
B. Sections 192-14 and 192-15, permits.
(1) Permit issuance fees: Issuance fees are used to defray costs
incurred by the Borough in reviewing and processing the
application and plan(s), including the preliminary review of the site
§ A231-1.13 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-1.15
220:923
location identified in the application, and issuing and processing
the permit.
(a) Issuance fee: $20.
(b) Supplement fee (each six-month time extension) (each
submitted change): $10
(c) Emergency permit card (each card): $5.
(2) General permit inspection fees: General inspection fees are used to
defray costs incurred by the Borough in spot inspection(s) of
permitted work and/or subsequent inspection(s) after the
permitted work has been completed, to ensure compliance with the
permit and these regulations.
(a) Underground facilities (e.g., pipe lines, buried cable with
pedestals, conduit, manholes, headwall, inlet and grate). This
fee is calculated on the total linear feet of the facility or
facilities being permitted within the right-of-way.
[1] Physically connected facility or facilities (first 50 feet or
fraction thereof) (each section): $20.
[2] Additional physically connected facilities (each 100 feet or
fraction thereof): $5.
(b) Surface openings (e.g., service connections performed
independently of underground installation, pipe line repairs)
(each opening): $15.
(c) Aboveground facilities (e.g., poles, guys and/or anchors if
installed independently of poles):
[1] Up to 10 physically connected aboveground facilities (each
continuous group): $20.
[2] Additional aboveground physically connected facilities
(each pole with appurtenances): $2.
(d) Crossings (e.g., overhead tipples, conveyers or pedestrian
walkways and undergrade subways or mines): $80.
(3) Additional inspection fees. If the Borough determines that the
permitted work is of sufficient magnitude or importance to warrant
assignment of one or more inspectors to observe said work, on
more than a spot-inspection basis, the permittee shall be charged
for all salary, overhead and expenses incurred by each inspector
and the Borough.
(4) Temporary and permanent restoration fees. (Public utilities
franchised in the Borough are exempt.)
§ A231-1.15 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-1.15
220:924
(a) Restoration fees cover the cost for the Borough to make
necessary temporary and permanent restoration of trenches. A
deposit of the required fee by the applicant shall be held by the
Borough to guarantee that the restorations have been made. If
the restorations are to be made by the Borough, the deposit
shall be used to cover the cost to make the restorations. The
fees for said restorations are as follows:
[1] Rigid concrete paving:
[a] Less than 50 square yards, per square yard: $40.
[b] Greater than 50 square yards, per square yard: $30.
[2] Flexible base paving:
[a] Less than 50 square yards, per square yard: $25
[b] Greater than 50 square yards, per square yard: $20
[3] Paved shoulder:
[a] Less than 50 square yards, per square yard: $18.
[b] Greater than 50 square yards, per yard: $13.
[4] Other shoulders:
[a] Less than 50 square yards per square yard: $8.
[b] Greater than 50 square yards, per square yard: $5.
(b) If the costs to the Borough to make the restorations and/or
inspections exceed the amount on deposit, the applicant, upon
written notification by the Borough, shall immediately
reimburse the Borough for the costs incurred with said
inspections and/or restorations.
(c) If the applicant makes said restorations, upon completion of
final restoration and receipt of written notification by the
Borough, the Borough shall within 45 days make a refund for
the deposit portion of the cost of the restorations' guaranty to
the applicant.
(5) Bonding of public utilities.
(a) Public utility corporations operating under a franchise within
the Borough shall have on file with the Borough a bond in the
amount of $5,000 each year, covering all openings or
excavations made or to be made in a calendar year, or shall
furnish a bond in the amount determined by the Borough
covering the proposed openings or excavation set out in the
application. The aforesaid bonds shall have either corporate
surety or surety approved by the Borough Solicitor and shall be
§ A231-1.15 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-1.15
220:925
§ A231-1.16. Ch. 195, Subdivision and Land Development.
[Amended 1-5-1998 by Res. No. 2-1998]
conditioned to indemnify the Borough in the event of any loss,
liability or damage that may result or accrue from or because
of the making, existence or manner of guarding or constructing
any such opening or excavation during the term of said bond.
(b) Said bonds shall be approved or disapproved by the Borough
Solicitor, the proper fee determined by a duly adopted
resolution of the Borough Council. The bond shall then be filed
with the Borough Superintendent.
(6) Borough authorities exempt. Any municipal authority created by
the Borough shall be exempt from the permit fees, general permit
inspection fees, additional inspection fees, temporary and
permanent restoration fees and bonds of public utilities as provided
herein. Borough authorities, however, are not exempted from
obtaining a permit as provided for in the Kutztown Borough Street
Occupancy Ordinance.
(7) Blasting bond amounts: When blasting will be required, a blasting
bond shall be provided in the following amounts:
(a) Length of trench or opening:
[1] Less than 500 feet: $50,000.
[2] Five hundred to 1,000 feet: $75,000.
[3] One thousand to 2,000 feet: $150,000.
[4] Greater than 2,000 feet: $200,000.
C. Section 192-22, Curb, sidewalk and driveway construction fees.
[Amended 12-26-1995 by Res. No. 25-1995; 1-5-1998 by Res. No.
2-1998; 4-25-2000 by Res. No. 9-2000; 3-12-2002 by Ord. No.
1-2002; 10-17-2006 by Res. No. 25-2006]
(1) Application: $25.
(2) Permit:
(a) Curb and sidewalk: $75.
(b) Curb: $50.
(c) Driveway: $50.
(d) Sidewalk: $50.
A. Section 195-43, Subdivision and land development filing fee schedule.
(1) Review of a residential subdivision having:
§ A231-1.15 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-1.16
220:926
§ A231-1.17. Ch. 212, Vehicles and Traffic. [Amended 1-23-1996 by
Res. No. 5-1996; 2-27-1996 by Res. No. 10-1996]; 11-26-1996 by
Ord. No. 13-1996; 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000; 1-15-2008 by Res.
No. 7-2008; 8-19-2008 by Ord. No. 9-2008; 1-20-2015 by Ord. No.
1-2015; 9-17-2019 by Ord. No. 2-2019]
(a) Ten or more dwelling units or lots: $1,000 plus $40 for each
dwelling unit or lot.
(b) Fewer than 10 dwelling units or lots: $500 plus $40.00 for each
dwelling unit or lot.
(2) Review of a commercial or industrial subdivision: $1,000 plus $150
for each acre or fraction thereof.
(3) Review of land development: $1,000 plus $500 for each acre or
fraction thereof over one acre.
A. Section 212-13.1, Penalties for violations of proclamations issued by
Mayor (other than penalties for violations covered by the Vehicle Code
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or other sections of Chapter
212): $25.
B. Section 212-26, Metered parking.
(1) The parking rates and the length of time that parking is permissible
in any individual parking space shall be regulated by the meter or
kiosk immediately adjacent thereto. Notice thereof shall be given to
the public, stating the length of time during which parking is
permitted and the conditions regulating the same, by either placing
said notice on the parking meter or kiosk or in the immediate
vicinity of said parking facility.
(2) Rates:
(a) Municipal Lot (22 S. Whiteoak St.): Initial 15 minutes are
exempt; $0.25 per 15 minutes thereafter.
[1] Extend-by-phone service fee: $0.25 per transaction.
(3) Penalty for violation of § 212-26A: $25.
(4) If not paid within 20 days from the date that the violation notice
was served shall make the owner or operator subject to the penalty
for the violation equal to two times the amount due.
C. Sections 212-27 through 212-31, and 212-111 penalty for parking
violation other than § 212-28M and N, person with a disability and
disabled veterans.
(1) Penalty: $25.
§ A231-1.16 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-1.17
220:927
§ A231-1.17.1. (Reserved).264
§ A231-1.18. Ch. 218, Water and Sewers. [Added 8-24-1999 by Res.
No. 12-1999; amended 6-25-2002 by Res. No. 13-2002; 6-15-2004 by
Res. No. 15-2004; 1-18-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2011; 1-19-2016 by Res.
No. 2-2016]
§ A231-1.19. Ch. 220, Wellhead Protection.
(2) If not paid within 20 days from the date that the violation notice
was served shall make the owner or operator subject to the penalty
for the violation equal to two times the amount due.
D. Section 212-28M(2) and (3) and 212-28N, handicapped persons and
disabled veterans, penalty for parking violation: $50 minimum to $200
maximum.
E. Section 212-39, residential parking permits and renewals: $10.
F. Section 212-108, residential parking permits and renewals for areas
outside of time limit parking: $10. Applicants over 64 years of age are
exempt from application and renewal fees.
G. Section 212-57, penalty for snow emergency route violation: $50.
A. Section 218-3, deposit.
(1) Deposit for water: $4,000.
(2) Deposit for sewers: $4,000.
B. Section 218-4, cost for facilities fee. The fee imposed for the furnishing
of a water meter and the installation of a water meter shall be in an
amount equal to the greater of the cost of furnishing such water meter
and the installation thereof or the sum of $500.
A. The following fees, charges and expenses are hereby established
pursuant to Chapter 220 and made applicable to applications, special
permits, reviews, inspections, appeals and other matters pertaining to
Ch. 220:
(1) Application and special permit fee in connection with Ch. 220:
(a) Application fee (payable on submission): $50.
(b) Special permit fee (payable upon approval of application): $50.
(2) Inspection (per 0.25 hour): $10.
(3) Special inspection/review fee (When application for a borough
special permit is filed which will require special expertise to
264. Editor's Note: Former § A231-1.17.1, Water, as amended, was repealed 8-18-2009 by Ord.
No. 8-2009. Current rates are on file in the Borough offices.
§ A231-1.17 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-1.19
220:928
§ A231-1.20. Ch. 225, Zoning.
complete its review and issue a determination, including special
inspection expertise, the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to
require inspections and/or reviews by the Borough Engineer.): Cost
incurred by Borough.
(4) Application fee/deposit for appeal to Zoning Hearing Board: $500.
[Amended 4-8-1997 by Res. No. 8-1997; 04-19-2005 by Res.
No. 14-2005]
(5) An application for an appeal shall be accompanied by the above -
noted fee/deposit. Upon payment by the Borough of all costs
associated with the appeal, any unused portion of the fee/deposit
shall be returned to the applicant. In the event that the costs
exceed the fee/deposit, the applicant shall be billed for such costs,
and in the absence of payment of the excess costs by the applicant,
such costs may be collected by the Borough from the applicant in
the manner provided by law. [Added 4-8-1997 by Res. No.
8-1997; amended 4-19-2005 by Res. No. 14-2005]
B. Pursuant to Chapter 220, no action shall be taken on any application or
appeal until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in
full. Therefore, no special inspections (as described hereinabove) shall
be commenced until the applicant shall have deposited with the
Borough Code Enforcement Office a sum equal to the estimated cost (as
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer) of conducting such
special inspections. Further, no determination of an application, nor any
special permit, shall be issued until all fees, charges and expenses
imposed herein have been paid in full.
C. The form "Wellhead Protection Permit Application" annexed hereto,
marked as "Exhibit A," and incorporated herein by reference is hereby
approved as the form of application for use pursuant to Chapter 220.265
A. Section 225-45, schedule of fees, charges and expenses.
(1) Application, permit and certificate fees: [Amended 12-26-1995
by Res. No. 25-1995; 10-17-2006 by Res. No. 25-2006
(a) Application fee: $25.
(b) Permit/certificate fee based on construction costs:
[1] Zero to $5,000: $50.
[2] Five thousand one dollars to $25,000: $75.
[3] Twenty-five thousand one dollars to $50,000: $100.
[4] Fifty thousand one dollars or greater: $150.
265. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ A231-1.19 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-1.20
220:929
§ A231-2. Borough labor and equipment rates. [Amended last
2-20-2018 by Res. No. 3-2018]
The Borough of Kutztown shall charge the following billing rates for
Borough labor and equipment:
(c) Change of use: $50.
(d) Signs:
[1] Minimum fee: $25.
[2] Fee per square foot: $2.
(2) Application fee/deposit for appeal to Zoning Hearing Board: $750.
[Amended 3-11-1997 by Res. No. 6-1997; 2-18-2003 by Res.
No. 3-2003; 1-18-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2011]
(3) An application for an appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board shall be
accompanied by the above-noted fee/deposit. Upon the payment by
the Borough of all allowable costs associated with the appeal, any
unused portion of the fee/deposit shall be returned to the applicant.
In the event that the allowable costs exceed the fee/deposit, the
applicant shall be billed for such costs, and in the absence of
payment of the excess allowable costs by the applicant, such excess
allowable costs may be collected by the Borough from the applicant
in the manner provided by law. [Added 3-11-1997 by Res. No.
6-1997]
(4) Application fee for preliminary opinion: $100. (In addition, the
applicant shall bear all advertising costs in connection with the
requirements for obtaining a preliminary opinion).
(5) Application fee for requested plan review and report, other than
zoning, building or plumbing permit applications, per request: $50.
(6) Application fee for property, building, housing and/or plumbing
inspection and report, other than those inspections provided for in
connection with the zoning, building, housing and plumbing permit
fees, per inspection: $95. [Amended 6-24-2003 by Res. No.
12-2003]
A. Labor rates.
§ A231-1.20 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-2
220:930
Straight
Time 1/2 Hour
Minimum
Charge
Straight
Time Hourly
Charge
Overtime
Hourly Charge
Electric Division
hourly personnel
$23 $46 $69
Water Division
hourly personnel
$23 $46 $69
Wastewater
Division hourly
personnel
$23 $45.75 $68.75
Telecom Division
hourly personnel
$23 $45.75 $68.75
Public Works
Division hourly
personnel
$21.75 $43.50 $65.25
Clerical hourly
personnel
$19 $38 $57
Administrative
personnel
$29.50 $58.75 N/A
Public Safety
Division Police
$47.25 $94.50 N/A
Community
Service Officers
$12.50 $25 $37.50
Billing Notes:
1. The billing of straight-time rates or overtime rates will be
determined in accordance with the actual application of pay
required from the Borough of Kutztown (employer) to the Borough
employee(s).
2. A minimum of 1/2 hour shall be billed for work performed while the
employee(s) are receiving straight-time compensation, and to the
nearest quarter hour from the total thereafter.
3. A two-hour minimum of overtime shall be billed for special call-outs
when the employee is entitled to overtime and two-hour minimum
compensation, and to the nearest quarter hour from the total
thereafter.
4. Administration classification includes Code Inspector and Planning
and Code Office Administrator.
5. A flat fee of $10 will be charged for special pickup of discarded
Christmas trees as per policy adopted by the Kutztown Borough
Council.
§ A231-2 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-2
220:931
B. Equipment rates. (These rates do not include labor/operator rates.)
NOTE: All equipment must be operated by a Borough employee unless
otherwise authorized by a Borough Superintendent.
(1) Bobcat: $45 per hour.
(a) Accessories:
[1] Pavement breaker: $30 per hour.
[2] Broom: $26 per hour.
(2) Paint sprayer (line striping): $18 per hour.
(3) Pressure washer: $18 per hour.
(4) Snowblower: $11 per hour.
(5) Bucket truck: $50 per hour.
(6) Roller: $28 per hour.
(7) Tamper - jumping jack: $13 per hour.
(8) Generator (large trailer-mounted): $65 per day plus fuel used.
(9) Welder: $22 per hour.
(10) Air compressor: $80 per day plus fuel used.
(a) Accessories:
[1] Jackhammer: $18 per day.
[a] Accessories:
[i] One each pavement breaker, hand-held: $8 per
day.
[ii] One each asphalt cutter, five inches: $8 per day.
[iii] One each moll point: $8 per day.
(11) Pickup truck: $25 per hour.
(12) Dump truck: $50 per hour.
(13) Line truck: $55 per hour.
(14) John Deere backhoe: $78 per hour.
(15) Garbage packer truck: $55 per hour.
(16) Forklift: $30 per hour.
(17) Salter/truck: $55 per hour plus cost of salt.
(18) Snow loader (belt): $78 per hour.
§ A231-2 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-2
220:932
(19) Four-wheel rubber tire loader (Volvo): $99 per hour.
(20) Ditch witch trencher: $21 per hour.
(21) Street sweeping (municipalities only): $50 per hour plus cost of
labor [except Maxatawny Township for college area and
surrounding areas only (College Boulevard, etc.)].
(22) Tamper - vibratory plate: $10 per hour.
(23) Two-inch pump: $10 per hour.
(a) Accessories:
[1] Suction hose per ten-foot length: $1.60 per day.
[2] Discharge hose per ten-foot length: $1.05 per day.
(24) Three-inch pump: $12 per hour.
(a) Accessories:
[1] Suction hose per ten-foot length: $2.05 per day.
[2] Discharge hose per ten-foot length: $1.60 per day.
(25) Breaker for boom mounting: $37 per hour.
(26) Crimping tool - pilot tool: $8 per day.
(27) Tapping machine (Do not loan out):
(a) Per TAP: $38.90.
(b) Plus pickup truck: $16 per hour.
(28) Concrete saw: $11.25 per hour, plus blade charge (minimum blade
charge is $30; $138.80 per 1/32 blade use).
(29) Pipe cutter- ductile iron or cast iron: $22.50 per day.
(30) Pipe trailer: $7.20 per day.
(31) Hand tamper: $4 per day.
(32) Pipe locator:
(a) Underground electric line locator: $8 per hour.
(b) Water line: $8 per hour.
(33) Leak detector (water): $8 per hour.
(34) Fire hydrant de-chlor equipment: $10 per hour (plus de-chlor
tablets: $0.85 each).
(35) Sewer line video camera: $40 per hour.
§ A231-2 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-2
220:933
(36) Cable fault locator (electric): $8 per hour.
(37) Number 18 tractor - mowing, etc.: $30 per hour.
(38) Brush chipper: $50 per hour.
(39) Photocopying: $0.25 per side of sheet of paper.
(40) Laminating: $0.75 per page.
(41) Cones: $1 per cone per day.
(a) Cost per each cone for replacement:
[1] Cone: $17.95.
[2] Crosswalk sign: $25.50.
(b) Sign stands: $1 per sign per day.
(c) Cost per each stand for replacement: $20.
(42) Barricades. [NOTE: Under emergency situation only, the Borough
can loan out barricades/flashers to contractors at the above-listed
fees, plus labor for setup and removal.]
(a) Cost per each barricade:
[1] Class I wooden (no lights):
[a] Replacement: $175.
[b] Rental: $3 per day.
[2] Class II nonmetallic (with lights):
[a] Replacement: $53.50.
[b] Rental: $7.50 per day.
[3] Class III metallic (with lights):
[a] Replacement: $251.
[b] Rental: $15 per day.
(43) Steel plates (for securing excavations):
(a) Replacement: $1,000.
(b) Rental: $15 each per day.
(44) Flashers. [NOTE: Under emergency situation only, the Borough can
loan out barricades/flashers to contractors at the above-listed fees,
plus labor for setup and removal.]
§ A231-2 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-2
220:934
§ A231-3. Fees for notary public services. [Added 12-26-1995 by
Res. No. 27-1995; amended 7-20-2005 by Res. No. 24-2005]
§ A231-4. Fees for publications. [Added 1-23-1996 by Res. No.
4-1996]
(a) Cost for replacement of flashers if lost or stolen or damaged
(includes batteries): $18.25 each.
C. In addition to labor and equipment charges, administrative expenses
and overhead costs will be applied and billed for reimbursement to the
Borough, with the amount and/or method of charge to be determined by
the Borough Manager.
D. The above-listed fees shall become effective March 21, 2017, through
adoption of this resolution and shall thereafter continue in effect until
the same are changed by action of the Council of the Borough of
Kutztown.
A. The Borough of Kutztown shall charge fees for notary public services as
fixed by the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and set
forth by the Pennsylvania Association of Notaries, with an effective date
of May 28, 2005. A copy of said fees are posted in the offices of the
Borough of Kutztown, 45 Railroad Street, Kutztown, Pennsylvania.
B. These fees may be waived at the Borough Manager's discretion for
services, when said services are requested and/or benefiting the
Borough of Kutztown.
A. The following is a schedule of fees and charges for publications of the
Borough:
Type Fee
The Code of the Borough of Kutztown $175
Supplements to the Code of the Borough of Kutztown Cost
Zoning pamphlet with map (Chapter 225) $16.50
Subdivision and Land Development Pamphlet (Chapter
195)
$20
Housing Standard Pamphlet (Chapter 135) (includes
Appendix A) [Amended 10-19-2004 by Res. No.
35-2004]
$6
Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 136) [Added
10-19-2004 by Res. No. 35-2004]
$25
Electrical Standards (Chapter 107) $5
Street Excavations (Chapter 192, Article III) $3.50
Plumbing Standards (Chapter 163) $3.50
Sidewalk Standards (Chapter 192, Article IV) $5
§ A231-2 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-4
220:935
§ A231-5. Fees for certifications. [Added 7-20-2004 by Ord. No.
19-2004]
§ A231-6. Fees for police reports. [Added 10-19-2010 by Ord. No.
6-2010]
Type Fee
Copies of other chapters of the Code of the Borough of
Kutztown, per page
$0.25
Comprehensive Plan, Kutztown Borough (1996) [Added
10-19-2004 by Res. No. 35-2004]
$25
B. Only complete chapters will be reproduced and be available for
purchase.
C. Requests for publications to be mailed shall be mailed upon receipt of
the required fee and first-class-mail postage.
D. The Borough of Kutztown reserves the right to adopt additional fees
and charges and to modify the fees and charges listed herein.
A. All certifications of outstanding payment due for services provided by
the Borough of Kutztown shall be provided by the Borough of Kutztown
and signed by the Borough Manager or his designee.
B. The following is a schedule of fees and charges for the certification of
outstanding sewer, water, electric, refuse and any other service fees
outstanding from a specific property in the Borough of Kutztown:
Service Fee
Provision of certification on a form provided by the
requesting organization
$15
Provision of certification on the standard Borough form $10
C. In all cases where a form is provided by a requesting organization, the
form will be used and the appropriate fee will be charged.
D. In all cases where no form is provided and no request is made by the
requesting organization as to the type of form used, the standard
Borough form will be used.
E. These fees may be waived by the Borough Manager’s discretion for
services completed when requested and/or benefiting the Borough of
Kutztown.
A. 75 Pa.C.S.A § 3751 provides for the Borough of Kutztown, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, to charge a fee to provide police crash reports.
B. The Borough recognizes the need to establish fundamental fee
standards for the Kutztown Borough Police Department in order to
§ A231-4 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-6
220:936
§ A231-7. Fees for use of professional consultants. [Added
12-21-2010 by Res. No. 25-2010; amended 1-3-2012 by Res. No.
2-2012; 1-15-2013 by Res. No. 3-2013; 1-6-2014 by Res. No. 3-2014;
1-4-2016 by Res. No. 1-2016; 1-2-2018 by Res. No. 1-2018]
The Council of the Borough of Kutztown, County of Berks, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in conformity with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as from time to time amended, Chapter 195, Subdivision and Land
Development, Chapter 189, Stormwater Management, and Chapter 123,
Floodplain Management, of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown adopts the
following schedule of fees, charges and expenses incurred by the Borough
for the review and report of Subdivision and Land Development Plans
and Stormwater Management, which shall be chargeable to developers/
applicants, as follows:
provide direction for the Department and to signify the Borough's
commitment to the Kutztown community.
C. The following is a schedule of fees and charges in connection with
furnishing police crash reports, confirmations of police incidents and
digital photographs:
Document Fee
Police crash report $15
Confirmation of police incident $10
Digital photograph $10
D. These fees may be waived by the Borough Manager's discretion for
services completed when requested and/or benefiting the Borough of
Kutztown.
E. In all cases, the appropriate Right-to-Know request form must be
completed when required.
A. Legal Consultants. Hourly rates shall be as listed below:
(1) General Municipal Law Services [all matters not described in
Subsection A(2) below]:
(a) Solicitor and Solicitor's Partners: $195.
(b) Associates in Solicitor's Office: $180.
(c) Paralegals in Solicitor's Office: $98.
(d) Other Legal Consultants: Such fees, charges and expenses
shall be the same as the charges incurred by the Borough for
such Legal Consultants.
(2) Specialized Services (travel time to be charged only from Reading
office):
§ A231-6 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-7
220:937
(a) Telecommunications:
[1] Partner: $235.
[2] Associate: $210.
[3] Paralegal: $105.
(b) Labor/Employment/Benefits:
[1] Partner: $235.
[2] Associate: $210.
[3] Paralegal: $105.
(c) Environmental:
[1] Partner: $235.
[2] Associate: $210.
[3] Paralegal: $105.
(d) Litigation (excluding code enforcement, zoning, and minor
collection/eviction matters, in each case not involving other
issues, claims or counterclaims):
[1] Partner: $235.
[2] Associate: $210.
[3] Paralegal: $105.
(e) Municipal Finance (bonds): fees negotiated per transactions.
B. Engineering Consultants. Hourly rates shall be as listed below:
(1) Borough Water/Wastewater and Planning/Zoning Engineer and
Staff:
(a) Junior Technician: $50.
(b) Administrative Staff: $65.
(c) Field Technician: $75.
(d) Technician I: $86.
(e) Technician II: $98.
(f) Senior Technician: $108.
(g) Staff Professional I: $102.
(h) Staff Professional II: $108.
(i) Project Professional: $139.
§ A231-7 KUTZTOWN CODE § A231-7
220:938
(j) Senior Professional: $155.
(k) Principal: $165.
(2) Borough Electrical Engineering Consultants:
(a) Principal: $100.
(b) Senior Professional: $95.
(c) Project Manager: $85.
(d) Engineer: $70.
(e) Designer: $55.
(f) CADD Operator: $45.
(g) Support Staff: $35.
(3) Borough Transportation Engineering Consultants:
(a) Rod Person; Engineering Aide: $36 to $40.
(b) Word Processor: $44 to $48.
(c) Technician; Administrative Assistant: $54 to $58.
(d) Instrument Person; Survey Party Chief: $67 to $70.
(e) Registered Surveyor: $90 to $94.
(f) Design Drafter/Design Technician: $82 to $88.
(g) Senior Technician: $86 to $90.
(h) Construction Observer; Code Officer: $75 to $79.
(i) Engineer/Designer: $84 to $92.
(j) Senior Designer: $97 to $101.
(k) Project Engineer: $101 to $106.
(l) Project Manager; Senior Construction Observer: $104 to $107.
(m) Senior Project Engineer; Senior Planner; Senior Project
Manager; Senior Architect; Technical Manager; Principal:
$111 to $118.
(n) CAD Time: $12.
(o) Travel, Mileage Rate: $0.535 per mile. (NOTE: The rate
established by the IRS changes periodically, and the actual
travel rate will be the rate allowed by the IRS.)
§ A231-7 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § A231-7
220:939
Chapter A232
(RESERVED)
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation
(4) Other Engineering Consultants: Such fees, charges and expenses
shall be at cost plus 10% as received from such Consultants.
C. Other Consultants. Such fees, charges and expenses shall be the same
as the charges incurred by the Borough of Kutztown for such
Consultants.
D. Miscellaneous Charges and Disbursement Expenses. Miscellaneous
charges and disbursement expenses incurred by the Borough for the
services of the above-noted Consultants in the performance of the
reviews and reports required by Chapter 195, Subdivision and Land
Development, Chapter 189, Stormwater Management, and Chapter
123, Floodplain Regulations, of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown
shall be charged to the Developer/Applicant at the same rate as
charged to the Borough for such expenses.
E. Such fees, charges and expenses as herein listed shall be the same as
would be charged to the Borough when such fees, charges and
expenses are not reimbursable. Such fees, charges and expenses as
herein listed shall be on file and available upon request to the
Developer/Applicant for review.
F. The Borough of Kutztown reserves the right to adopt additional fees,
charges and expenses, and to modify the fees, charges and expenses
listed herein. Upon adoption or modification of this Resolution, any and
all Developers and/or Applicants currently being charged for such
services, as allowed by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
as from time to time amended, shall be notified of such within 10 days
of adoption.
G. Capitalized terms used herein without definition shall have the
meanings attributed thereto by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code and/or Chapter 195, Subdivision and Land Development,
Chapter 189, Stormwater Management, and Chapter 123, Floodplain
Regulations, of the Code of the Borough of Kutztown, as appropriate.
§ A231-7 KUTZTOWN CODE § DL-1
220:940
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Proclamation 7-12-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 12-1995
Proclamation 8-23-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 12-1995
Proclamation 12-6-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 12-1995
Ord. No.
6-1994
12-6-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 12-1995
Ord. No.
8-1994
12-20-1994 Sewer rentals
amendment
NCM (new
legislation
pending)
Res. No.
35-1994
12-20-1994 Building permit fees Superseded by
Res. No. 23-1995
Res. No.
36-1994
12-20-1994 Plumbing permit fees Superseded by
Res. No. 23-1995
Ord. No.
1-1995
1-10-1995 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 1-2003
Proclamation 1-10-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 12-1995
Ord. No.
3-1995
2-14-1995 Wellhead protection Ch. 220
Res. No.
7-1995
3-14-1995 Wellhead protection fees Superseded by
Res. No. 23-1995
Res. No.
9-1995
5-9-1995 Fees in lieu of
dedication of land
Superseded by
Res. No. 23-1995
Ord. No.
4-1995
5-9-1995 Recreation and Parks
Plan
Ch. 156, Art. III
Ord. No.
5-1995
5-9-1995 Zoning amendment Ch. 225
Ord. No.
7-1995
7-11-1995 Insurance: fire loss
claims
Ch. 138, Art. I
Ord. No.
10-1995
10-10-1995 Police powers of Mayor
re. vehicles and traffic
Superseded by
Ord. No. 12-1995
Ord. No.
12-1995
12-26-1995 Code adoption Ch. 1, Art. I
Res. No.
23-1995
12-26-1995 Fees Ch. A231
Res. No.
25-1995
12-26-1995 Fees Ch. A231
§ DL-1 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § DL-1
220:941
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
27-1995
12-26-1995 Notary public fees Ch. A231
Res. No.
2-1996
1-2-1996 Electric service fees Ch. A231
Res. No.
3-1996
1-2-1996 Borough labor and
equipment fees
Ch. A231
Res. No.
4-1996
1-23-1996 Fees for publications Ch. A231
Res. No.
5-1996
1-23-1996 Vehicles and traffic fees Ch. A231
Ord. No.
1-1996
1-23-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Res. No.
10-1996
2-27-1996 Vehicles and traffic fees Ch. A231
Ord. No.
2-1996
3-12-1996 General provisions:
Code title
Ch. 1, Art. III
Ord. No.
3-1996
3-26-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 225
Ord. No.
4-1996
Enactment
3-26-1996
Adoption
Date
Solid waste Subject Chs. 11 and 185
Res. No.
17-1996
4-9-1996 Solid waste fees Ch. A231
Ord. No.
5-1996
5-28-1996 Snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 192, Art. I
Res. No.
19-1996
5-28-1996 Housing standards rules
and regulations
NCM
Ord. No.
6-1996
6-11-1996 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 218, Art. II,
Exhibit B
Ord. No.
7-1996
7-23-1996 Placing a portion of Park
Alley on Topographical
Survey and opening
portions of Park Alley
and Apple Alley
NCM
Ord. No.
8-1996
8-13-1996 Cable television
franchise amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 4-2010
Proclamation 8-27-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
9-1996
9-10-1996 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 13-2001
§ DL-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § DL-1
220:942
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
10-1996
9-10-1996 Sewers Superseded by
Ord. No. 3-2002
Ord. No.
11-1996
9-10-1996 Water Ch. 217
Ord. No.
12-1996
9-24-1996 Realignment of curbing
at intersection of
Normal Avenue and
Willow Street
NCM
Ord. No.
13-1996
11-26-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment; vehicles
and traffic fees
amendment
Chs. 212 and
A231
Ord. No.
14-1996
12-17-1996 1997 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
1-1997
1-14-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 225
Res. No.
3-1997
1-14-1997 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
3-1997
1-14-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
4-1997
2-25-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
5-1997
3-11-1997 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 107
Ord. No.
6-1997
3-11-1997 Nonuniformed
employees pension
amendment
Ch. 33, Art. III
Res. No.
6-1997
3-11-1997 Zoning fees Ch. A231
Ord. No.
7-1997
4-8-1997 Solid waste amendment Ch. 185
Res. No.
8-1997
4-8-1997 Floodplain fees;
wellhead protection fees
Ch. A231
Proclamation 5-27-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Proclamation 10-28-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
9-1997
11-11-1997 Collection matters Ch. 13
Ord. No.
11-1997
12-9-1997 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 218, Art. II
§ DL-1 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § DL-1
220:943
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
12-1997
12-9-1997 Private communications
systems
Ch. 166
Ord. No.
1-1998
1-5-1998 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 108
Res. No.
2-1998
1-5-1998 Building construction
fees; electrical
standards fees;
plumbing fees; solid
waste fees; streets and
sidewalks fees;
subdivision and land
development fees
Ch. A231
Res. No.
11-1998
1-27-1998 Labor and equipment
rates
Ch. A231
Ord. No.
2-1998
2-10-1998 Code enforcement Chs. 11; 47; 77;
119; 163; 192, Art
IV; 195; 217; 220;
225
Ord. No.
3-1998
3-10-1998 Floodplain regulations Superseded by
Ord. No. 1-2000
Ord. No.
4-1998
3-10-1998 Sacony Creek
Watershed stormwater
management
Superseded by
Ord. No. 6-2008
Ord. No.
7-1998
4-14-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 225
Ord. No.
8-1998
4-14-1998 Occupational privilege
tax amendment
Ch. 200, Art. III
Ord. No
10-1998
4-28-1998 Police Department
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 13-2004
Res. No.
14-1998
4-28-1998 Electrical fees Ch. A231
Proclamation 7-28-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Proclamation 8-25-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
12-1998
9-8-1998 Housing standards
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 20-2004
Res. No.
3-1999
1-26-1999 Labor and equipment
fees amendment
Ch. A231
Proclamation 1-26-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
§ DL-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § DL-1
220:944
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2-1999
2-9-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
4-1999
3-9-1999 Nonuniformed
employees pension
Ch. 33, Art. III
Ord. No.
5-1999
4-27-1999 Police jurisdiction Ch. 39
Ord. No.
7-1999
6-29-1999 Water and sewers:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 218, Art. II
Ord. No.
9-1999
7-13-1999 Code Appeals Board;
building construction
amendment; electrical
standards amendment;
fire prevention
amendment; housing
standards amendment;
plumbing amendment;
public health; nuisances
amendment; solid waste
amendment; street
specifications
amendment
Chs. 12; 77; 107;
119; 135; 163;
168; 185; 192,
Art. III
Res. No.
9-1999
7-13-1999 Code Appeals Board
fees
Ch. A231
Ord. No.
10-1999
8-10-1999 Kutztown Municipal
Authority amendment
Ch. 5, Art. I
Ord. No.
11-1999
8-24-1999 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 107
Res. No.
11-1999
8-24-1999 Electrical fees Ch. A231
Res. No.
12-1999
8-24-1999 Water and sewer fees Ch. A231
Proclamation 9-14-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Proclamation 9-17-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Motion 11-23-1999 Form 3A, Application for
Review of Land
Development Plan
Ch. 195
Ord. No.
1-2000
1-3-2000 Floodplain regulations Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-2012
§ DL-1 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § DL-1
220:945
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2-2000
2-22-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Res. No.
4-2000
1-31-2000 Labor and equipment
fees amendment
Ch. A231
Ord. No.
3-2000
3-28-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 225
Res. No.
9-2000
4-25-2000 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
10-2000
4-25-2000 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Proclamation 6-27-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Proclamation 7-11-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 6-2000
Res. No.
12-2000
7-25-2000 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Proclamation 7-25-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 6-2000
Ord. No.
5-2000
8-8-2000 Municipal authorities
amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
6-2000
10-24-2000 Police Department;
peace and good order;
snow and ice removal;
vehicles and traffic; and
fees amendments
Chs. 38; 158; 192,
Art. I; 212; A231
Ord. No.
7-2000
12-28-2000 Nonuniformed
employees amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 12-2001
Ord. No.
11-2000
12-28-2000 Collection matters
amendment
Ch. 13
Res. No.
23-2000
12-28-2000 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
2-2001
1-23-2001 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Proclamation 3-6-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
3-2001
4-17-2001 Water and sewers:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 218, Art. II
§ DL-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § DL-1
220:946
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
7-2001
4-17-2001 Alcoholic beverages:
intermunicipal liquor
license transfers and
economic development
liquor licenses
Ch. 62, Art. II
Ord. No.
5-2001
5-29-2001 Peace and good order:
disorderly conduct
amendment; vehicles
and traffic amendment
Ch. 158, Art. I;
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
6-2001
7-10-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 225
Ord. No.
8-2001
8-21-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Res. No.
19-2001
10-2-2001 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
11-2001
11-13-2001 Solid waste amendment Ch. 185
Ord. No.
12-2001
11-13-2001 Pensions: nonuniformed
employees
Repealed by Ord.
No. 1-2012
Ord. No.
13-2001
12-18-2001 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
Ch. 43
Res. No.
3-2002
2-19-2002 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
1-2002
3-12-2002 Streets and sidewalks:
construction and
maintenance
amendment; fees
amendment
Ch. 192, Art. IV;
Ch. A231
Ord. No.
2-2002
3-12-2002 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 107
Ord. No.
3-2002
3-12-2002 Sewers amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 3-2015
Ord. No.
4-2002
4-23-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 225
Proclamation 4-23-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
5-2002
5-14-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Res. No.
9-2002
5-14-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
§ DL-1 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § DL-1
220:947
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
10-2002
5-14-2002 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
8-2002
6-25-2002 Water and sewers:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 218, Art. II
Res. No.
13-2002
6-25-2002 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
9-2002
7-16-2002 Code enforcement
amendment; Code
Appeals Board
amendment; fiber-optic
communications
network
Ch. 11; Ch. 12;
Ch. 110
Res. No.
14-2002
7-16-2002 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
15-2002
8-6-2002 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Proclamation 8-28-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
10-2002
9-17-2002 Taxation: earned income
tax amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 12-2011
Ord. No.
11-2002
9-17-2002 Payment and collection
matters
Ch. 13
Res. No.
17-2002
9-17-2002 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Proclamation 10-29-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Res. No.
25-2002
11-19-2002 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Proclamation 11-19-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
13-2002
12-10-2002 Streets and sidewalks
construction
amendment
Ch. 192, Art. IV
Res. No.
27-2002
1-7-2003 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
14-2002
1-28-2003 Fiber-optic network
amendment
Ch. 110
Res. No.
29-2002
1-28-2003 Access to public records
and fees
Chs. A231 and
A232
§ DL-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § DL-1
220:948
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
2-2003
2-18-2003 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
3-2003
2-18-2003 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
1-2003
3-11-2003 Peddling and soliciting
repealer; transient retail
businesses
Chs. 160 and 206
Ord. No.
2-2003
3-11-2003 Recycling Ch. 172
Res. No.
5-2003
4-1-2003 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
8-2003
4-1-2003 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Proclamation 4-29-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Proclamation 5-13-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Res. No.
12-2003
6-24-2003 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
5-2003
6-24-2003 Electrical standards
amendment; plumbing
amendment
Chs. 107 and 163
Proclamation 7-1-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Proclamation 8-5-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
6-2003
9-16-2003 Personnel policies Ch. 161
Ord. No.
7-2003
9-16-2003 Parades and vehicles
and traffic amendment
Chs. 155 and 212
Ord. No.
8-2003
10-28-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Ord. No.
10-2003
12-30-2003 Standing committees
amendment
Ch. 47
Res. No.
28-2003
12-30-2003 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Proclamation 12-30-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Proclamation 1-20-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
§ DL-1 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § DL-1
220:949
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
5-2004
1-20-2004 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
6-2004
2-3-2004 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
3-2004
3-16-2004 Police pension plan
amendment
Ch. 33
Ord. No.
4-2004
4-20-2004 Uniform Construction
Code enforcement
Ch. 75
Ord. No.
5-2004
4-20-2004 Code enforcement
amendment
Ch. 11
Ord. No.
6-2004
4-20-2004 Code Appeals Board
amendment
Ch. 12
Ord. No.
7-2004
4-20-2004 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 77
Ord. No.
8-2004
4-20-2004 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 119
Ord. No.
9-2004
4-20-2004 Plumbing amendment Ch. 163
Ord. No.
10-2004
4-20-2004 Property maintenance Repealed by Ord.
No. 11-2007
Ord. No.
11-2004
5-18-2004 Joint Appeals Board Repealed by Ord.
No. 1-2007
Ord. No.
12-2004
6-15-2004 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 161
Ord. No.
13-2004
6-15-2004 Police Department Ch. 38
Ord. No.
14-2004
6-15-2004 Water and sewer
deposits amendment
Ch. 218
Res. No.
13-2004
6-15-2004 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
15-2004
6-15-2004 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
19-2004
7-20-2004 Collection of deposits
for electrical service
Ch. 107, footnote
only
Ord. No.
16-2004
7-20-2004 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 38
Ord. No.
18-2004
7-20-2004 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 107
Ord. No.
19-2004
7-20-2004 Fees amendment Ch. A231
§ DL-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § DL-1
220:950
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
20-2004
9-28-2004 Housing standards Ch. 135
Ord. No.
21-2004
9-21-2004 Streets and sidewalks:
snow and ice removal;
vehicles and traffic
amendment
Chs. 192 and 212
Ord. No.
22-2004
9-21-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Res. No.
33-2004
9-21-2004 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Proclamation 9-21-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Proclamation 9-21-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Proclamation 9-21-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Res. No.
34-2004
10-19-2004 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
35-2004
10-19-2004 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
36-2004
10-19-2004 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
38-2004
11-16-2004 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
23-2004
11-16-2004 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 135
Proclamation 11-16-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
24-2004
12-1-2004 Uniform Construction
Code amendment
Ch. 75
Ord. No.
1-2005
1-18-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
2-2005
2-15-2005 Housing standards
amendment
Vetoed
Res. No.
4-2005
2-15-2005 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
8-2005
2-15-2005 Tax Collector
amendment
Ch. 200, Art. VII
Ord. No.
9-2005
3-15-2005 Street specifications
amendment
Ch. 192, Art. II
§ DL-1 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § DL-1
220:951
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Proclamation 3-15-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
11-2005
4-19-2005 Borough Seal Ch. 3
Res. No.
11-2005
4-19-2005 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
12-2005
4-19-2005 Floodplain regulations
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 2-2012
Res. No.
12-2005
4-19-2005 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
13-2005
4-19-2005 Wellhead protection
amendment
Ch. 220
Res. No.
13-2005
4-19-2005 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
14-2005
4-19-2005 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
14-2005
5-23-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 225
Ord. No.
15-2005
5-23-2005 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 135
Ord. No.
16-2005
5-23-2005 Appeals Boards Ch. 12
Ord. No.
17-2005
5-24-2005 Uniform construction
code amendment
Ch. 75
Res. No.
17-2005
5-24-2005 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
18-2005
5-24-2005 Water amendment Ch. 217
Ord. No.
19-2005
5-24-2005 Sewers amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 3-2015
Res. No.
19-2005
6-21-2005 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
20-2005
6-21-2005 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 218
Res. No.
20-2005
7-20-2005 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
21-2005
7-20-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
22-2005
7-20-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
§ DL-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § DL-1
220:952
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
24-2005
7-20-2005 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Proclamation 8-2-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Res. No.
29-2005
9-20-2005 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
23-2005
11-15-2005 Planning Commission
amendment
Ch. 36
Ord. No.
25-2005
12-20-2005 Emergency and
municipal services tax
Superseded by
Ord. No. 7-2006
Proclamation 12-20-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Res. No.
3-2006
1-3-2006 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
4-2006
1-17-2006 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
1-2006
2-21-2006 Fiber-optic
communications
network amendment
Ch. 110
Res. No.
6-2006
2-21-2006 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
3-2006
3-21-2006 Ambulance services Ch. 64
Ord. No.
4-2006
3-21-2006 Snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 192, Art. I
Ord. No.
5-2006
3-21-2006 Standing committees
amendment
Ch. 47
Ord. No.
7-2006
3-21-2006 Emergency and
municipal services tax
Repealed by Ord.
No. 16-2007
Ord. No.
8-2006
4-18-2006 Disorderly conduct
amendment
Ch. 158, Art. I
Ord. No.
11-2006
6-20-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
12-2006
6-20-2006 Solid waste amendment Ch. 185
Ord. No.
13-2006
7-18-2006 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 107
Ord. No.
14-2006
7-20-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 225
§ DL-1 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § DL-1
220:953
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
15-2006
7-20-2006 Zoning amendment;
Zoning Map amendment
Ch. 225; NCM
Ord. No.
16-2006
10-17-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Res. No.
25-2006
10-17-2006 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
17-2006
11-21-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
18-2006
12-19-2006 Sewers amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 3-2015
Ord. No.
19-2006
12-19-2006 Water amendment Ch. 217
Res. No.
34-2006
12-19-2006 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
35-2006
12-19-2006 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
36-2006
12-19-2006 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
37-2006
12-19-2006 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
38-2006
12-19-2006 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
1-2007
1-16-2007 UCC Board of Appeals Ch. 20
Ord. No.
2-2007
1-16-2007 Police pensions
amendment
Ch. 33, Art. II
Res. No.
3-2007
1-16-2007 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
4-2007
1-16-2007 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
5-2007
2-20-2007 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
13-2007
3-20-2007 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
3-2007
4-17-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
4-2007
4-17-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
5-2007
4-17-2007 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 135
§ DL-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § DL-1
220:954
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
7-2007
5-22-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
8-2007
5-22-2007 Joint Comprehensive
Plan
Ch. 37, Art. I
Ord. No.
9-2007
5-22-2007 Sacony Creek
Watershed amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 6-2008
Ord. No.
10-2007
5-22-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Res. No.
15-2007
5-22-2007 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Proclamation 5-22-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
11-2007
6-19-2007 Property maintenance Repealed by Ord.
No. 3-2010
Ord. No.
13-2007
10-16-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Proclamation 10-16-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Proclamation 10-16-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
14-2007
11-20-2007 Property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 3-2010
Ord. No.
15-2007
11-20-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
16-2007
11-20-2007 Local services tax Ch. 200, Art. III
Ord. No.
17-2007
12-18-2007 Environmental Advisory
Commission
Ch. 15, Art. I
Ord. No.
19-2007
12-18-2007 Standing committees
amendment
Ch. 47
Res. No.
44-2007
12-18-2007 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
3-2008
1-7-2008 Fees amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 7-2016
Res. No.
4-2008
1-7-2008 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
1-2008
1-15-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Res. No.
5-2008
1-15-2008 Fees amendment Ch. A231
§ DL-1 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § DL-1
220:955
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
7-2008
1-15-2008 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
8-2008
1-15-2008 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
3-2008
2-26-2008 Residential rental tax Ch. 200, Art. VIII
Ord. No.
4-2008
5-20-2008 Fiber-optic
communications
network amendment
Ch. 110
Res. No.
16-2008
5-20-2008 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
5-2008
5-29-2008 Joint Comprehensive
Plan amendment
Ch. 37, Art. I
Ord. No.
6-2008
6-17-2008 Stormwater
management: Sacony
Creek Watershed
amendment
Ch. 189, Art. I
Ord. No.
7-2008
6-17-2008 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 195
Ord. No.
8-2008
7-15-2008 Manager amendment Ch. 29, Art. III
Ord. No.
9-2008
8-19-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 212; A231
Ord. No.
10-2008
8-19-2008 Peace and good order:
graffiti
Ch. 158, Art. II
Ord. No.
11-2008
9-16-2008 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 135
Proclamation 9-16-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
13-2008
11-18-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
14-2008
11-18-2008 Police pensions
amendment
Ch. 33, Art. II
Ord. No.
16-2008
12-16-2008 Right-to-know policy;
access to public records
repealer
Ch. 170, Art. I;
Ch. A232, footnote
only
Res. No.
2-2009
1-20-2009 Fees amendment Ch. A231
§ DL-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § DL-1
220:956
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1-2009
1-27-2009 Electrical standards:
aggregation of demand
response of retail
customers
Ch. 107, Art. II
Ord. No.
3-2009
4-21-2009 Transient retail business
amendment
Ch. 206
Res. No.
15-2009
4-21-2009 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
16-2009
4-21-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Res. No.
20-2009
6-16-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
4-2009
7-21-2009 Right-to-know policy
amendment
Ch. 170, Art. I
Ord. No.
5-2009
8-18-2009 Environmental Advisory
Commission amendment
Ch. 15, Art. I
Ord. No.
6-2009
8-18-2009 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
7-2009
8-18-2009 Fiber-optic
communications
network amendment
Ch. 110
Ord. No.
8-2009
8-18-2009 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
9-2009
8-18-2009 Sewers amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 3-2015
Ord. No.
10-2009
8-18-2009 Water amendment Ch. 217
Ord. No.
11-2009
9-15-2009 Plumbing amendment Ch. 163
Ord. No.
12-2009
10-20-2009 Telecommunications
Advisory Commission
Ch. 110, Art. II
Proclamation 11-1-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Res. No.
40-2009
12-15-2009 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
1-2010
1-4-2010 Standing committees
amendment
Ch. 47
Res. No.
2-2010
1-4-2010 Water distribution and
supply fees
NCM
§ DL-1 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § DL-1
220:957
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
3-2010
1-4-2010 Sewage collection and
treatment fees
NCM
Ord. No.
2-2010
1-19-2010 Police pensions
amendment
Ch. 33, Art. II
Res. No.
5-2010
1-19-2010 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
3-2010
5-19-2010 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 136
Ord. No.
4-2010
5-19-2010 Cable television
franchise
Repealed by Ord.
No. 9-2010
Res. No.
15-2010
7-20-2010 Video, television and
internet service fees
NCM
Res. No.
16-2010
7-20-2010 Water distribution and
supply fees
NCM
Ord. No.
5-2010
8-17-2010 Stormwater
management
amendment
Ch. 189
Ord. No.
6-2010
10-19-2010 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
7-2010
10-19-2010 Customer generation of
electricity
Ch. 107, Art. III
Ord. No.
8-2010
12-21-2010 2011 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
9-2010
12-21-2010 Cable television
franchise
Ch. A230
Res. No.
25-2010
12-21-2010 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
1-2011
1-18-2011 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
1-2011
1-18-2011 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
2-2011
2-15-2011 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
3-2011
2-15-2011 Reimbursement of
project costs
NCM
Ord. No.
2-2011
3-16-2011 Snow and ice removal
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 192, Art. I;
A231
§ DL-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § DL-1
220:958
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
3-2011
3-16-2011 Electrical standards:
general provisions
amendment; sewers
amendment; water
amendment
Chs. 107, Art. I;
177 (repealed by
Ord. No. 3-2015);
217
Res. No.
4-2011
3-16-2011 Authorization of
corporate indemnity or
subordination
NCM
Ord. No.
4-2011
4-19-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 225
Res. No.
5-2011
4-19-2011 Authorization of landfill
energy schedule
NCM
Res. No.
6-2011
4-19-2011 Video, television and
internet service fees
NCM
Res. No.
7-2011
6-30-2011 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
5-2011
7-19-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
6-2011
7-19-2011 Police pensions
amendment
Ch. 33, Art. II
Ord. No.
7-2011
7-19-2011 Customer generation of
electricity amendment
Ch. 107, Art. III
Res. No.
8-2011
7-19-2011 Authorizing submission
of grant application
NCM
Res. No.
9-2011
7-19-2011 Video, television and
internet service fees
NCM
Ord. No.
8-2011
8-16-2011 Bond ordinance NCM
Res. No.
10-2011
8-16-2011 Addition to health care
provider panel
NCM
Res. No.
11-2011
8-16-2011 Authorization of
Manager to conduct
promotional marketing
programs
NCM
Ord. No.
9-2011
9-20-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
10-2011
9-20-2011 Telecommunications
Advisory Commission
amendment
Ch. 110, Art. II
§ DL-1 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § DL-1
220:959
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
12-2011
9-20-2011 Required contribution
for participation in
Police Pension Plan
NCM
Res. No.
13-2011
9-20-2011 Video, television and
internet service fees
NCM
Res. No.
14-2011
9-20-2011 Acknowledgment of
agreement between
Municipal Authority and
Kutztown University
NCM
Res. No.
15-2011
9-20-2011 Acknowledgment of
agreement between
Municipal Authority and
Kutztown University
NCM
Res. No.
16-2011
10-18-2011 Designation of towing
service and impound lot
NCM
Ord. No.
11-2011
11-15-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
12-2011
11-15-2011 Earned income tax Ch. 200, Art. VI
Res. No.
17-2011
11-15-2011 Video, television and
internet service fees
NCM
Ord. No.
13-2011
11-21-2011 Bond ordinance NCM
Res. No.
18-2011
11-21-2011 Reimbursement of
project costs
NCM
Ord. No.
14-2011
12-20-2011 Police pensions
amendment
Ch. 33, Art. II
Ord. No.
15-2011
12-20-2011 2012 tax rate NCM
Res. No.
19-2011
12-20-2011 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
20-2011
12-20-2011 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
21-2011
12-20-2011 Water distribution and
supply fees
NCM
Res. No.
22-2011
12-20-2011 Collection and
treatment of sewage
fees
NCM
Res. No.
1-2012
1-3-2012 Video, television and
internet service fees
NCM
§ DL-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § DL-1
220:960
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
2-2012
1-3-2012 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
3-2012
1-17-2012 Emergency operations
plan amendment
NCM
Res. No.
4-2012
1-17-2012 Appointment of
Assistant Borough
Secretary
NCM
Res. No.
5-2012
1-17-2012 Addition to Health Care
Provider Panel
NCM
Res. No.
6-2012
3-20-2012 Grant of authority to
sign grant agreement
NCM
Res. No.
7-2012
3-20-2012 Exoneration from
collection of taxes on
certain property
NCM
Res. No.
8-2012
4-17-2012 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
9-2012
4-17-2012 Appointment of
authorized designee to
provide demand
response service to KFLarge
General Service
Customer Class
NCM
Ord. No.
1-2012
4-17-2012 Pensions: nonuniformed
employees
Ch. 33, Art. III
Res. No.
10-2012
5-15-2012 Support of Act 13
challenge
NCM
Res. No.
11-2012
5-15-2012 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
2-2012
5-15-2012 Floodplain regulations Ch. 123
Ord. No.
3-2012
6-26-2012 Flood damage
prevention amendment
Ch. 123
Res. No.
13-2012
8-21-2012 Video, television and
internet service fees
NCM
Res. No.
14-2012
8-21-2012 Appointment of
Emergency
Management
Coordinator
NCM
Res. No.
15-2012
9-18-2012 Contributions to Police
Pension Plan
NCM
§ DL-1 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § DL-1
220:961
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
4-2012
10-16-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 225
Ord. No.
5-2012
10-16-2012 Alcoholic beverages:
bring your own bottle
clubs
Ch. 62, Art. III
Ord. No.
6-2012
11-20-2012 Bond ordinance NCM
Res. No.
16-2012
11-20-2012 Commendation of
Borough workers
NCM
Res. No.
17-2012
11-20-2012 Authorization of loan
agreement
NCM
Res. No.
18-2012
11-20-2012 Authorization to execute
land development plan
NCM
Res. No.
19-2012
12-18-2012 Water distribution and
supply fees
NCM
Ord. No.
1-2013
1-15-2013 Bond ordinance NCM
Res. No.
1-2013
1-15-2013 Authorization to execute
EPPG pool participant
schedule
NCM
Res. No.
2-2013
1-15-2013 Video, television and
internet service fees
NCM
Res. No.
3-2013
1-15-2013 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
2-2013
2-12-2013 Tax Collector
amendment
Ch. 200, Art. VII
Res. No.
4-2013
2-19-2013 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
5-2013
3-19-2013 Nonpool power sales
schedule agreement
NCM
Res. No.
6-2013
3-19-2013 Agreement for
delinquent tax collection
NCM
Res. No.
7-2013
3-19-2013 Indemnification of
delinquent tax collector
NCM
Res. No.
8-2013
3-19-2013 Appointment of
independent tax hearing
officer
NCM
Res. No.
9-2013
3-19-2013 Schedule of costs for
collection of delinquent
taxes
NCM
§ DL-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § DL-1
220:962
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
3-2013
4-16-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Res. No.
10-2013
4-16-2013 Borough employee
commendation
NCM
Res. No.
11-2013
5-23-2013 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
12-2013
5-23-2013 Police Pension Plan
actuarial value of assets
NCM
Res. No.
13-2013
5-23-2013 Adoption of Hazard Plan
Update
NCM
Res. No.
14-2013
8-20-2013 Surplus metal roofing
sale
NCM
Res. No.
15-2013
9-17-2013 2014 rate for police
pension plan
contributions
NCM
Ord. No.
4-2013
12-17-2013 2014 tax rate NCM
Res. No.
16-2013
12-17-2013 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
17-2013
12-17-2013 Water distribution and
supply fees
NCM
Res. No.
18-2013
12-17-2013 Sewage collection and
treatment fees
NCM
Res. No.
19-2013
12-17-2013 Video, television,
Internet and telephone
service fees
NCM
Res. No.
1-2014
1-6-2014 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
2-2014
1-6-2014 Authorizing Borough
Solicitor to defend
Borough in action to
prevent creation of
SauconyCreek Regional
Authority
NCM
Res. No.
3-2014
1-6-2014 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
4-2014
3-18-2014 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
5-2014
4-15-2014 Donation of bicycles to
Boy Scout Troop 101
NCM
§ DL-1 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § DL-1
220:963
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
6-2014
4-15-2014 Authorization to submit
application for traffic
signal approval
NCM
Res. No.
7-2014
6-17-2014 Request for Greenways,
Trails and Recreation
Program grant
NCM
Res. No.
8-2014
6-17-2014 Bond ordinance NCM
Res. No.
9-2014
9-19-2014 Police pensions
amendment
See Ch. 33, Art. II
Res. No.
10-2014
10-21-2014 Video, television,
Internet and telephone
service fees
NCM
Ord. No.
1-2014
11-18-2014 Police pensions
amendment
Ch. 33, Art. II
Res. No.
11-2014
11-18-2014 Appointment of
Emergency
Management
Coordinator
NCM
Ord. No.
2-2014
12-16-2014 2015 tax rate NCM
Res. No.
12-2014
12-16-2014 Water distribution and
supply fees
NCM
Res. No.
13-2014
12-16-2014 Sewage collection and
treatment fees
NCM
Ord. No.
1-2015
1-20-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment; fees
amendment
Ch. 212; Ch. A231
Ord. No.
2-2015
1-20-2015 Street excavations Ch. 192, Art. III
Res. No.
1-2015
1-20-2015 Authorization of filing
proposal for funds from
Department of
Community and
Economic Development
Repealed by Res.
No. 4-2015
Res. No.
2-2015
1-20-2015 Emergency operations
plan amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
3-2015
2-17-2015 Sewers Ch. 177
Res. No.
3-2015
2-17-2015 Approval of sale of
surplus desk
NCM
§ DL-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § DL-1
220:964
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
4-2015
3-17-2015 Authorization of filing
proposal for funds from
Department of
Community and
Economic Development;
repeal of Res. No.
1-2015
NCM
Res. No.
5-2015
3-17-2015 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
6-2015
4-21-2015 Life Saving Award for
Police Department
Patrol Officer Arthur T.
Hirsch, Jr.
NCM
Res. No.
7-2015
4-21-2015 Life Saving Award for
Police Department
Patrol Officer William A.
Wyandt
NCM
Res. No.
8-2015
4-21-2015 Department
Commendation for
Police Department
Patrol Officer William A.
Wyandt
NCM
Res. No.
9-2015
5-20-2015 Commendation and
recognition of Edna A.
Kramer for
contributions to
Emergency
Management Center
NCM
Res. No.
10-2015
5-20-2015 Approval of sale of
surplus corrugated
metal pipe
NCM
Res. No.
11-2015
5-20-2015 Authorization of
execution of 2018-2022
non-pool energy
purchase schedule with
American Municipal
Power, Inc.
NCM
Ord. No.
4-2015
6-16-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 225
Ord. No.
5-2015
6-16-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
§ DL-1 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § DL-1
220:965
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
12-2015
7-21-2015 Authorization of
execution of agreement
with Pennsylvania
Department of
Transportation for
winter traffic services
for five winter seasons
Repealed by Res.
No. 13-2015
Res. No.
13-2015
9-15-2015 Authorization of
execution of agreement
with Pennsylvania
Department of
Transportation for
winter traffic services
for five winter seasons;
repeal of Res. No.
12-2015
NCM
Res. No.
14-2015
9-15-2015 Police pensions
amendment
See Ch. 33, Art. II
Res. No.
15-2015
9-15-2015 Adopting and submitting
to the Department of
Environmental
Protection a revision of
the Official Sewage
Facilities Plan
NCM
Res. No.
16-2015
9-15-2015 Opposition to House Bill
No. 809
NCM
Res. No.
17-2015
10-20-2015 Rates and charges for
fiber-optic
communications
See Ch. 110, Art. I
Res. No.
18-2015
11-17-2015 Supporting Senate Bill
No. 974 and House Bill
No. 1510
NCM
Res. No.
19-2015
11-17-2015 Donation of surplus
filing cabinets
NCM
Ord. No.
6-2015
12-15-2015 2016 tax rate NCM
Res. No.
20-2015
12-15-2015 Sale of surplus liner
material
NCM
Res. No.
21-2015
12-15-2015 Sale of surplus pipe NCM
Res. No.
1-2016
1-4-2016 Fees amendment Ch. A231
§ DL-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § DL-1
220:966
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
2-2016
1-19-2016 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
1-2016
3-15-2016 Bond NCM
Res. No.
3-2016
3-15-2016 Sale of surplus property NCM
Res. No.
4-2016
3-15-2016 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
5-2016
4-19-2016 Civilian Service Award
to Horace Foraker
NCM
Res. No.
6-2016
4-19-2016 Civilian Service Award
to Sydney Shade
NCM
Res. No.
7-2016
4-19-2016 Life Saving Award for
Police Department
Patrol Officer Walter J.
Skavinsky
NCM
Res. No.
8-2016
4-19-2016 Authorization to submit
application for traffic
signal approval
NCM
Res. No.
9-2016
4-19-2016 Authorization to submit
application for disaster
relief
NCM
Res. No.
10-2016
4-19-2016 Taxation: agency fees
for delinquent taxes
Ch. 200, Art. IX
Ord. No.
2-2016
6-21-2016 Peace and good order:
disorderly conduct
amendment
Ch. 158, Art. I
Res. No.
11-2016
6-21-2016 Objection to installation
of new forcemain
NCM
Res. No.
12-2016
6-21-2016 Approval of financing
and designation of
applicable elected
representative
NCM
Res. No.
13-2016
7-19-2016 Life Saving Award for
Police Department
Patrol Officer Charles J.
Lawson
NCM
Res. No.
14-2016
7-19-2016 Life Saving Award for
Police Department
Patrol Officer Omar G.
Sanchez
NCM
§ DL-1 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § DL-1
220:967
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
3-2016
9-20-2016 Acquisition of property NCM
Res. No.
15-2016
9-20-2016 Life Saving Award for
Police Department
Patrol Officer Jacob T.
Auman
NCM
Res. No.
16-2016
9-20-2016 Life Saving Award for
Police Department
Patrol Officer Charles J.
Lawson
NCM
Res. No.
17-2016
9-20-2016 Recognition of Suzanne
Barron for volunteer
service to Emergency
Management Center
NCM
Res. No.
18-2016
9-20-2016 Contributions to Police
Pension Plan
NCM
Ord. No.
4-2016
10-18-2016 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
5-2016
12-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No.
6-2016
12-20-2016 2017 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
7-2016
12-20-2016 Taxation: residential
rental tax repealer
Ch. 200, Art. VIII
(reference only)
Res. No.
19-2016
12-20-2016 Civilian Service Award
to Brenda Wengert
NCM
Res. No.
20-2016
12-20-2016 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
21-2016
12-20-2016 Water rates amendment NCM
Res. No.
22-2016
12-20-2016 Sewage collection and
treatment fees
NCM
Res. No.
23-2016
12-20-2016 Proposal for funds for
the Facade
Improvement Program
NCM
Res. No.
1-2017
3-21-2017 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
2-2017
4-18-2017 Opposition to regulation
of municipal electric
systems
NCM
§ DL-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § DL-1
220:968
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
3-2017
5-17-2017 Calling on Delaware
River Basin Commission
to ban natural gas
development and
hydraulic fracturing
NCM
Ord. No.
1-2017
6-20-2017 Opening a portion of
Baldy Alley
NCM
Res. No.
4-2017
6-20-2017 Opposition to Senate
Bill 663 regarding use of
UCC third-party
agencies
NCM
Res. No.
5-2017
6-20-2017 Sale of old playground
equipment and refuse
truck
NCM
Res. No.
6-2017
6-20-2017 Accepting and executing
grant to repair library
HVAC
NCM
Ord. No.
2-2017
7-18-2017 General obligation notes NCM
Res. No.
7-2017
7-18-2017 Pensions: selection
criteria for professional
services contracts
Ch. 33. Art. V
Res. No.
8-2017
7-18-2017 Kutztown Municipal
Authority amendment
Ch. 5, Art. I
(footnote only)
Res. No.
9-2017
7-18-2017 Authorizing release of
escrowed documents
and payment of
arbitration award
damages
NCM
Res. No.
10-2017
8-15-2017 Use of grant for rental
housing strategy
planning project
NCM
Res. No.
11-2017
8-15-2017 Support of independent
citizens redistricting
commissions
NCM
Res. No.
12-2017
9-19-2017 Commending Lisa Reilly
for life-saving efforts at
municipal pool
NCM
Res. No.
13-2017
9-19-2017 Commending Patrick
Eigenbrod for life-saving
efforts at municipal pool
NCM
§ DL-1 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § DL-1
220:969
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
14-2017
10-17-2017 Fees amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
15-2017
9-19-2017 Donation of surplus pool
cover
NCM
Res. No.
16-2017
9-19-2017 Contributions to Police
Pension Plan
NCM
Res. No.
17-2017
9-19-2017 Authorizing first
amendment to
2018-2022 Non-Pool
Energy Purchase
Schedule
NCM
Ord. No.
3-2017
10-17-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 225
Ord. No.
4-2017
10-17-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 225
Res. No.
18-2017
10-17-2017 Opposition to House Bill
1620 regarding wireless
infrastructure
deployment
NCM
Res. No.
19-2017
11-21-2017 Sale of print servers NCM
Ord. No.
5-2017
12-19-2017 2018 tax rate NCM
Res. No.
20-2017
12-19-2017 Prohibition of Category
4 casinos within
Borough
NCM
Res. No.
21-2017
12-19-2017 Sale of I beam NCM
Res. No.
22-2017
12-19-2017 Water rates amendment NCM
Res. No.
23-2017
12-19-2017 Sewage collection and
treatment fees
NCM
Res. No.
1-2018
1-2-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. A231
Ord. No.
1-2018
1-16-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 212
Res. No.
2-2018
2-20-2018 Easement for Bridge
Rehabilitaion
NCM
Res. No.
3-2018
2-20-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. A231
§ DL-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § DL-1
220:970
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
4-2018
2-20-2018 Grant for Water
Treatment Plant
Filtration Media
Replacement Project
NCM
Res. No.
5-2018
4-17-2018 Sale of Equipment NCM
Ord. No.
2-2018
4-17-2018 Cable Television
Franchise Amendment
Ch. A230
Res. No.
6-2018
5-16-2018 Life Saving Award for
Police Department
Patrol Officer Arthur T.
Hirsch, Jr.
NCM
Res. No.
7-2018
5-16-2018 Life Saving Award for
Police Department
Patrol Officer Matthew J.
Yerger
NCM
Res. No.
8-2018
5-16-2018 Life Saving Award for
Police Department
Patrol Corporal Walter J.
Skavinsky
NCM
Ord. No.
3-2018
5-16-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 225
Ord. No.
4-2018
5-16-2018 Sewers Amendment Ch. 177
Res. No.
9-2018
6-19-2018 Sale of Equipment NCM
Res. No.
10-2018
6-19-2018 Donation of Bicycles NCM
Res. No.
11-2018
7-17-2018 Highway Project
Agreement
NCM
Res. No.
12-2018
8-21-2018 Grant for Commercial
and Rental Housing
Strategic Plan
NCM
Res. No.
13-2018
9-18-2018 Contributions to Police
Pension Plan
NCM
Ord. No.
5-2018
10-16-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 225
Res. No.
14-2018
10-16-2018 Appointment of Voting
Delegate Representative
NCM
Res. No.
15-2018
11-20-2018 Commendation of Tax
Collector
NCM
§ DL-1 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § DL-1
220:971
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
16-2018
11-20-2018 Sale of Property NCM
Res. No.
17-2018
11-20-2018 Hazard Vulnerability
Assessment and
Mitigation Plan
NCM
Ord. No.
6-2018
12-18-2018 2019 Tax Rate NCM
Res. No.
18-2018
12-18-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. A231
Res. No.
19-2018
12-18-2018 Water Distribution
Charges
NCM
Res. No.
20-2018
12-18-2018 Sewage Treatment and
Collection Charges
NCM
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Res. No.
1-2019
1-15-2019 Agreement NCM 24
Res. No.
2-2019
1-15-2019 Appointment NCM 24
Res. No.
3-2019
1-15-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. A231 24
Res. No.
4-2019
2-19-2019 Life Saving Award NCM 24
Res. No.
5-2019
3-19-2019 Sale of Equipment NCM 24
Ord. No.
1-2019
6-18-2019 Public Health;
Nuisances
Amendment; Sewers
Amendment
Ch. 168; Ch.
177
24
Ord. No.
2-2019
9-17-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment; Fees
Amendment
Ch. 212; Ch.
A231
24
Res. No.
6-2019
9-17-2019 Life Saving Award NCM 24
Res. No.
7-2019
9-17-2019 Life Saving Award NCM 24
Res. No.
8-2019
9-17-2019 Contributions to
Police Pension Plan
NCM 24
§ DL-1 KUTZTOWN CODE § DL-1
220:972
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Res. No.
9-2019
9-17-2019 Second Amendment
to 2018-2022 Non-
Pool Energy
Purchase Schedule
NCM 24
Ord. No.
3-2019
11-19-2019 Bond NCM 24
Res. No.
10-2019
11-19-2019 Grant NCM 24
Ord. No.
4-2019
12-17-2019 2020 Tax Rate NCM 24
Res. No.
11-2019
12-17-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. A231 24
Res. No.
12-2019
12-17-2019 Water Distribution
Charges
NCM 24
Res. No.
13-2019
12-17-2019 Sewer Treatment and
Collection Charges
NCM 24
§ DL-1 WELLHEAD PROTECTION § DL-1
220:973