Home Rule Charter
Chapter Ch
HOME RULE CHARTER
Ch:1

Article I
Name And Boundaries
§ 101. Name.
Kingston Township shall continue to be a municipal corporation under
its present name, "Kingston Township." As used in this charter, the word
"Township" shall mean Kingston Township in Luzerne County, Pennsylvania.
§ 102. Boundaries.
The boundaries of the township shall be the actual boundaries of the
township at the time this charter takes effect and as they may be lawfully
changed thereafter.
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 102
Ch:3

Article II
Powers Of The Township
§ 201. Powers of the Township.
The township shall have all powers possible for it to have under the
constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they
were specifically enumerated in this charter.
§ 202. Construction.
The powers of the township under this charter shall be construed liberally
in favor of the township, and the specific mention of particular powers in
the charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power
stated in this article.
§ 203. Intergovernmental Relations.
The township may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions
and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by
contract or otherwise, with any one or more states or civil divisions or
agencies thereof, or the United States or any agency thereof,
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 203
Ch:5

Article III
Board Of Supervisors
§ 301. Composition; Eligibility; Election and Terms.
§ 302. Compensation; Expenses.
The board of supervisors may determine the annual salary of supervisors by
ordinance, but no ordinance increasing such salary shall become effective
until the date of commencement of the terms of supervisors elected at
the next regular election, provided that such election follows the adoption
of such ordinance by at least six months. Supervisors shall receive
reimbursement for their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties of office.
§ 303. Chairman of Board of Supervisors.
The board of supervisors shall elect from among its members officers of the
township who shall have the titles of chairman and vice chairman, each of
whom shall serve at the pleasure of the board of supervisors. The chairman
shall preside at meetings of the board of supervisors, shall be recognized
as head of the township government for all ceremonial purposes and by
the governor for purposes of military law, but shall have no administrative
duties. The vice chairman shall act as chairman during the absence or
disability of the chairman.
§ 304. General Powers and Duties.
All powers of the township shall be vested in the board of supervisors,
except as otherwise provided by law or this charter, and the board of
(a) Composition. There shall be a board of supervisors of five members
elected at large by the qualified voters of the township.
(b) Eligibility. Only qualified voters of the township shall be eligible to hold
the office of supervisor.
(c) Election and Terms. The regular election of supervisors shall be held on
the general municipal election day as established from time to time by
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, commencing in the
year 1975. At the first election under this charter (1975), three
supervisors shall be elected; the two candidates receiving the greatest
number of votes shall serve for terms of four years, and the one
candidate receiving the next greatest number of votes shall serve for a
term of two years. At the next regular election, two supervisors shall be
elected, for terms of four years. Commencing at the next regular
election and at all subsequent regular elections, either two or three
supervisors shall be elected to serve terms of four years as required to
replace supervisors whose terms are expiring and in order to maintain
the number of supervisors at five.
§ 301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 304
Ch:7
supervisors shall provide for the exercise thereof and for the performance
of all duties and obligations imposed on the township by law.
§ 305. Prohibitions.
§ 306. Vacancies; Forfeiture of Office; Filling of Vacancies.
(a) Holding Other Office. Except where authorized by State or Federal law,
no supervisor shall hold any other municipal office or employment
during the term for which he was elected to the board of supervisors,
and no former supervisor shall hold any compensated appointive
township office or employment until one year after the expiration of the
term for which he was elected to the board of supervisors.
(b) Appointments and Removals. Neither the board of supervisors nor any
of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal
of any township administrative officers or employees whom the
township manager or any of his subordinates are empowered to
appoint, but the board of supervisors may express its views and fully
and freely discuss with the manager anything pertaining to
appointment and removal of such officers and employees.
(c) Interference with Administration. Except for the purpose of inquiries
and investigations under section 309, the board of supervisors or its
members shall deal with the township officers and employees who are
subject to the direction and supervision of the manager solely through
the manager, and neither the board of supervisors nor its members
shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or
privately.
(a) Vacancies. The office of a supervisor shall become vacant upon his
death, resignation, removal from office in any manner authorized by
law, or forfeiture of his office.
(b) Forfeiture of Office. A supervisors shall forfeit his office if he (1) lacks at
any time during his term of office any qualification for the office
prescribed by this charter or by law; (2) violates any express prohibition
of this charter; (3) is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; or
(4) fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the board of
supervisors without being excused by the board of supervisors.
(c) Filling of Vacancies. If a vacancy shall occur in the office of the board of
supervisors for any reason set forth in this charter, the remaining
members of the board of supervisors shall fill such vacancy by
appointing a person qualified under this charter to hold such office for
the unexpired term thereof. If the board of supervisors shall refuse, fail
or neglect, or be unable for any reason whatsoever, to fill such vacancy
within forty-five (45) days after the vacancy occurs, then the Court of
Common Pleas shall, upon petition of the board of supervisors or of any
five (5) citizens of the township, fill the vacancy in such office by the
appointment of a qualified resident of the township for the unexpired
§ 304 KINGSTON CODE § 306
Ch:8
§ 307. Judge of Qualifications.
The board of supervisors shall be the judge of the election and qualifications
of its members and of the grounds for forfeiture of their office and for
that purpose shall have power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths
and require the production of evidence. A member charged with conduct
constituting grounds for forfeiture of his office shall be entitled to a public
hearing on demand, and notice of such hearing shall be published in one
or more newspapers of general circulation in the township at least two
(2) weeks in advance of the hearing. Decisions made by the board of
supervisors under this section shall be subject to review by the courts.
§ 308. Township Clerk.
The board of supervisors may appoint an officer of the township who shall
have the title of township clerk. The township clerk shall give notice of
board of supervisors' meetings to its members and the public, keep the
journal of its proceedings and perform such other duties as are assigned to
him by this charter or by the board of supervisors.
§ 309. Investigations.
The board of supervisors may make investigations into the affairs of the
township and the conduct of any township department, office or agency and
for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony
and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to
obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the board of
supervisors shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of
not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment for not
more than thirty (30) days, or both.
§ 310. Procedure.
term of the office. Notwithstanding the requirement in section 310 that
a quorum of the board of supervisors consists of three (3) members,
if at any time the membership of the board of supervisors is reduced
to less than three (3), the remaining members may by majority action
appoint additional members to raise the membership to three (3).
(a) Meetings. The board of supervisors shall meet regularly at least once in
every month at such times and places as the board of supervisors may
prescribe by rule. Special meetings may be held on the call of the
chairman or of three (3) or of more members and upon no less than
twenty-four (24) hours notice to each member. All meetings shall be
public; however, the board of supervisors may recess for the purpose of
discussing in a closed or executive session limited to its own
membership any matter which would tend to defame or prejudice the
character or reputation of any person, provided that the general subject
matter for consideration is expressed in the motion calling for such
§ 306 HOME RULE CHARTER § 310
Ch:9
session and that final action thereon shall not be taken by the board of
supervisors except in public meeting.
(b) Rules and Journal. The board of supervisors shall determine its own
rules and order of business and shall provide for keeping a journal of its
proceedings. This journal shall be a public record.
(c) Voting. Voting, except on procedural motions, shall be by roll call and
the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal. Three (3) members
of the board of supervisors shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller
number may adjourn from time to time and may compel the attendance
of absent members in the manner and subject to the penalties
prescribed by the rules of the board of supervisors. No action of the
board of supervisors, except as otherwise provided in the preceding
sentence and in section 306, shall be valid or binding unless adopted by
the affirmative vote of three (3) or more members of the board of
supervisors.
§ 310 KINGSTON CODE § 310
Ch:10
Article IV
Ordinances And Regulations
§ 401. Action Requiring an Ordinance.
In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provision of this
charter to be done by ordinance, those acts of the township board of
supervisors shall be by ordinance which:
§ 402. Ordinances in General.
(1) (Reserved)1
(2) Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or regulation for
violation of which a fine or other penalty is imposed;
(3) Levy taxes;
(4) Grant, renew or extend a franchise;
(5) Authorize the borrowing of money;
(6) Convey or lease or authorize the conveyance or lease of any lands of the
township;
(7) Adopt with or without amendment ordinances proposed under the
initiative power; and
(8) Amend or repeal any ordinance previously adopted, except as otherwise
provided in Article IX with respect to repeal of ordinances reconsidered
under the referendum power.
Acts other than those referred to in the preceding sentence may be
done either by ordinance or by resolution.
(a) Form. Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in
the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain more
than one subject which shall be clearly expressed in its title. The
enacting clause shall be "The Township of Kingston hereby ordains..."
Any ordinance which repeals or amends an existing ordinance or part of
the township administrative code shall set out in full the ordinance,
sections or subsections to be repealed or amended, and shall indicate
matter to be omitted by enclosing it in brackets or by strikeout type and
shall indicate new matter by underscoring or by italics.
(b) Procedure. An ordinance may be introduced by any member at any
regular or special meeting of the board of supervisors. Upon
introduction of any ordinance, the township manager shall cause to be
1. Editor's Note: Former § 401(1), listing adoption or amendment of an administrative code
or establishing, altering or abolishing any township department, was repealed by Ord.
2012-3, 6/13/2012, § 1. The Charter amendments adopted by this ordinance were subject
to referendum and approved by a majority of the electors at the general election of
November 6, 2012, and ratified by Res. No. R-2012-13.
§ 401 HOME RULE CHARTER § 402
Ch:11
§ 403. Emergency Ordinances.
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public
peace, the board of supervisors may adopt one or more emergency
ordinances, but such ordinances may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend
a franchise or authorize the borrowing of money except as provided in
subsection 707(d)(2). An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the
form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall
be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after
the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and
describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be
adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which
it is introduced, by the affirmative vote of at least three (3) members
shall be required for adoption. After its adoption the ordinance shall be
published and printed as prescribed for other adopted ordinances. It shall
become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every
emergency ordinance except one made pursuant to subsection 707(d)(2)
shall automatically stand repealed as of the 61st day following the date
distributed a copy to each board member and to the chairman, shall
file a copy in the office of the township manager and such other public
places as the board of supervisors may designate, and shall publish the
ordinance or a brief summary thereof, together with a notice setting out
the time and place for a public hearing thereon and for its consideration
by the board of supervisors. The public hearing shall follow the
publication by at least seven (7) days, may be held separately or in
connection with a regular or special board meeting and may be
adjourned from time to time; all persons interested shall have an
opportunity to be heard. After the hearing the board of supervisors may
adopt the ordinance with or without amendment or reject it, but, if it
is amended as to any matter of substance, the board of supervisors
may not adopt it until the ordinance or its amended sections have been
subjected to all the procedures hereinbefore required in the case of a
newly introduced ordinance. Within thirty (30) days of the adoption of
any ordinance, the Clerk shall have it published again together with a
notice of its adoption.
(c) Effective Date. Every adopted ordinance shall become effective five (5)
days after adoption, unless a date later than five (5) days after adoption
is stated in the ordinance, and except as otherwise provided in this
Charter. [Ord. 2012-3,2 6/13/2012, § 2]
(d) "Publish" Defined. As used in this section, the term "publish" means to
print in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the township:
(1) the ordinance or a brief summary thereof, and (2) the places where
copies of it have been filed and the times when they are available for
public inspection.
2. Editor’s Note: The Charter amendments adopted by this ordinance were subject to
referendum and approved by a majority of the electors at the general election of
November 6, 2012, and ratified by Res. No. R-2012-13.
§ 402 KINGSTON CODE § 403
Ch:12
on which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent re-enactment of the
ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still
exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a
repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for
adoption of emergency ordinances.
§ 404. Codes of Technical Regulations.
The board of supervisors may adopt any standard code of technical
regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure
and requirements governing such an adopting ordinance shall be as
prescribed for ordinances generally except that:
§ 405. Authentication and Recording; Codification; Printing.
(1) The requirements of section 402 for distribution and filing of copies of
the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of the code of
technical regulations as well as of the adopting ordinance, and
(2) A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations as well as of the
adopting ordinance shall be authenticated and recorded by the
township clerk pursuant to subsection 405(a).
Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made
available by the township clerk for distribution or for purchase at a
reasonable price.
(a) Authentication and Recording. The township clerk shall authenticate by
his signature and record in full, in a properly indexed book kept for the
purpose, all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the board of
supervisors.
(b) Codification. Within three years after adoption of this charter, and at
least every ten years thereafter, the board of supervisors shall provide
for the preparation of a general codification of all township ordinances
and resolutions having the force and effect of law. The general
codification shall be adopted by the board of supervisors by ordinance
and shall be published promptly in bound or loose-leaf form, together
with this charter and any amendments thereto, pertinent provisions of
the constitution and other laws of the State of Pennsylvania, and such
codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the
board of supervisors may specify. This compilation shall be known and
cited officially as the Kingston Township Code. Copies of the code shall
be furnished to township officers, placed in libraries and public offices
for free public reference, and made available for purchase by the public
at a reasonable price fixed by the board of supervisors.
(c) Printing of Ordinances and Resolutions. The board of supervisors shall
cause each ordinance and resolution having the force and effect of law
and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following
its adoption; and the printed ordinances, resolutions and charter
§ 403 HOME RULE CHARTER § 405
Ch:13
amendments shall be distributed or sold to the public at reasonable
prices to be fixed by the board of supervisors. Following publication
of the first Kingston Township Code and at all times thereafter, the
ordinances, resolutions and charter amendments shall be distributed
or sold to the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the board of
supervisors. Following publication of the first Kingston Township code
and at all times thereafter, the ordinances, resolutions and charter
amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code
currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for integration therein.
The board of supervisors shall make such further arrangements as
it deems desirable with respect to reproduction of the constitution
and other laws of the State of Pennsylvania, or the codes of technical
regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code.
§ 405 KINGSTON CODE § 405
Ch:14
Article V
Township Manager
§ 501. Appointment; Qualifications; Compensation.
The board of supervisors shall appoint a township manager for an indefinite
term and fix his compensation. The manager shall be appointed solely on
the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. He need not be
a resident of the township or state at the time of his appointment, but may
reside outside the township while in office only with the approval of the
board of supervisors.
§ 502. Removal.
The board of supervisors may remove the manager from office in
accordance with the following procedures:
§ 503. Acting Township Manager.
By letter filed with the township clerk the manager shall designate, subject
to approval of the board of supervisors, a qualified township administrative
officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of manager during
his temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the
board of supervisors may revoke such designation at any time and appoint
another officer of the township to serve until the manager shall return or
his disability shall cease.
(1) The board of supervisors shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of
all its members a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons
for removal and may suspend the manager from duty for a period not to
exceed forty-five (45) days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered
promptly to the manager.
(2) Within five (5) days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the
manager, he may file with the board of supervisors a written request for
a public hearing. This hearing shall be held at a board meeting not
earlier than fifteen (15) days nor later than thirty (30) days after the
request is filed. The manager may file with the board of supervisors a
written reply not later than five (5) days before the hearing.
(3) The board of supervisors may adopt a final resolution of removal, which
may be made effective immediately, by affirmative vote of a majority of
all its members at any time after five (5) days from the date when a copy
of the preliminary resolution was delivered to the manager if he has not
requested a public hearing, or at any time after the public hearing if he
has requested one.
The manager shall continue to receive his salary until the effective
date of a final resolution of removal. The action of the board of
supervisors in suspending or removing the manager shall not be
subject to review by any court or agency.
§ 501 HOME RULE CHARTER § 504
Ch:15
§ 504. Powers and Duties of the Township Manager.
The township manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the
township. He shall be responsible to the board of supervisors for the
administration of all township affairs placed in his charge by or under this
charter. He shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) He shall appoint and, when he deems it necessary for the good of the
township, suspend or remove all township employees and appointive
administrative officers, provided for by or under this charter, except as
otherwise provided by law, this charter or personnel rules adopted
pursuant to this charter. He may authorize any administrative officer
who is subject to his direction and supervision to exercise these powers
with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office or
agency.
(2) He shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments,
offices and agencies of the township, except as otherwise provided by
this charter or by law.
(3) He shall attend all board of supervisors' meetings and shall have the
right to take part in discussion, but may not vote.
(4) He shall see that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the
board of supervisors, subject to enforcement by him or by officers
subject to his direction and supervision, are faithfully executed.
(5) He shall prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to
the board of supervisors.
(6) He shall submit to the board of supervisors and make available to the
public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of
the township as of the end of each fiscal year, within forty-five (45) days
of the end of such year.
(7) He shall make such other reports as the board of supervisors may
require concerning the operations of township departments, offices and
agencies subject to his direction and supervision.
(8) He shall keep the board of supervisors fully advised as to the financial
condition and future needs of the township and make recommendations
to the board of supervisors concerning the affairs of the township.
(9) He shall perform such other duties as are specified in this charter or as
may be required by the board of supervisors.
§ 504 KINGSTON CODE § 504
Ch:16
Article VI
Administrative Departments, Boards And Commissions
§ 601. General Provisions.
§ 602. Boards and Commissions.
The board of supervisors may from time to time establish, by ordinance,
various boards and commissions to act in an advisory capacity or to perform
special functions. In all instances when such boards and commissions are
constituted in the name of the township or directed to act on behalf of the
township, the members thereof shall be appointed by the chairman of the
board of supervisors, with the advice and consent of a majority of all the
members of the board of supervisors. Except as may otherwise be provided
by statute or by this charter, the chairman of the board of supervisors
shall have authority to suspend or remove any member of such boards and
commissions acting in the name or on behalf of the township.
§ 603. Personnel System.
(a) Creation of Departments. The board of supervisors may establish
township departments, offices or agencies, in addition to those created
by this charter, and may prescribe the functions of all departments,
offices and agencies, except that no function assigned by this charter to
a particular department, office or agency may be discontinued or,
unless this charter specifically so provides, assigned to any other.
(b) Direction by Manager. All departments, offices and agencies under the
direction and supervision of the manager shall be administered by an
officer appointed by and subject to the direction and supervision of the
manager. With the consent of the board of supervisors, the manager
may serve as the head of one or more such departments, offices or
agencies, or may appoint one person as the head of two or more of
them.
(a) Merit Principle. All appointments and promotions of township officers
and employees shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness
demonstrated by examination or other evidence of competence.
(b) Personnel Director. There shall be a personnel director, a position which
may be filled by the manager as provided in section 601, or separately
appointed by the manager, who shall administer the personnel system
of the township.
(c) Personnel Board. There may be a personnel board consisting of five (5)
members: the chairman of the board of supervisors, the township
manager, and three members appointed by the board of supervisors for
terms of three (3) years, from among the qualified voters of the
township. The personnel director shall provide necessary staff
assistance for the personnel board.
§ 601 HOME RULE CHARTER § 603
Ch:17
§ 604. Legal Officer.
There shall be a legal officer of the township, appointed by the board
of supervisors, who shall serve as chief legal adviser to the board of
supervisors, the manager and all township departments, offices and
agencies; shall represent the township in all legal proceedings; and shall
perform any other duties prescribed by this charter or by ordinance.
§ 605. Planning.
The board of supervisors shall initiate planning for the township in
accordance with the "Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code," Act 247
of 1968, as amended.
(d) Personnel Rules. The personnel director, if separately appointed, or the
manager, shall prepare personnel rules. The manager shall refer such
proposed rules to the personnel board, if established, which shall report
his recommendations thereon. When approved by the manager, the
rules shall be proposed to the board of supervisors, and the board of
supervisors may by ordinance adopt them with or without amendment.
These rules shall provide for:
(1) The classification of all township positions, based on the duties,
authority and responsibility of each position, with adequate
provision for reclassification of any position whenever warranted
by changed circumstances.
(2) A pay plan for all township positions.
(3) Methods for determining the merit and fitness of candidates for
appointment or promotion.
(4) The policies and procedures regulating reduction in force and
removal of employees.
(5) The hours of work, attendance regulations and provisions for sick
and vacation leave.
(6) The policies and procedures governing persons holding provisional
appointment.
(7) The policies and procedures governing relationships with employee
organizations.
(8) Policies regarding in-service training programs.
(9) Grievance procedures, including procedures for the hearing of
grievances by the personnel board, which may render advisory
opinions based on its findings to the township manager with a copy
to the aggrieved employee.
(10) Other practices and procedures necessary to the administration of
the township personnel system.
§ 603 KINGSTON CODE § 605
Ch:18
Article VII
Financial Procedures
§ 701. Fiscal Year.
The fiscal year of the township shall begin on the first day of January and
end on the last day of December.
§ 702. Submission of Budget and Budget Message.
On or before the 15th day of November of each year, the manager shall
submit to the board of supervisors a budget for the ensuing fiscal year and
an accompanying message.
§ 703. Budget Message.
The manager's message shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and
in terms of progress. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of the
township for the ensuing fiscal year; describe the important features of
the budget; indicate any major changes from the current year in financial
policies, expenditures, and revenues, together with reasons for such
changes; summarize the township's debt position; and include such other
material as the manager deems desirable.
§ 704. Budget.
The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all township funds
and activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required by this
charter, shall be in such form as the manager deems desirable or the board
of supervisors may require. In organizing the budget, the manager shall
utilize the most feasible combination of expenditure classification by fund,
organization unit, program, purpose or activity, and object. The budget shall
contain, inter alia, the following:
(1) A general summary of its contents.
(2) All estimated income, in detail, indicating the existing and proposed tax
levies, as well as other assessments, fees and charges.
(3) All proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal
year.
(4) The number of proposed employees in every job classification.
(5) Comparative figures for actual and estimated income and expenditures
for the current fiscal year, and actual income and expenditures of the
preceding fiscal year.
(6) Proposed expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed by
offices, departments and agencies, in terms of their respective work
programs and the methods of financing such expenditures.
§ 701 HOME RULE CHARTER § 704
Ch:19
§ 705. Capital Program.
§ 706. Public Record.
The annual budget shall be a public record and shall be available for
public inspection after submission and prior to adoption, and after adoption,
during regular business hours.
§ 707. Action on Budget.
(7) Proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed
by offices, departments and agencies when practicable, and the
proposed method of financing each such capital expenditure.
The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of
estimated income.
(a) Submission to Council. The manager shall prepare and submit to the
board of supervisors a five-year capital program at least three (3)
months prior to the final date for submission of the budget.
(b) Contents. The capital program shall include:
(1) A clear general summary of its contents.
(2) A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be
undertaken during the five fiscal years next ensuing, with
appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such
improvements.
(3) Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time
schedules for each such improvement.
(4) The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the
facilities to be constructed or acquired.
The above information may be revised and extended each year
with regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of
construction or acquisition.
(a) Amendment Before Adoption. After the public hearing, the board of
supervisors may adopt the budget with or without amendment. In
amending the budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts and
may delete or decrease any programs or amounts, except expenditures
required by law or for debt service or for estimated cash deficit,
provided that no amendment to the budget shall increase the
authorized expenditures to an amount greater than the total of
estimated income.
(b) Adoption of Budget. The annual budget shall be adopted by ordinance.
This action shall be taken prior to the commencement of the year for
§ 704 KINGSTON CODE § 707
Ch:20
which the budget is prepared, but only after it has been available for
public inspection, after due notice, for at least ten (10) days.
(c) Tax Rates. Immediately after the budget is finally adopted, the board of
supervisors shall, by ordinance, set the tax rates and levy on the various
subjects of taxation. The fixing of rates of taxation on the assessed
valuation of all real property shall be in conformity with and subject to
the Second Class Township Code as it may be amended from time to
time. The board of supervisors shall determine the rate of all taxes
which may be levied under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act,
Act 511 of 1965, as amended.
(d) Amendment After Adoption:
(1) Supplemental Appropriations. If, during the fiscal year, the
manager certifies that there are available for appropriation
revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget, the board of
supervisors, by ordinance, may make supplemental appropriations
for the year up to the amount of such excess.
(2) Emergency Appropriations. To meet a public emergency affecting
life, health, property or the public peace, the board of supervisors
may make emergency appropriations. Such appropriations may be
made by emergency ordinance in accordance with the provisions of
section 403. To the extent that there are no available
unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriations, the board of
supervisors may by such emergency ordinance authorize the
issuance of emergency notes, which may be renewed from time to
time, but the emergency notes and renewals of any fiscal year shall
be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding
that in which the emergency appropriation was made.
(3) Reduction of Appropriations. If, at any time during the fiscal year, it
appears probable to the manager that the revenues available will
be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he shall report to
the board of supervisors without delay, indicating the estimated
amount of the deficit, any remedial action taken by him, and his
recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The board of
supervisors shall then take such further action as it deems
necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit and for that purpose it
may, by ordinance, reduce one or more appropriations.
(4) Transfer of Appropriations. At any time during the fiscal year the
manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered
appropriation balance among programs within a department, office
or agency; and, upon written request by the manager, the board of
supervisors may, by ordinance, transfer part or all of any
unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office
or agency to another.
(5) Limitations; Effective Date. No appropriation for debt service may
be reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced
§ 707 HOME RULE CHARTER § 707
Ch:21
§ 708. Action on Capital Program.
§ 709. Lapse of Appropriations.
Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure,
shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not
been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure
shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been
accomplished, but it shall lapse if three years pass without any
disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation.
§ 710. Administration of the Budget.
below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more
than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. The
supplemental and emergency appropriations and reduction or
transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made
effective immediately upon adoption.
(e) Appropriations. Adoption of the budget and amendments thereof shall
constitute appropriations for the expenditures set forth herein.
(a) Notice and Hearing. The board of supervisors shall publish in one or
more newspapers of general circulation in the township the general
summary of the capital program and a notice stating:
(1) The times and places where copies of the capital program are
available for inspection by the public, and
(2) The time and place, not less than two weeks after such publication,
for a public hearing on the capital program.
(b) Adoption. The board of supervisors, by resolution, shall adopt the
capital program, with or without amendment, after the public hearing
and concurrently with action on the operating budget for the
forthcoming fiscal year.
(a) Work Programs and Allotments. At such time as the manager shall
specify, each department, office or agency shall submit work programs
for the ensuing fiscal year showing the requested allotments of its
appropriation by periods within the year. The manager shall review and
authorize such allotments with or without revision as early as possible
in the fiscal year. He may revise such allotments during the year if he
deems it desirable and shall revise them to accord with any
supplemental, emergency, reduced or transferred appropriations made
pursuant to section 707(d).
(b) Payment of Funds. No payment of any fund of the township shall be
made unless provided for in the budget and specifically approved by the
board of supervisors; provided, however, that payroll and utility
expenditures may be made at the direction of the manager where based
upon a prior ordinance or contract. All checks or drafts of the township
§ 707 KINGSTON CODE § 710
Ch:22
§ 711. Independent Audit.
The board of supervisors shall provide for an independent annual audit
of all township revenues and accounts by a Certified Public Accountant
who has no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the
township government or any of its elected or appointed officers. The board
of supervisors may provide for more frequent audits, as well as special
audits, as it deems necessary. The results of the annual audit and a financial
statement of the fiscal affairs of the township shall be presented to the
board of supervisors and published in a newspaper circulating generally in
the township by April 1st of the year following the fiscal year audited.
§ 712. Fidelity Bonds.
Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices or positions, the
township manager as well as any other officer, agent or employee of the
township, as the board of supervisors may determine, shall execute and
file with the township corporate surety bonds, conditioned for the honest
and faithful performance of their respective duties, in such sums as shall
be fixed by the board of supervisors. All such bonds and sureties thereon,
before being accepted by the township, shall be approved by the township
legal officer. The insurance carrier placing such bonds shall be determined
by the board of supervisors and the premium therefore shall be paid by
the township. Such bonds may provide for one or more additional obligees
in the event that the officer bonded is acting in a dual or similar capacity
with other political sub-divisions or governmental or quasi-governmental
entities.
shall be signed by the manager and shall be counter-signed by the
chairman or vicechairman of the board of supervisors.
§ 710 HOME RULE CHARTER § 712
Ch:23

Article VIII
Nominations And Elections
§ 801. Township Elections.
(a) Regular Elections. The regular township election shall be held as
specified by the Pennsylvania Election Code.
(b) Qualified Voters. All citizens qualified by the constitution and laws of
the State of Pennsylvania to vote in the township, and who satisfy the
requirements for registration prescribed by law, shall be qualified
voters of the township within the meaning of this charter.
(c) Conduct of Elections. The provisions of the general election laws of the
State of Pennsylvania shall apply to elections held under this charter.
All elections provided for by the charter shall be conducted by the
election authorities established by law.
§ 801 HOME RULE CHARTER § 801
Ch:25

Article IX
Initiative And Referendum
§ 901. General Authority.
§ 902. Commencement of Proceedings; Petitioners' Committee;
Affidavit.
Any five (5) qualified voters may commence initiative or referendum
proceedings by filing with the township clerk an affidavit stating they will
constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the
petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses
and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be
sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the
ordinance sought to be reconsidered.
Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed the Clerk
shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners' committee.
§ 903. Petitions.
(a) Initiative. The qualified voters of the township shall have power to
propose ordinances to the board of supervisors and, if the board of
supervisors fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change
in substance, to adopt or reject it at a township election, provided that
such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any
ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes, or salaries
of township officers or employees.
(b) Referendum. The qualified voters of the township shall have power to
require reconsideration by the board of supervisors of any adopted
ordinance and, if the board of supervisors fails to repeal an ordinance
so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a township election, provided
that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or
any emergency ordinance or ordinance relating to appropriation of
money or levy of taxes.
(a) Number of Signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be
signed by qualified voters of the township equal in number to at least
fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of qualified voters registered
to vote at the last regular township election.
(b) Form and Content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and
style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each
signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be
followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or
have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the
ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
(c) Affidavit of Circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it
when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he
§ 901 HOME RULE CHARTER § 903
Ch:27
§ 904. Procedure After Filing.
personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that
all the signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to
be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to
be, and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the
full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
(d) Time for Filing Referendum Petitions. Referendum petitions must be
filed within thirty (30) days after adoption by the board of supervisors of
the ordinance sought to be reconsidered.
(a) Certificate of Clerk; Amendment. Within twenty (20) days after the
petition is filed, the township clerk shall complete a certificate as to its
sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is
defective, and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the
petitioners' committee by registered mail. A petition certified
insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be
amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to
amend it with the Clerk within two (2) days after receiving the copy of
his certificate and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers
within ten (10) days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such
supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of
subsections (b) and (c) of section 903, and within five (5) days after it is
filed the Clerk shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the
petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the
petitioners' committee by registered mail as in the case of an original
petition. If a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and
the petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or request board of
supervisors' review under subsection (b) of this section within the time
required, the Clerk shall promptly present his certificate to the board of
supervisors and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to
the sufficiency of the petition.
(b) Board of Supervisors' Review. If a petition has been certified
insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not file notice of
intention to amend it, or if an amended petition has been certified
insufficient, the committee may, within two (2) days after receiving the
copy of such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the board
of supervisors. The board of supervisors shall review the certificate at
its next meeting following the filing of such request and approve or
disapprove it, and the board of supervisors' determination shall then be
a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition.
(c) Court Review; New Petition. A final determination as to the
insufficiency of a petition shall be subject to court review. A final
determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall
not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
§ 903 KINGSTON CODE § 905
Ch:28
§ 905. Referendum Petitions; Suspension of Effect of Ordinance.
When a referendum petition is filed with the township clerk, the ordinance
sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such
suspension shall terminate when:
§ 906. Action on Petitions.
§ 907. Results of Election.
(1) There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition; or
(2) The petitioners' committee withdraws the petition; or
(3) The board of supervisors repeals the ordinance; or
(4) Thirty (30) days have elapsed after a vote of the township on the
ordinance.
(a) Action by Council. When an initiative or referendum petition has been
finally determined sufficient, the board of supervisors shall promptly
consider the proposed initiative ordinance in the manner provided in
Article IV or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If
the board of supervisors fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance
without any change in substance within sixty (60) days, or fails to repeal
the referred ordinance with thirty (30) days after the date the petition
was finally determined sufficient, it shall submit the proposed or
referred ordinance to the voters of the township.
(b) Submission to Voters. The vote of the township on a proposed or
referred ordinance shall be held not less than thirty (30) days and not
later than one year from the date of the final board of supervisors' vote
thereon. If no regular township election is to be held within the period
prescribed in this subsection, the board of supervisors shall provide for
a special election; otherwise, the vote shall be held at the same time as
such regular election, except that the board of supervisors may in its
discretion provide for a special election at an earlier date within the
prescribed period. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall
be made available at the polls.
(c) Withdrawal of Petitions. An initiative or referendum petition may be
withdrawn at any time prior to the fifteenth day preceding the day
scheduled for a vote of the township by filing with the township clerk a
request for withdrawal signed by at least four members of the
petitioners' committee. Upon the filing of such request the petition shall
have no further force of effect and all proceedings thereon shall be
terminated.
(a) Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed
initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon
certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in
the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the board
§ 905 HOME RULE CHARTER § 907
Ch:29
of supervisors. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same
election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes
shall prevail to the extent of such conflict.
(b) Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred
ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon
certification of the election results.
§ 907 KINGSTON CODE § 907
Ch:30
Article X
Recall
§ 1001. Officers Subject to Recall.
Any person holding an elective office of the township, whether by election,
succession or appointment to fill a vacancy, shall be subject to removal from
office at a recall election in the manner provided in this article.
§ 1002. Recall Procedure.
A recall of an incumbent of an elective office shall be initiated upon petition
signed by thirty percent (30%) of the registered electors of the township at
large. Every recall petition shall name the office and officer against whom it
is directed.
Each elector signing a recall petition shall add to his signature his
occupation, his residence, his election district, and the date of signing.
Signatures on a recall petition may be on separate sheets, but each sheet
shall have appended to it the affidavit of some person, not necessarily a
signer of the petition, that to the best of the affiant's knowledge and belief
the persons whose signatures appear on the sheet are registered electors
of the township, that they signed with full knowledge of the contents of the
petition, and that their residences are correctly given.
A recall petition shall be tendered for filing to the board of elections having
jurisdiction over elections in the township. No signature shall be counted
as valid which is dated more than sixty (60) days prior to the date the
petition is tendered for filing. Upon tender to the board of elections, the
petition shall be available for examination by any interested person. Within
fifteen (15) days after tender of the petition, the board of elections shall
have authority to pass upon the validity of the petition and the validity
and number of signatures required thereon. The decision of the board of
elections shall be subject to immediate review on appeal to the Court of
Common Pleas.
§ 1003. Notice to Incumbent.
As soon as the board having jurisdiction over elections in the township
has accepted a recall petition for filing and determined its validity and
sufficiency, the chairman of the board shall notify the incumbent named in
the petition that the petition has been filed. Upon receipt of such notice the
incumbent may resign from his office and thereupon the recall proceedings
shall terminate.
§ 1004. Recall Elections.
If the incumbent against whom a recall petition is directed does not resign
from his office within ten (10) days after notice of the filing of such petition
shall have been given to him, the board having jurisdiction over elections in
the township shall arrange a recall election. If a regular or special election
§ 1001 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1004
Ch:31
is to be held not less than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days
after the ten (10) days have expired, the recall question shall be placed
before the electors at such an election. Otherwise, a special recall election
shall be fixed by such board for a date not earlier than thirty (30) days nor
later than ninety (90) days after the ten days have expired. The incumbent
against whom a recall petition is directed may resign at any time prior to
the recall election and thereupon the election shall not be held.
The following question shall be presented to each elector in a recall
election: "Shall (name of officer) be recalled and removed from the office of
(name of office)?"
The above question shall appear as to every officer whose recall is to be
voted upon and provision shall be made for the elector to vote "Yes" or "No"
on the question.
If a majority of the registered electors who vote on the question at a
recall election shall vote "Yes," the incumbent shall be deemed recalled and
removed from office; but if a majority of such registered electors shall vote
"No," he shall remain in office.
Should the result of such election be affirmative, the date of the removal
and vacancy in the office shall be seven (7) days subsequent to the date
when the results of election are certified by the board having jurisdiction
thereon, unless such date is further postponed by order of court.
§ 1005. Disqualification for Office.
No person who has been removed from an elective office by a recall
election, or who has resigned from such an elective officer after a recall
petition directed to him has been filed, shall be eligible for election or
appointment to any office of the township within two years after his removal
or resignation.
§ 1006. Limitations.
No recall petition shall be filed against any incumbent of an elective office
within the first year or the last nine months of the terms of his office or
within nine months after an unsuccessful recall election against him, but
an officer who has been reelected for a successive term shall be subject to
recall also during the first year of such term.
§ 1004 KINGSTON CODE § 1006
Ch:32
Article XI
Contracts
§ 1101. Requirements. [Ord. 2012-3,3 6/13/2012, § 3]
All contracts of the township involving sums of money aggregating in excess
of the prevailing Pennsylvania statutory sums of money expended for the
municipal purchase and procurement of goods and services shall be in
writing and shall be executed on behalf of the township by the chairman of
the board of supervisors or, in his absence, the vice chairman of the board
of supervisors. The chairman of the board of supervisors shall also execute
all contracts, regardless of amount, for the purchase, sale, leasing, or use
of real estate. The township manager is authorized to execute contracts
on behalf of the township upon the condition that the aggregate sum in
respect to each such contract does not exceed the sum of money fixed
by the resolution of the board of supervisors, from time to time, for such
purpose. Authorization for contracts for the construction of public capital
improvements shall be given by ordinance. Any officer required to execute
a written contract may request the township attorney to approve the same
as to form.
§ 1102. Competitive Bids.
Except as otherwise provided in this charter, no contract for supplies,
material, labor, franchise, or other valuable consideration, to be furnished
to or by the township, shall be authorized on behalf of the township, except
with the best responsible bidder after competitive bidding.
§ 1103. Bidding Procedure.
The board of supervisors shall, by ordinance, establish a system of
competitive bidding, including such definitions, publication requirements,
deposit and bond requirements, conditions, terms, rules, regulations,
waiver and exceptions as it shall from time to time deem advisable.
§ 1104. Exceptions to Competitive Bidding.
Competitive bidding shall not be required under this charter for:
(1) Labor or services rendered by any township officer or employee.
(2) Labor, material, supplies, or services furnished by one township
department to another township department.
(3) Contracts for labor, material, supplies, or services available from only
one vendor.
3. Editor’s Note: The Charter amendments adopted by this ordinance were subject to
referendum and approved by a majority of the electors at the general election of
November 6, 2012, and ratified by Res. No. R-2012-13.
§ 1101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1104
Ch:33
§ 1105. Maximum Term of Certain Contracts.
The term of contracts for the purchase of supplies shall not exceed two
years.
§ 1106. Eminent Domain.
The township shall have no authority to grant to others, by franchise,
contract, or otherwise, its power and right of eminent domain.
(4) Contracts for labor, material, supplies, or services aggregating less
than the prevailing Pennsylvania statutory sums of money for the
municipal purchase and procurement of such labor, material, supplies
or services for the item in the year supplied. [Ord. 2012-3,4 6/13/
2012, § 4]
(5) Contracts relating to the acquisition or use of real property.
(6) Contracts for professional or unique services.
(7) Contracts for insurance and surety company bonds.
(8) Contracts for emergency repair of public works of the township.
(9) Contracts with other governmental entities, authorities, agencies, of
political sub-divisions.
4. Editor’s Note: The Charter amendments adopted by this ordinance were subject to
referendum and approved by a majority of the electors at the general election of
November 6, 2012, and ratified by Res. No. R-2012-13.
§ 1104 KINGSTON CODE § 1106
Ch:34
Article XII
General Provisions
§ 1201. Personal Financial Interest.
Any township officer or employee who has a substantial financial interest,
direct or indirect, or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation
in any contract with the township, or in the sale of any land, material,
supplies or services to the township, or to a contractor supplying the
township, shall make known that interest and shall refrain from voting upon
or otherwise participating in his capacity as a township officer or employee
in the making of such sale or in the making or performance of such contract.
Any township officer or employee who wilfully conceals such a substantial
financial interest or wilfully violates the requirements of this section shall
be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall forfeit his office or
position. Violation of this section with the knowledge express or implied of
the person or corporation contracting with or making a sale to the township
shall render the contract or sale voidable by the township manager or the
township board of supervisors.
§ 1202. Prohibitions.
(a) Activities Prohibited.
(1) No person shall be appointed to or removed from, or in any way
favored or discriminated against with respect to any township
position or appointive township administrative office because of
race, sex, political or religious opinions or affiliations.
(2) No person shall wilfully make any false statement, certificate,
mark, rating or report in regard to any test, certification or
appointment made under the personnel provisions of this charter
or the rules and regulations made thereunder, or in any manner
commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial
execution of such provisions, rules and regulations.
(3) No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any
township position or appointive township administrative office shall
directly or indirectly give, render or pay any money, service or
other valuable thing to any person for or in connection with his test,
appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed
promotion.
(4) No person shall orally, by letter or otherwise, solicit or assist in
soliciting any assessment, subscription or contribution for any
political party or political purpose whatever from any person
holding any compensated appointive township position.
(5) No person who holds any compensated appointive township
position shall solicit any contribution to the campaign funds of any
political party or any candidate for public office or take any part in
§ 1201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1202
Ch:35
§ 1203. Charter Amendment.
The terms of the "Home Rule Charter and Optional Plans Law," Act 62 of
1972, as amended, shall govern any action to amend this charter.
§ 1204. Separability.
If any provision of this charter is held invalid, the other provisions of
the charter shall not be affected thereby. If the application of the charter
or any of its provisions to any person or circumstance is held invalid,
the application of the charter and its provisions to other persons or
circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
the management, affairs or political campaign of any political party,
but he may exercise his rights as a citizen to express his opinions
and to cast his vote.
(b) Penalties. Any person who by himself or with others wilfully violates any
of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
three hundred dollars ($300.00). Any person convicted under this
section shall be ineligible for a period of five (5) years thereafter to hold
any township office or position and, if an officer or employee of the
township, shall immediately forfeit his office or position.
§ 1202 KINGSTON CODE § 1204
Ch:36
Article XIII
Transition Procedures
§ 1301. Rights and Liabilities of the Township.
The township shall continue to own, possess and control all rights and
property, of every kind and nature, owned, possessed or controlled by
it when this charter takes effect, and shall be subject to all its debts,
obligations, liabilities and duties.
§ 1302. Ordinances to Remain in Force.
All ordinances, regulations and resolutions in force at the time this charter
takes effect, which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter,
shall remain and be in force until altered, modified or repealed by or under
authority of this charter or ordinance.
§ 1303. Authority of Existing Elected Officers.
The supervisors in office at the time this charter becomes effective shall
remain in office for the full terms for which they were originally elected.
However, they shall have the responsibilities, duties, compensation and
authority only as set forth in and in pursuance of this charter. All other
elected officials of the township in office at the time this charter becomes
effective shall remain in office for the full term for which they were elected
and they shall continue to perform the duties and receive the same
compensation which they received prior to the adoption of this charter.
However, should any of such other offices become vacant for any reason,
the vacancies shall not be filled, but the duties of the offices shall, instead,
pass to the persons designated in this charter.
§ 1304. Personnel System.
An employee holding a township position at the time this charter takes
effect, who was serving in that same or a comparable position at the time
of its adoption, shall not be subject to competitive tests as a condition of
continuance in the same position, but in all other respects shall be subject
to the personnel system established pursuant to this charter.
§ 1305. Pending Actions and Proceedings.
No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending at the time this charter
shall take effect, brought by or against the township or any office,
department, agency or officer thereof, shall be affected or abated by the
adoption of this charter or by anything herein contained.
§ 1306. Continuance of Contracts, Public Improvements and Taxes.
All contracts entered into by the township, or for its benefit, prior to
the taking effect of this charter, shall continue in full force and effect.
Public improvements for which legislative steps have been taken under laws
§ 1301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1306
Ch:37
existing at the time this charter takes effect may be carried to completion
as nearly as practicable in accordance with the provisions of such existing
laws. All taxes and assessments levied or assessed, all fines and penalties
imposed, and all other obligations owing to the township, which are
uncollected at the time this charter becomes effective, shall continue in full
force and effect and shall be collected as if no change had been made.
§ 1307. First Election.
At the time of its adoption, this charter shall be in effect to the extent
necessary in order that the first election of members of the board of
supervisors may be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this
charter.
§ 1308. Time of Taking Full Effect.
This charter shall be in full effect for all purposes on and after the date and
time of the first meeting of the newly elected board of supervisors on or
after January 1, 1976.
§ 1309. Temporary Ordinances.
At its first meeting or at any meeting held within sixty (60) days thereafter,
the board of supervisors may adopt temporary ordinances to deal with
cases in which there is an urgent need for prompt action in connection
with the transition of government and in which the delay incident to the
appropriate ordinance procedure would probably cause serious hardship or
impairment of effective township government. Every temporary ordinance
shall be plainly labeled as such but shall be introduced in the form and
manner prescribed for ordinances generally. A temporary ordinance may be
considered and may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at
the meeting at which it is introduced. A temporary ordinance shall become
effective upon adoption or at such later time preceding automatic repeal
under this subsection as it may specify, and the referendum power shall
not extend to any such ordinance. Every temporary ordinance, including
any amendments made thereto after adoption, shall automatically stand
repealed as of the 91st day following the date on which it was adopted,
and it shall not be re-adopted, renewed or otherwise continued except by
adoption in the manner prescribed in Article IV for ordinances of the kind
concerned.
§ 1310. Initial Salary of Supervisors.
Members of the board of supervisors shall be compensated at the rate of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per regularly scheduled and advertised meeting
attended until such amount is changed by the board of supervisors in
accordance with the provisions of this charter.
§ 1306 KINGSTON CODE § 1311
Ch:38
§ 1311. Purpose of Schedule.
The purpose of the foregoing provisions in this article is to provide a
transition from the present government of the Township of Kingston,
Pennsylvania, to the new government provided for in this charter and to
inaugurate the new government under the provisions of this charter. They
shall constitute a part of this charter only to the extent and for the time
required to accomplish that aim.
§ 1311 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1311
Ch:39
Municipal Code
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT (ADMINISTRATIVE
CODE)
§ 1311 KINGSTON CODE § 1311
Ch:40
Part 1
SHORT TITLE AND DEFINITIONS
§ 101. Short Title. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative Code
of the Township of Kingston, Pennsylvania, and is adopted pursuant to Act
62 of 1972 (P.L. 184), as amended, designated as the "Home Rule Charter
and Optional Plans Law," and Article IV, Section 401(1), of the Kingston
Township Home Rule Charter.
§ 102. Definitions. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
As used in this Chapter 1, these words, terms, and phrases shall mean or
include the following:
ADMINISTRATIVE — The function of carrying out the policies, ordinances,
or mandates of the Board of Supervisors.
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE — The administrative code adopted by the Board
of Supervisors of the Township of Kingston, pursuant to the provisions
of the Home Rule Charter Article IV, Section 401(1) which defines the
responsibilities of the municipal departments, offices and agencies.
ADVISORY — The function of gathering facts and making recommendations
to the Board of Supervisors or to any other body designated by the Board of
Supervisors.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Kingston elected by the qualified voters of said Township pursuant to the
Home Rule Charter.
BOARD — A body established under the provisions of the law or by a
valid ordinance of the Township, on a permanent basis and for indefinite
duration, to perform those functions of a judicial or quasi-judicial nature
that are specified in the Part creating the board or the law governing it,
and to be composed of three or more individuals, appointed by the Board
of Supervisors for definite terms of office as specified in the Home Rule
Charter. Where a body falling within this definition of "Board" shall, by law,
be required to be designated as a "Commission," that fact shall be clearly
stated in the Part erecting or governing that "Commission," and that Part
shall specify that the "Commission" shall perform the functions of a "Board"
rather than a "Commission".
CODE — The Code of the Township of Kingston as adopted by the Board of
Supervisors. The Code contains all Township ordinances of a general and
permanent nature, including the Administrative Code.
COMMISSION — A body established under the provisions of the law or by
a valid ordinance of the Township, on a permanent basis and for indefinite
duration, to perform those functions of an advisory or administrative nature
that are specified in the Part creating the commission or in the law
governing it, and to be composed of not less than three nor more than
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 102
Ch:41
seven individuals, appointed by the Board of Supervisors for definite terms
of office. Where a body falling within this definition of "Commission" shall,
by law, be required to be designated as a "Board," that fact shall be clearly
stated in the Part creating or governing that "Board," and that Part shall
specify that the "Board" shall have only the authority of a "Commission," as
defined in this paragraph.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Use of the term
"state" shall be deemed to mean "commonwealth."
HOME RULE CHARTER — The Home Rule Charter of the Township of
Kingston, as approved by the electors of said Township on May 21, 1974,
with amendments, if any, thereafter lawfully adopted and approved. Said
Home Rule Charter may be simply referred to as "Charter."
JUDICIAL — The function of hearing and deciding cases or controversies
arising from the application of ordinances, regulations or laws.
LAW — The Constitution and any statute of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and all applicable laws of the United States of America.
MANAGER — The Township Manager of the Township of Kingston
appointed by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to the Home Rule Charter,
Article V, Section 501.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Kingston.
ORDINANCE — All ordinances of the Township, including this
Administrative Code.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, firm,
utility, government agency, or other entity capable of being sued. Whenever
used in any section prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person,"
as applied to associations shall mean the partners or members thereof, and
as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Kingston, a home rule municipality, in the
County of Luzerne, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include
the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 103. Word Usage. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
In this chapter and in other ordinances of the Township, the following rules
of word usage shall apply unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
1. Gender. Words importing the masculine gender only shall also mean
and include the feminine and neuter genders and shall also apply to
firms, associations, corporations, and other artificial persons.
2. Number. Words importing the singular number only shall include the
plural number, and words importing the plural number only shall
include the singular number.
§ 102 KINGSTON CODE § 103
Ch:42
§ 104. Interpretation and Application of Provisions Generally. [Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985]
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. Where the provisions
of this chapter impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of
any law, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall
control. Where the provisions of any law, other ordinance or regulation
impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of such law,
other ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
3. Shall, May. The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is
permissive.
§ 103 HOME RULE CHARTER § 104
Ch:43

Part 2
ADMINISTRATIVE GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 201. Establishment of Administrative Code. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/
1985]
There is hereby established an Administrative Code for the government of
the Township of Kingston, Pennsylvania, a home rule municipality, pursuant
to its Home Rule Charter and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. The Code of the Township of Kingston shall be known and
referred to as the "Administrative Code." Said code defines the
responsibilities of such municipal departments, offices, and agencies as the
Board of Supervisors deems necessary for the proper and efficient conduct
of municipal affairs.
§ 202. Continuity of Authority and Responsibilities. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/
13/1985]
The performance of functions pursuant to the provisions of this
Administrative Code shall be deemed and held to constitute a continuation
of the performance of previous functions for the purpose of succession
to all rights, powers, duties, and obligations attached to such functions.
Any proceedings or other business undertaken or commenced prior to the
effective date of this Administrative Code may be conducted and completed
by the Township officer or administrative unit responsible therefor under
the Home Rule Charter or this Administrative Code.
§ 203. Transitional Matters. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
§ 204. Municipal Authority Not Affected. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The provisions of this Administrative Code shall not be deemed to affect
the organization, authority, powers, duties, or obligations of the Dallas Area
Municipal Authority as created August 22, 1967, pursuant to an ordinance
1. Departments of Government. In accordance with Article VI of the Home
Rule Charter, administrative departments are hereby established as
designated in Departments of Government in this Administrative Code.
During any transitional period after the date of adoption of this
Administrative Code and prior to the actual establishment of the
designated administrative departments, the Township Manager or an
officer designated by him shall carry out the duties and responsibilities
assigned to the administrative departments.
2. Members of Boards and Commissions. The terms of all members of the
following boards and commissions in existence prior to the adoption of
this Administrative Code shall continue upon the adoption of this
Administrative Code: Zoning Hearing Board, Civil Service Commission,
Planning Commission, Police Pension Fund Trustees, Recreation
Commission, and Water Commission.
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 204
Ch:45
of the Board of Supervisors of the Second Class Township of Kingston.
The Dallas Area Municipal Authority shall continue to exist and function
under the provisions of its Articles of Incorporation and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 205. Construction of Provisions. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The provisions of this Administrative Code shall be construed broadly in
favor of the Township of Kingston within the limitations of its Home Rule
Charter and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Any specific
mention of particular functions, authorities, powers, and duties in this
Administrative Code shall not be construed in any way as limiting the
general powers of the Board of Supervisors or of the Township Manager as
set forth in the Home Rule Charter, in providing for the most efficient and
beneficial administration of government for the Township of Kingston.
§ 206. Citizens' Right to Examine and Copy Township Records. [Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985]
1. Any person who is a citizen of the Commonwealth (hereinafter "citizen")
shall have the right to examine and copy any account, voucher,
contract, minute, order, or decision of the Township ("Township
records") in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the procedure hereinafter set forth.
2. Procedure.
A. Any citizen who desires to examine or copy Township records shall
conform to the following procedures:
(1) The person who desires to examine the Township records shall
address a letter to the Township Manager stating the Township
records which the citizen desires to examine.
(2) The Township Manager shall notify such citizen of the time and
place at which the Township records requested may be
examined. Such time shall be fixed within one week of receipt
of the request to examine the Township records; provided,
however, that if the Township records which have been
requested for examination are not available, the Township
Manager shall state in writing the time when such Township
records will be available and the place where they can be
examined.
(3) Any Township record may be copied at the time the Township
record is examined; provided, however that if the copy is made
by the Township, the citizen requesting the copy shall pay a
reasonable cost to be determined by the Township Manager.
B. In addition to the procedure set forth above, at the discretion of the
Township Manager, all Township records shall be made available to
any citizen during regular business hours of the Township.
§ 204 KINGSTON CODE § 206
Ch:46
3. Records Not Open to Citizen Access. No citizen shall have the right to
examine or copy any records to which the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or the Township deny public access.
4. Appeals from the Denial of the Right to Examine Records. Any citizen
shall have the right to appeal the denial of access to Township records
in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 206 HOME RULE CHARTER § 206
Ch:47

Part 3
TOWNSHIP ORGANIZATION
§ 301. Basic Form and Structure. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as
amended by Ord. 2006-7, 10/11/2006, § 6]
The basic form and structure of government provided in the Home Rule
Charter and this Administrative Code is the Council/Manager form of
government. As more fully described in the Home Rule Charter and this
Administrative Code, the legislative powers and functions of the Township
government shall be vested in and exercised by the Board of Supervisors.
The Township Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the
Township, responsible to the Board of Supervisors for the administration of
all Township affairs. The advisory boards and commissions perform advisory
duties of a continuing nature in specific areas as designated by this
Administrative Code. The Assistant Township Manager shall be the assistant
chief administrative officer of the Township, responsible primarily to the
Township Manager and secondarily to the Board of Supervisors for
assistance and support in the administration of all Township business and
affairs, except when to so act would be in violation of the provisions of the
Charter.
§ 302. Flow of Information. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The flow of information, policy direction and activity coordination shall,
in the case of administrative matters, be directed to and/or through the
Township Manager. The flow of information in the establishment of policy
shall always emanate from the Board of Supervisors to the Township
Manager and administrative and advisory boards, when applicable.
§ 303. Chart of Government Organization. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985;
as amended by Ord. 2006-7, 10/11/2006, § 7]
The chart of government organization shall be as follows:
Kingston Township Government
Table of Organization
ELECTORATE:
VOTERS
ELECTED OFFICIALS:
Board of Supervisors
Five Members
4-year terms, overlapping
Elected at Large
APPOINTED
OFFICIALS:
§ 301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 303
Ch:49
Legal Officer Township Manager Township Clerk
(optional)
Assistant Township
Manager
Personnel Director
Chief of Police
Roadmaster
Sanitary Enforcement
Officer
Zoning Officer
APPOINTED BOARDS,
COMMISSIONS:
Civil Service Commission
Personnel Board
(optional)
Planning Commission
Recreation Commission
Water Commission
Zoning Hearing Board
Pension Fund Trustees
§ 303 KINGSTON CODE § 303
Ch:50
Part 4
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
ARTICLE A.
General Provisions: Administrative.
§ 401. Purpose. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The commissions or boards specified in this Administrative Code have been
or are hereby established for the proper and efficient conduct of municipal
affairs. The purpose of these commissions or boards is to perform duties of
a continuing nature in specific areas as designated by this Administrative
Code, the Home Rule Charter or other ordinances of the Township.
§ 402. Establishment of Administrative Boards; Authority. [Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985]
§ 403. Expenditure of Public Funds; Contracts. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/
1985]
No commission or board shall have the authority to spend Township funds
unless provided for in the budget, specifically approved by the Board of
Supervisors and subsequently approved by the Township Manager or a
member of the administrative staff authorized to do so by the Manager. No
commission or board shall have the power to enter into contracts unless
otherwise provided by this Administrative Code.
§ 404. Appointment, Vacancies, Removal, Compensation and Term
of Office of Members. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
1. The commissions or boards designated in the following subparts have
been previously established by ordinance or are established by this
Administrative Code. Additional commissions or boards shall, from time
to time, be established by ordinance as deemed necessary by the Board
of Supervisors. However, no additional commissions or boards may be
created until the Board of Supervisors has determined that the
functions of the proposed commission or board cannot be feasibly
performed by one or more of the existing commissions or boards.
2. Those commissions or boards in this Administrative Code have been or
are hereby established within the requirements of the statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the laws of the Township of
Kingston. Those commissions or boards shall have authority only in the
specific areas of responsibility granted to such bodies by the statutes of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, by this Administrative Code, by the
Home Rule Charter or by other ordinances of the Township.
1. Appointment. The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors shall appoint
the members of commissions or boards with the advice and consent of
the majority of all the members of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 401 HOME RULE CHARTER § 404
Ch:51
§ 405. Officers; Duties of Officers. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
§ 406. Meetings; Procedures for Meetings. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of
the term. Vacancies shall be filled by the Board of Supervisors within
60 days of notification from the Chairman of the Board or Commission
on which the vacancy occurs.
2. Removal. Any member of a commission or board may be removed prior
to the expiration of his appointed term by the chairman of the Board of
Supervisors or in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth
applicable to such board or commission.
3. Compensation. No member of any commission or board shall be
compensated for his duties.
4. Membership. All members of boards and commissions shall be
residents of the Township.
1. Officers.
A. Chairman and Vice Chairman. A Chairman and a Vice Chairman of
each commission or board shall be elected by the members of each
body in January of each year. Each such officer shall serve a oneyear
term.
B. Secretary. The member of each administrative board may elect one
of their own members or appoint an employee of the Township (to
be designated by the Township Manager) to act as Secretary. The
Secretary, if elected from the membership, shall serve a one-year
term. If an appointed Township employee, the Secretary shall serve
at the pleasure of the board or commission.
1. All meetings and hearings of commissions or boards shall be open to the
public, unless otherwise permitted by law.
2. Regular meetings of commissions or boards shall be held on a
designated day as established at annual organizational meetings. The
first regular meeting in January of each year shall constitute the annual
organization meeting of the commissions or boards.
3. Special meetings may be held as needed upon the call of the Chairman
or Vice Chairman, providing that appropriate notice of each meeting is
given to each member and to the public in accordance with the statutes
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
4. A quorum shall consist of at least a majority of all members of the
commission or board.
5. The Chairman or, in his absence, the Vice Chairman shall administer
oaths and may compel the attendance of witnesses when required by
§ 404 KINGSTON CODE § 406
Ch:52
law, in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the
Commonwealth.
6. The Secretary or his designee shall keep minutes of the commission or
board proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact.
7. A file of all materials and decisions relating to each case shall be kept
by the Secretary or his designee as part of the records of each board.
8. All records of administrative boards shall be public records, unless
otherwise permitted by law.
9. All meetings of commissions or boards shall be conducted in an orderly
fashion.
§ 406 HOME RULE CHARTER § 406
Ch:53

ARTICLE B.
Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 411. Continuance of Board. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
There shall be in and for the Township of Kingston a Zoning Hearing Board
pursuant to the Municipalities Planning Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 412. Powers and Duties. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The powers and duties of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be only as
prescribed in Article IX of the Municipalities Planning Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 413. Employees; Appropriations. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The Zoning Hearing Board may, within the limit of funds appropriated by
the Board of Supervisors, employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal
counsel other than the Township Attorney, consultants, and other technical
and clerical services.
§ 411 HOME RULE CHARTER § 413
Ch:55

ARTICLE C.
Civil Service Commission.
§ 421. Establishment and Purpose. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
There shall be in and for the Township of Kingston a Civil Service
Commission which is hereby established for the following purposes:
§ 422. Membership. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
§ 423. Authority Powers and Duties. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as
amended by Ord. 90-7, 9/12/1990, § 1]
1. To administer or designate any recognized examining agency to
administer examinations to all applicants for any police officer position,
except Chief of Police, in the Police Department of the Township of
Kingston.
2. To enforce the rules and regulations pertaining to the examinations for
appointment to a police officer position, except Chief of Police, in the
Police Department of the Township of Kingston.
3. To create and amend as necessary the rules and regulations for the
organization and procedure of the Civil Service Commission of the
Township. Such rules and regulations shall be consistent with the
ordinances of the Township of Kingston, this Administrative Code, and
the statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Furthermore, such
rules and regulations shall be approved by the Board of Supervisors.
1. The Civil Service Commission shall consist of three members, each of
whom shall be a full-time resident and qualified elector of the Township
and be appointed by the Board of Supervisors for a three-year term.
2. Members of the Civil Service Commission shall hold no other office in
the Township.
3. The term of not more than one member shall expire every year.
Therefore, unless a vacancy occurs, the Board of Supervisors shall
annually appoint one member to the Civil Service Commission for a
three-year term.
4. Should a vacancy occur, the Board of Supervisors shall appoint a
member to fill the vacancy only for the unexpired portion of the term.
Such appointments shall be made within a period of 60 days after such
a vacancy occurs.
1. The Civil Service Commission shall have authority only in the specific
areas of responsibility granted by the following provisions of this
Administrative Code, by the statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by the ordinances of the Township.
§ 421 HOME RULE CHARTER § 423
Ch:57
2. The powers and duties of the Civil Service Commission shall include but
not be limited to the following:
A. Rules and Regulations. To make and alter such rules and
regulations for its own organization and procedure as are
necessary and are consistent with the ordinances of the Township,
this Administrative Code and the statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. Such rules and regulations shall be approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
B. Applications.
(1) To require a sworn application, giving such information as the
Commission may require, before any person shall be admitted
to an examination for a position of police officer, except Chief
of Police, in the Police Department of the Township.
(2) To prescribe the official form of application on which all
required information must be stated before any person shall be
admitted to an examination for a position of police officer,
except Chief of Police, in the Police Department of the
Township.
C. Applicant Qualifications.
(1) To determine, within the general personnel policies of the
Township, if each applicant for any police officer position,
except Chief of Police, in the Police Department:
(a) Is a citizen of the United States or a naturalized citizen of
the United States.
(b) Has graduated from an accredited high school or has an
equivalent education.
(c) Is medically fit for the performance of the duties of a police
officer.
(d) Is of good moral character.
(e) Is licensed to operate a motor vehicle in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(f) Meets any other officially established job-related
requirements.
(g) Is a resident of the Township of Kingston.
(2) To determine if each applicant for the position of a police
officer, except Chief of Police, has satisfactorily completed an
in-service training program for police officers; has graduated
from a recognized academy or school; and meets all other
requirements officially established henceforth.
§ 423 KINGSTON CODE § 423
Ch:58
(3) To request as necessary an investigation of the character and
reputation of any applicant. Such investigation shall be
conducted by the Police Department and may include reports
of investigation from other recognized agencies.
D. Examinations.
(1) To fix the dates for the written and oral examination of
applicants for any police officer position, except Chief of Police,
in the Police Department; to fix the dates and times by which
applications must be received; and to designate the offices and
officers which shall receive such applications. All examinations
shall be job-related.
(2) To examine any applicant who lacks any of the prescribed
qualifications if, in the judgment of the Civil Service
Commission, it can be reasonably presumed that the applicant
will acquire the necessary qualifications prior to the date of a
possible certification from the list of eligibles produced as a
result of examination.
(3) To give public notice, in a newspaper of general circulation, of
the time and place of every entrance-level police officer
examination, together with information as to the position to be
filled. The public notice shall be published and posted in
accordance with the rules and regulations established by the
Civil Service Commission. Additional public notice may be
given at any time at the discretion of the Civil Service
Commission.
(4) To appoint from time to time one or more medical examiners to
make all required medical examinations of all applicants for
police officer positions, except Chief of Police, in the Police
Department.
(5) To establish the minimum medical requirements for all
applicants for police officer positions, except Chief of Police, in
the Police Department. A statement of the established medical
requirements shall appear on the official application form, and
a copy of such statement of medical requirements shall be filed
in the office of each medical examiner.
(6) To furnish each medical examiner with forms upon which the
medical examiner shall state the physical and mental condition
of each applicant.
(7) To require any applicant to submit to a further medical
examination before the name of such applicant shall be
certified for appointment. Additional medical examinations
may be required if the Civil Service Commission determines
that there has been a change in the medical fitness of an
§ 423 HOME RULE CHARTER § 423
Ch:59
applicant after the original medical examination of any such
applicant has been completed.
(8) To designate a recognized examining agency to act as
examiner for the written examination.
(9) To accept or reject, in whole or in part, the recommendations
of the regularly appointed examining agency.
(10) To administer and evaluate the oral examination of any
applicant, and to designate, as necessary, qualified persons to
assist in the administration and evaluation of oral examining
procedures and techniques.
(11) To prepare a statement of instructions and rules for the
conduct of written examinations, which the regularly
appointed examiner shall be responsible for enforcing.
(12) To administer and evaluate a physical agility testing program
for police officer applicants and/or appoint a testing facility to
perform the same.
(13) To appoint from time to time one or more psychological
examiners to perform pre-employment psychological
examinations on police officer applicants and to evaluate the
results prior to certifying applicants for appointment.
(14) To establish a system of veteran's preference in employment
for officer candidates in accordance with federal and state
statutes.
(15) To establish a comprehensive testing program for police officer
candidates in the order listed below:
(a) Written examination.
(b) Oral interview.
(c) Medical examination(s).
(d) Physical agility examination.
(e) Psychological examination.
(f) Background investigation(s).
E. Evaluations. To evaluate the service or performance record of any
applicant, and to designate, as necessary, qualified persons to
assist in the evaluation of performance or service records.
F. Eligible and Furlough Lists.
(1) To void at any time, at the request of the Board of Supervisors,
an eligible list. In no case shall any eligible list remain in effect
§ 423 KINGSTON CODE § 423
Ch:60
for a period of more than two years from the date of its
certification.
(2) To prepare, at the request of the Board of Supervisors, a
certified eligible list of all names currently on the passing
grade list for each uniformed officer position except the Chief
of Police.
(3) To prepare and maintain a list of all officers furloughed in
accordance with the Act of June 15, 1951, P.L. 586, as
amended, whenever the Township Manager causes a reduction
in the number of police officers. The names of each furloughed
officer on the furlough list shall be arranged in the order of
length of service, from the longest to the shortest. The furlough
list shall also include the position held by each officer at the
time of furlough.
(4) To certify, upon request from the Board of Supervisors, the
names of those eligibles who were furloughed because of a
reduction in force. Such certifications shall be made in
accordance with the rules and regulations established by the
Civil Service Commission.
(5) To certify, upon request from the Township Manager, the
names from the eligible list if no furlough list exists or if the
total number of vacancies cannot be filled from the available
names on the furlough list. Such certifications shall be made in
accordance with the rules and regulations established by the
Civil Service Commission.
3. The Civil Service Commission shall have no power pertaining to areas
not related to officers of the Township of Kingston Police Department,
except the Chief of Police, or to similar areas specifically designated in
the above subsections of this Administrative Code, the statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the rules and regulations of the Civil
Service Commission or the ordinances of the Township.
§ 423 HOME RULE CHARTER § 423
Ch:61

ARTICLE D.
General Provisions: Advisory.
§ 431. Purpose. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The advisory boards and commissions specified in this Administrative Code
have been or are hereby established for the proper and efficient conduct
of municipal affairs. The purpose of these boards is to perform duties of
a continuing nature in specific areas as designated by this Administrative
Code, the Home Rule Charter, or other ordinances of the Township.
§ 432. Establishment of Advisory Boards and Commissions;
Authority. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
§ 433. Expenditure for Public Funds; Contracts. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/
1985]
No advisory board or commission shall have the authority to spend
Township funds unless provided for in the budget, specifically approved
by the Board of Supervisors and subsequently approved by the Township
Manager or a member of the administrative staff authorized so to do by the
Manager. No advisory board or commission shall have the authority to enter
into contracts of any nature.
§ 434. Appointments, Vacancies, Removal, Compensation and Term
of Office of Members. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
1. The boards and commissions designated in the following subparts have
been previously established by ordinance or are established by this
Administrative Code. Additional boards shall, from time to time, be
established by ordinance as deemed necessary by the Board of
Supervisors. However, no additional boards may be created until the
Board of Supervisors has determined that the functions of the proposed
board cannot be feasibly performed by one or more of the existing
boards.
2. The boards and commissions specified as being advisory boards or
commissions in this Administrative Code have been or are hereby
established within the requirements of the statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the laws of the Township of
Kingston to provide advice, guidance, and recommendations to the
Township Manager and the Board of Supervisors. No board designated
as an advisory board shall perform administrative duties or have
executive authority.
1. Appointment. The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors shall appoint
the members of advisory boards and commissions with the advice and
consent of the majority of the members of the Board of Supervisors.
Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of
the term.
§ 431 HOME RULE CHARTER § 434
Ch:63
§ 435. Officers, Duties of Officers. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
§ 436. Meetings; Procedures for Meetings. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
2. Removal. Any member of an advisory board or commission may be
removed prior to the expiration of his appointed term by the Chairman
of the Board of Supervisors or in accordance with the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania applicable to such board or
commission.
3. Compensation. No member of any advisory board or commission shall
be compensated for his duties.
1. Officers.
A. Chairman and Vice Chairman. A Chairman and a Vice Chairman of
each advisory board or commission shall be elected by the
members of each board in January of each year. Each such officer
shall serve a one-year term.
B. Secretary. The members of each advisory board and commission
may elect one of their own members or appoint an employee of the
Township (to be designated by the Township Manager) to act as the
Secretary. The Secretary, if elected from the membership, shall
serve a one-year term. If an appointed Township employee, the
Secretary shall serve at the pleasure of the board or commission.
2. Duties of Officers.
A. Chairman and Vice Chairman. The Chairman or, in his absence, the
Vice Chairman shall preside at all meetings of an advisory board or
commission, decide all points of order or procedure and perform
any other duties required by the statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by the ordinances of the Township.
B. Secretary. The Secretary or his designee shall conduct, at the
direction of the advisory board or commission, all official
correspondence of the board or commission; shall keep a record of
each meeting or other official action of the board or commission;
and shall perform all other duties required by the board or
commission, by this Administrative Code, by the statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by the ordinances of the
Township.
1. All meetings and hearings of advisory boards and commissions shall be
open to the public, unless otherwise permitted by law.
2. Regular meetings of advisory boards and commissions shall be held at
least once a month on a designated day unless no matters are pending
for consideration.
§ 434 KINGSTON CODE § 436
Ch:64
3. Special meetings may be held as needed upon the call of the Chairman
or Vice Chairman, provided that appropriate notice of each meeting is
given to each member and the public in accordance with the statutes of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
4. A quorum shall consist of at least a majority of all members of the board
or commission.
5. The Secretary or his designee shall keep minutes of the board's or
commission's proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact.
6. A file of all materials and decisions relating to all official actions of the
board or commission shall be kept as part of the records of each board
or commission.
7. All official records and files of each board and commission shall be kept
in the Township business office and shall be public records unless
otherwise provided by law or regulation.
8. All meetings of advisory boards and commissions shall be conducted in
an orderly fashion and in accordance with the rules delineated in
Robert's Rules of Order.
§ 436 HOME RULE CHARTER § 436
Ch:65

ARTICLE E.
Planning Commission.
§ 441. Continuance of Commission. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
There shall be in and for the Township of Kingston a Planning Commission,
pursuant to the Municipalities Planning Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 442. Powers and Duties. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The powers and duties of the Planning Commission shall be only as
prescribed in the Township Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances and in
Article II of the Municipalities Planning Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 443. Membership. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
1. The Planning Commission shall consist of five members, all of whom
shall be full-time residents and qualified electors of the Township. Each
will be appointed for a four-year term.
2. The terms of not more than two members shall expire each year.
3. Should a vacancy occur the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors shall
appoint a member to fill the vacancy only for the unexpired portion of
the term. Such appointments shall be made within a period of 60 days
after such vacancy occurs.
§ 441 HOME RULE CHARTER § 443
Ch:67

ARTICLE F.
Parks and Recreation Commission.
§ 451. Establishment and Purpose. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
There shall be in and for the Township of Kingston a Parks and Recreation
Commission, which is hereby established in accordance with the ordinances
of the Township for the following purposes:
§ 452. Membership. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
§ 453. Powers and Duties. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
1. To make recommendations pertaining to the development, supervision,
maintenance, and regulation of public park and recreation areas and
facilities located in the Township.
2. To develop and conduct a recreation program for the residents of the
Township of Kingston.
1. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall consist of five members,
each of whom shall be a full-time resident and qualified elector of the
Township and be appointed for a three-year term.
2. Members of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall hold no other
office in the Township.
3. The terms of not more than two members shall expire each year.
Therefore, unless a vacancy occurs, the Chairman of the Board of
Supervisors, with the advice and consent of the majority of the board
members, shall annually appoint no more than two members to the
Parks and Recreation Commission.
4. Should a vacancy occur, the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors shall
appoint a member to fill the vacancy only for the unexpired portion of
the term.
1. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall be a regular advisory board
and, as such, it shall be only advisory in nature and shall perform no
administrative duties. Its duties shall include but not be limited to the
following:
A. To act in an advisory capacity to the Board of Supervisors in
matters relating to parks and recreation.
B. To work with the Township Manager in reviewing and developing
policy matters.
C. To cooperate with other governmental agencies and civic groups in
the advancement of parks and recreation in the Township.
D. To recommend policies pertaining to all municipal park and
recreational matters within the Township.
§ 451 HOME RULE CHARTER § 453
Ch:69
E. To review and make recommendations, with the Township Manager
and Board of Supervisors concerning problems of development of
recreation areas, facilities, programs and improved recreation
services.
F. To make recommendations concerning a comprehensive system of
recreation and park areas, facilities and programs to meet the
needs of Township residents.
G. To define the objectives of public park and recreation services and
to recommend plans and general policies harmonizing with them.
H. To interpret the importance and need of recreation services for the
general public.
I. To inform the Board of Supervisors as to the status and progress of
recreation and park services.
J. To promote stability and continuity of park and recreation services.
K. To evaluate annually the park and recreation system in the
community in relation to its objectives.
L. To submit an annual report to the Board of Supervisors as deemed
necessary.
2. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall have no power pertaining
to matters not related to parks and recreation.
§ 453 KINGSTON CODE § 453
Ch:70
ARTICLE G.
Ad Hoc Boards.
§ 461. Establishment and Purpose. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Ad hoc boards may be established as deemed necessary by the Board of
Supervisors in accordance with the requirements of the ordinances of the
Township and this Administrative Code. Such boards shall be created only
for specific and temporary purposes. The exact purpose of such boards shall
be specified at the time each ad hoc board is created.
§ 462. Powers and Duties. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
All ad hoc boards shall be advisory boards and, as such, they shall be
advisory in nature and shall perform no administrative duties. Ad hoc
boards shall have the authority and responsibility to seek findings of fact,
express opinions or make recommendations in the specific areas of
responsibility granted to such boards at the time of their establishment.
§ 461 HOME RULE CHARTER § 462
Ch:71

ARTICLE H.
Police Pension Fund Trustees.
§ 471. Police Pension Fund Trustees. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
1. The Police Pension Fund Trustees shall periodically review and advise
the Board of Supervisors and the Manager on the Police Pension Fund
and shall serve as trustee of the Police Pension Fund, or in conjunction
with a separate professional trustee to serve as trustee of a designated
portion of the pension fund, subject to the terms and conditions,
limitations and restrictions provided by law for investments of trust
funds by fiduciaries.
2. Execute and fulfill all duties and responsibilities vested in the pension
fund trustees.
§ 471 HOME RULE CHARTER § 471
Ch:73

ARTICLE I.
Water Commission.
§ 481. Declaration of Purpose. [Ord. of 12/11/1968; as amended by
Ord. 4/14/1971; and by Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
§ 482. Procedure. [Ord. of 12/11/1968; as amended by Ord. 4/14/
1971; and by Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The Water Commission shall organize and adopt the Rule of Procedure not
inconsistent with this chapter or the Home Rule Charter.
§ 483. Meetings. [Ord. 12/11/1968]
Meetings of the Water Commission shall be held at the call of the Chairman
and at such other times as the Water Commission in its rules and procedure
may specify. The Chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may
conduct the meeting. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to
the public. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, and
shall keep records of any examinations or other actions taken by it. The
records of the Water Commission shall be kept in the Office of the Township
Supervisors and shall be a public record, and may be examined upon giving
the Water Commission due notice.
1. It is hereby declared that Kingston Township desires to establish a
Water Commission which shall function as a liaison and advisory
committee between the residents of Kingston Township, and the
Township Supervisors.
2. It is further declared that the Water Commission shall investigate
complaints of residents of Kingston Township and make
recommendations to the Township Supervisors on matters related to
water supply and water service within the Township.
3. The Water Commission shall consist of five members to be appointed by
the Board of Supervisors of Kingston Township.
4. The Township Supervisors shall fill any vacancies for an unexpired term
of any member of the Water Commission. At the expiration of a
member's term, he shall remain in office until he is reappointed or
released.
§ 481 HOME RULE CHARTER § 483
Ch:75

Part 5
BONDS AND INSURANCE
§ 501. Fidelity Bonds. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Bonds shall be approved by the Township Board of Supervisors on an annual
basis.
§ 502. Insurance Coverage. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The Township Manager shall submit reports to the Board of Supervisors, at
least biennially, reviewing all Township coverage in all liability areas and
recommending coverage deemed reasonable and prudent. Said areas shall
include but not be limited to the following:
§ 503. Purchase of Bonds and Insurance. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
As provided in Section 1104(7) of the Home Rule Charter, competitive
bidding shall not be required for contracts for insurance and surety bonds.
The Township Manager shall, in the biennial insurance report required
above, submit a recommendation concerning whether insurance and bonds
should be purchased through a competitive bidding procedure or on a direct
purchase basis.
1. Catastrophic liability insurance;
2. Comprehensive business liability and damage insurance;
3. Township property protection insurance;
4. Professional police liability insurance;
5. Workmen's compensation and employer's liability insurance;
6. Public officials' and employees' indemnity insurance;
7. Employee benefit insurance.
§ 501 HOME RULE CHARTER § 503
Ch:77

Part 6
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
§ 601. General Provisions. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The powers, composition, terms, election, eligibility, authority, prohibitions,
and other matters concerning the elected Board of Supervisors are set forth
in Article III of the Home Rule Charter for the Township of Kingston.
§ 602. Compensation. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as amended by Ord.
1996-5, 9/11/1996, § 1]
Each Township Supervisor shall receive a salary of $50 per regular
scheduled and advertised meeting attended, payable at each regular
monthly meeting. This salary may be changed as the Board of Supervisors
shall from time to time ordain in accordance with Section 1310 of the Home
Rule Charter.
§ 603. Indemnification and Personal Liability Insurance. [Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985]
To protect the Township Supervisors from personal liability in the
performance of their duties, indemnification and personal liability insurance
shall be provided by the Township. The amounts and limits of said insurance
will be determined in the annually approved insurance contracts as outlined
in Part 5, Bonds and Insurance, of this Administrative Code.
§ 604. Duties of Chairman and Vice Chairman. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/
1985]
§ 605. Meetings. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Regular meetings of the Board of Supervisors shall be held in the Kingston
Township Municipal Building, or at other such location as may be
designated by the Board, on the second Wednesday of each month at 8:00
1. The Board of Supervisors shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman as
provided in Section 303 of the Home Rule Charter.
2. The Chairman, at the stated hour for each meeting, shall call the
meeting to order. He shall preserve order and decorum, decide all
questions of order and conduct the proceedings of the meetings in
accordance with parliamentary rules contained herein and in Robert's
Rules of Order, unless otherwise provided by statute.
3. If the Chairman is absent at the designated time for any meeting, the
Vice Chairman shall call the meeting to order and preside.
4. In the absence of the Chairman and the Vice Chairman, the Board of
Supervisors shall elect a Chairman Pro Tem, who shall have all the
powers of the Chairman.
§ 601 HOME RULE CHARTER § 605
Ch:79
p.m. Adjourned and special meetings shall be called in compliance with
Section 310 of Article III of the Home Rule Charter.
§ 606. Citizens' and Taxpayers' Right to be Heard. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/
13/1985]
A regularly stated time for public comments on matters not included in
the agenda is provided in the order of business for each regular meeting
of the Board of Supervisors. On matters included in the agenda, citizens
and taxpayers will be recognized for comments during the time the agenda
item is under discussion. A citizen or taxpayer who wishes to be heard will
address the chair, state his name and address for the record and confine
himself to the question under debate. A member of the public may be asked
by the Chairman, should the orderly procedure of the meeting so require, to
limit his remarks to no longer than five minutes.
§ 607. Rules of Procedure. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
1. All rules of procedure shall be in accordance with Section 310 of the
Home Rule Charter and the current edition of Robert's Rules of Order.
2. The roll call of members shall be called with the Chairman first, Vice
Chairman second. All final action in adopting ordinances or resolutions
shall be by roll call vote, and the vote of each Supervisor shall be
entered in the minutes of the meeting. An abstention by a member who
is present at a meeting shall be considered an affirmative vote unless
the member has disqualified himself from consideration of the action
before discussion or vote, stating his reasons therefor.
3. No Supervisors shall address the Board until he has been recognized by
the presiding officer. He shall thereupon address himself to the
presiding officer and confine his remarks to the question under
discussion. All Supervisors shall be provided opportunity by the
presiding officer to participate fully and equally on each item being
discussed.
4. When two or more members simultaneously seek recognition, the
presiding officer shall name the member who is to speak first.
5. When a question is under discussion, no action shall be in order except
to adjourn, to lay it on the table, to call the previous question, to
postpone to a certain day, to refer to a committee, to amend or to
postpone indefinitely. These motions shall have precedence in the order
listed.
6. Any member desirous of terminating the debate may move the previous
question, in which event the presiding officer shall announce the
question as "Shall the main question now be put?". If the majority of the
members present vote in the affirmative, the main question shall be
taken without further debate, its effect being to put an end to all debate
§ 605 KINGSTON CODE § 607
Ch:80
§ 608. Committees. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Standing and ad hoc committees of the Board of Supervisors may be
established by the Chairman on the majority affirmative vote of the Board
of Supervisors.
§ 609. Ineligibility for Inclusion in Group Health Insurance Plan.
[Ord. 2005-10; 11/9/2005, §§ 1, 2]
and bring the Board of Supervisors to a direct vote, first upon any
pending amendments and then upon the main question.
7. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, and a motion to adjourn, to
lay it on the table and call for the previous question shall be decided
without debate.
8. The Board of Supervisors may adopt, by ordinance, such other rules of
procedures as may be deemed appropriate and are not in conflict with
the Home Rule Charter and this Administrative Code.
1. Notwithstanding any term or provision of the Charter of the Township
of Kingston, the ordinances of the Township of Kingston, or the Second
Class Township Code, or any other statute, legislation or resolutions of
the Township of Kingston, no serving member of the Board of
Supervisors shall be entitled to membership in or eligible for inclusion
in any group health, hospitalization, medical service and accident
insurance plans paid in whole or in part by the Township of Kingston.
2. The terms and provisions of this Section shall apply to all Supervisors
while serving in office or while in the employ of the Township of
Kingston during their service as Supervisor, in their capacity as a
Supervisor. During such employ by the Township of Kingston, such
serving Supervisor may qualify, as an employee only, for eligibility for
inclusion in any group health, hospitalization, medical service and
accident insurance plans paid in whole or in part, upon the condition
that such inclusion is at all times, granted as a benefit to all other
employees and upon the same terms and conditions for inclusion and
eligibility.
§ 607 HOME RULE CHARTER § 609
Ch:81

Part 7
DEPARTMENTS OF GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE A.
General Provisions.
§ 701. Organizational Function; Designation of Directors. [Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Operational departments of government shall be created or abolished by
the Board of Supervisors. Within each department, however, the
organization and implementation of specific functions shall be the
responsibility of the department head, subject to the review and approval of
the Township Manager.
§ 702. Establishment of Departments. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
§ 703. Appointment of Department Directors. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/
1985]
1. The following departments are hereby established to operate under the
direction and supervision of the Township Manager.
Department Department Head
Department of Administration Township Manager
Department of Police Protection Chief of Police
Department of Public Works Road Superintendent
Department of Zoning and
Building
Zoning and Building Inspector
2. The following additional departments are hereby established to operate
under the coordination of the Township Manager.
Department Department Head
Department of Law Township Attorney
Department of Engineering Township Engineer
Department of Fire Protection Chief of Volunteer Fire Company
1. Heads of departments of the Township which operate under the
direction and supervision of the Township Manager shall possess the
necessary qualifications for their respective offices, as established by
the Township Manager. They shall be appointed and removed by the
Township Manager in accordance with the provisions of Section 504(1)
of the Home Rule Charter.
2. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint a Township Attorney for an
indefinite term, subject to removal with or without cause. He shall be a
§ 701 HOME RULE CHARTER § 703
Ch:83
§ 704. Functions and Responsibilities of Department Directors.
[Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Each department of the Township which operates under the direction and
supervision of the Township Manager shall:
person learned in the law, in active legal practice in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and licensed to practice law in the Commonwealth.
3. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint a Township Engineer for an
indefinite term, subject to removal with or without cause. He shall be
appointed solely on the basis of his professional qualifications and may
be either an individual, a partnership, or an engineering corporation
licensed to practice civil engineering in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
4. The Volunteer Fire Companies shall each elect a Fire Chief in
accordance with company procedures and bylaws.
1. Cooperate with other departments in furnishing such services, labor,
and materials as may be requisitioned by the heads of such other
departments, subject to such regulations as the Township Manager may
prescribe.
2. Establish, maintain, and preserve a system of filing and indexing
records and reports in sufficient detail in order to furnish all
information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and
in order to form a basis for periodic reports to the Township Manager.
§ 703 KINGSTON CODE § 704
Ch:84
ARTICLE B.
Functions of Departments.
§ 711. Department of Administration. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The Department of Administration shall be responsible for all activities
relating but not limited to the following functions:
§ 712. Department of Police Protection. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The Department of Police Protection shall be responsible for all activities
relating but not limited to the following functions:
1. General financial administration.
2. Tax and revenue collection.
3. Accounting and expenditure control.
4. Payroll administration and control.
5. Insurance programs.
6. Budget preparation and control.
7. Capital programming.
8. Internal auditing.
9. Purchasing systems.
10. Property and inventory maintenance.
11. Personnel management.
12. Labor relations and negotiations.
13. Community communications and cable television.
14. Public relations programs.
15. Community group and service liaison.
16. Intergovernmental relations and contracts.
17. In-service training programs.
18. Staff assistance to independent auditors.
19. Staff assistance to boards and commissions.
20. All other responsibilities and obligations that the Township Manager
may from time to time assign consistent with the Home Rule Charter
and this Administrative Code.
1. General preservation of public order.
§ 711 HOME RULE CHARTER § 712
Ch:85
§ 713. Department of Public Works. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for all activities
relating but not limited to the following functions:
§ 714. Department of Zoning and Building Inspection. [Ord. 1985-1,
2/13/1985]
The Department of Zoning and Building Inspection shall be responsible for
all activities of Zoning and Building Inspection shall be responsible for all
activities relating but not limited to the following functions:
2. Prevention and suppression of crime.
3. Apprehension of violators of the law.
4. Protection of life and property.
5. Traffic and pedestrian control and safety.
6. Investigation of crimes.
7. Maintenance of police records and files.
8. Operation of the jail.
9. Coordination of police programs and services with other agencies.
10. All other responsibilities and obligations that the Township Manager
may from time to time assign consistent with the Home Rule Charter
and this Administrative Code.
1. Maintenance of municipal buildings, equipment and facilities, rights-ofway
and property.
2. Construction and maintenance of streets and storm sewers.
3. Erection and maintenance of parking and traffic control signals, signs,
and street markings.
4. Coordination and direction of refuse removal and disposal.
5. All other responsibilities and obligations that the Township Manager
may from time to time assign consistent with the Home Rule Charter
and this Administrative Code.
1. Housing, land and building inspections.
2. Enforcement of Township Building and Fire Prevention codes.
3. Coordination of code enforcement with other agencies.
4. Administration and enforcement of the Township Zoning Ordinance and
development programs.
§ 712 KINGSTON CODE § 714
Ch:86
§ 715. Department of Law. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The Department of Law shall be responsible for all activities relating but
not limited to the following functions:
5. Administrative coordination of long range planning and community
development programs.
6. Technical and staff review assistance to the Planning Commission.
7. Technical and staff review assistance to the Zoning Hearing Board.
8. Technical and staff review assistance to the Building and Fire Code
appeals.
9. All other responsibilities and obligations that the Township Manager
may from time to time assign consistent with the Home Rule Charter
and this Administrative Code.
1. Furnishing legal advice to the Board of Supervisors, to the Township
Manager, and all Township Departments, officers and agencies, except
as provided otherwise by this Administrative Code or the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, concerning any matter or thing arising
in connection with the exercise of their official powers or performance
of their official duties.
2. To prepare and revise ordinances when requested by the Board of
Supervisors or the Township Manager.
3. To give his written opinion on any legal matter or question submitted to
him by the Board of Supervisors or the Township Manager.
4. To attend all regularly scheduled Board of Supervisors meetings and
any other meetings at which his presence is requested by the Board of
Supervisors.
5. To prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the
municipality is a party and approve as to form all bonds required to be
submitted to the municipality.
6. To represent the municipality in all legal actions brought by or against
the municipality except as provided otherwise by the law of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
7. To keep records and to deliver all records, documents, and property of
every description in his possession, pertinent to his work as municipal
attorney, to his successor in office.
8. To perform all other legal services requested by the Board of
Supervisors or the Manager pertaining to municipal affairs.
§ 714 HOME RULE CHARTER § 716
Ch:87
§ 716. Department of Engineering. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The Department of Engineering shall be responsible for all activities
relating but not limited to the following functions:
§ 717. Department of Fire Projection. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The Volunteer Fire Companies shall continue to operate as private
corporations under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The
Department of Administration will coordinate activities of this Department
requiring action, support, or cooperation by and of the Township.
1. Supervision of all engineering matters of the Township.
2. Staff assistance to the Planning Commission, Zoning Hearing Board,
and Department of Public Works.
3. All other responsibilities and obligations that the Board of Supervisors
or Township Manager may from time to time assign consistent with the
Home Rule Charter and this Administrative Code.
§ 716 KINGSTON CODE § 717
Ch:88
Part 8
CODE OF ETHICS
§ 801. Statement of Principles. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The public judges its government by the way public officials and employees
conduct themselves in the posts to which they are elected or appointed. The
people have a right to expect that every public official and employee will
conduct himself in a manner that will tend to preserve public confidence in
and respect for the government he represents. Such confidence and respect
can best be promoted if every public official and employee, whether paid or
unpaid and whether elected or appointed, will uniformly:
§ 802. Definitions. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated.
FINANCIAL INTEREST — Any interest which shall yield, directly or
indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit to the official or employee
or to any person employing or retaining the services of the official or
employee. "Financial interest" shall not include cases where the official or
employee is a party to or is associated with a party to a transaction with the
Township when such official or employee has no possible influence in the
transaction.
OFFICIAL or EMPLOYEE — Any person elected or appointed to, or
employed or retained by, any public office or public body of the Township,
whether paid or unpaid and whether part-time or full-time.
PARTY — A person, firm, corporation, or other entity participating in or
intending to participate in any transaction with the Township in any manner
which would give the person, firm, corporation, or entity a personal or
financial interest in the transaction.
PERSONAL INTEREST — Any interest arising from blood or marriage
relationships or from close business associations, whether or not any
financial interest is involved.
PUBLIC BODY — Any agent, board, body, commission, committee,
department, or office of the Township.
TRANSACTION — Includes but is not limited to any proceeding, application,
submission, request for ruling or other determination, contract, lease,
claim, case award, decision, judgment, or legislation, including ordinances
and resolutions.
1. Treat all citizens with impartiality, fairness, and equality under the law.
2. Avoid both actual and potential conflicts between his private selfinterest
and the public interest.
§ 801 HOME RULE CHARTER § 803
Ch:89
§ 803. Fair and Equal Treatment. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
No official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any
consideration, treatment, advantage, or favor beyond that which is in the
general practice to grant or make available to the public at large.
§ 804. Conflicts of Interest. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
1. Financial or Personal Interest. No official or employee, either on his
own behalf or for any other person, shall have any financial or personal
interest in any transaction with any public body.
2. Disclosure and Disqualification. All officials and employees shall, upon
taking office, file a financial disclosure statement of all areas of
financial interest or personal interest as set forth by the Commonwealth
State Ethics Act, Act 120 of 1978, as amended or may be amended from
time to time. Whenever the performance of his official duties shall
require any official or employee to deliberate and vote on any matter
involving his financial or personal interest, he shall publicly disclose the
nature and extent of such interest and disqualify himself from
participating in the deliberation as well as in the voting.
3. Incompatible Employment. No official or employee shall engage in
private employment with or render service for any party in connection
with any transaction with any public body. Except where authorized by
law, no official or employee shall hold any other position as an official or
employee during the term for which he was elected or appointed to his
present office, and no former official or employee shall hold any
appointive compensated position as an official or employee until one
year after the expiration of the term for which he was elected or
appointed. No official or employee shall be prohibited, under this
subsection, from serving on any public body or on any
intergovernmental agency or council of government which would be in
furtherance of his duties and responsibilities as an official or employee,
but no additional pay shall be received for any such services. This
subsection shall not prohibit the Township Manager from serving as the
Township Secretary or Treasurer simultaneously.
4. Representation of any Party. No official or employee shall appear on
behalf of any private person, other than himself, before any public body,
except by issuance of a subpoena issued by a court having jurisdiction
over the subject matter at issue.
5. Gifts and Favors. No official or employee shall accept any gift, whether
in the form of money, thing, favor, loan, or promise, that would not be
offered or given to him if he were not an official or employee, except
that food or drink consumable at one meal shall not be considered a gift
or favor.
6. Confidential Information. No official or employee shall use or permit the
use of any confidential information acquired by him through his position
§ 803 KINGSTON CODE § 804
Ch:90
§ 805. Voiding of Transactions in the Case of Violations. [Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Every transaction made in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be
voided at the instance of any party to the transaction, except the official or
employee interested therein, upon written election thereof delivered to the
Township Manager before the transaction is completed or within 90 days
after completion. No such transaction may be voided because of the interest
of an official or employee unless such transaction is made in the official
capacity of such official or employee, by a public body of which he is an
official or employee or on the recommendation of a public body of which he
is an official or employee.
§ 806. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Subject to due process of law, any official or employee who violates any
provision of this chapter may be disqualified from being an appointed
official or employee in the Township for four years after the date of the
transaction in which the violation occurs. If the violation occurs while he is
serving as an appointed official, he may be removed from his position as an
appointed official by a majority vote of the Board of Supervisors subject to
as an official or employee to advance the financial or personal interest
of himself or any other person or entity.
7. Service as Attorney. No official or employee shall serve as attorney for a
public body during the period that he serves as an official or employee
and for one year thereafter. This shall not prohibit the Township
Attorney from serving any public body in the Township where he is the
attorney.
8. Township Attorney. The Township Attorney or his firm shall not be
permitted to serve a party in any matter in which the Township is an
adverse party or has an adverse interest during his tenure and for at
least one year subsequent to his retirement, resignation, or removal as
Township Attorney, but nothing herein shall prohibit the Board of
Supervisors from appointing the succeeding Township Attorney from
the same firm.
9. Purchases or Sales by Official or Employee. No official or employee
shall be a purchaser in any sale involving the Township; nor shall an
official or employee be a vendor, directly or indirectly, of any item
purchased by him in his official capacity, including a purchase or sale by
a parent, spouse, child, brother, sister, or like relative-in-law or by any
person, firm, partnership, corporation, business association, trustee or
straw party for or on behalf of such official or employee.
10. Independence of Judgment. No official shall accept other employment
or receive any compensation or make any investments that would
impair his independence of judgment in the performance of his duties
as an official or employee.
§ 804 HOME RULE CHARTER § 806
Ch:91
procedural and substantive procedure of law. If the violation occurs while
he is serving as an employee, he may be removed from his position as an
employee by the Township Manager all in accordance with the statutes of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 807. Financial Disclosure Statement Procedure. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/
13/1985]
1. Every official or employee, on or before January 31 of each year, shall
file a disclosure statement with the Township Manager. Where there is
no change from a disclosure statement already on file, a written
affirmation of the statement already on file may be submitted in lieu of a
new statement. Every person shall amend his own statement as
circumstances require. As required by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania State Ethics Act, Act 170 of 1978, a statement of financial
interest shall be filed in accordance with the statute.
2. The Township Manager shall maintain a file of all disclosure
statements, which shall be available for public inspection at reasonable
times in the Township office. The Manager shall also maintain a
register, also available for public inspection, of the name and address of
each person requesting inspection and the date the inspection was
made.
3. The Township Manager shall distribute standard forms for the financial
disclosure statement. No disclosure statements shall indicate dollar or
other value of an interest. The financial disclosure statement shall be
the standard form used by the State Ethics Commission.
§ 806 KINGSTON CODE § 807
Ch:92
Part 9
FISCAL AFFAIRS
§ 901. Annual Operating Budget. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Preparation and adoption of the annual budget shall be accomplished in
accordance with Article VII, Section 701 through 709, of the Home Rule
Charter.
§ 902. Capital Improvement Program Budget. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/
1985]
1. The Township Manager shall prepare and submit annually to the Board
of Supervisors a five year capital improvement program at least three
months prior to the final date for submission of the annual operating
budget.
A. The capital improvement program shall include:
(1) A general summary of its contents.
(2) A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be
undertaken during the five years next ensuing, with
appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such
improvements.
(3) Cost estimates, method of financing, and recommended time
schedules for each such improvement.
(4) The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the
facilities to be constructed or acquired.
B. The above information may be revised and extended each year with
regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of
construction or acquisition.
2. The Township Manager shall publish in one or more newspapers of
general circulation in the Township the general summary of the capital
improvement program and a notice stating:
A. The times when and places where copies of the capital
improvement program are available for inspection by the public.
B. The place and time, not less than two weeks after such publication,
for a public hearing on the capital improvement program.
3. The Board of Supervisors, by resolution, shall adopt the capital
improvement program, with or without amendment, after the public
hearing. Elements of the capital improvement program will not become
appropriations until included in the annual budget adopted by
ordinance.
§ 901 HOME RULE CHARTER § 903
Ch:93
§ 903. Claims Procedure; Payment of Funds. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/
1985]
§ 904. Borrowing, Debt Limits and Investments. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/
1985]
§ 905. Administrative Purchasing System. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
General Provisions. The Township Manager shall establish and administer
a purchasing system which shall provide the regulations, policies, and
procedures covering the acquisition of goods and services by the Township,
subject to the provisions of this Administrative Code. Such purchasing
system shall cover all purchases made by the municipality except those
specifically excluded in Section 1104 of the Home Rule Charter.
1. No payment of any funds of the Township shall be made unless provided
for in the annual operating budget and specifically ratified by the Board
of Supervisors at its regularly scheduled meetings; provided, however,
that payroll and utility expenditures may be made at the direction of the
Manager where based upon a prior ordinance or contract.
2. All checks or drafts of the Township shall be signed by the Secretary/
Treasurer and shall be countersigned by approved members of the
Board of Supervisors.
3. All claims, prior to payment, shall be accompanied by a properly
approved invoice, receipted purchase order or other acceptable
evidence that the claim is properly due.
1. Borrowing and nonelectoral debt limits are regulated in accordance
with laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Home Rule
Charter.
2. The Township Manager or his designated agent shall have full authority
to invest, redeem, and reinvest funds available for but not immediately
required for municipal operations in a separate Township account or in
a municipal funding pool; provided that such authority shall be
exercised only within the limits of programs previously approved by the
Board of Supervisors. Such investments shall be made only in securities
backed by the full faith and credit of the United States Government, by
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, by the Federal Savings and
Loan Insurance Corporation or by the pledges of assets of the type and
valuation provided under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. Temporary investments may also be made in bank
certificates of deposit supported by fully pledged collateral and
repurchase agreements for United States Government or other
allowable securities. It shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager to maximize investment revenues consistent with applicable
laws and minimum investment risk.
§ 903 KINGSTON CODE § 906
Ch:94
§ 906. Competitive Bidding System; Rules and Regulations. [Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985]
1. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER — A responsible bidder who, in a
competitive bidding situation, submits a bid which, as finally
determined by the Board of Supervisors, is the best bid available in
terms of price, product and/or service quality, adherence to
specifications, timeliness of delivery, serviceability and maintenance,
and other factors that the Board of Supervisors may establish.
RESPONSIBLE BIDDER — A bidder who is considered responsible
either through previous experience in business dealings with the
Township or through an investigation of the credit, reliability, and
performance of the bidder.
2. Subject and Exempt Purchases. Purchases subject to and exempt from
the competitive bidding system are covered in Section 1104 of the
Home Rule Charter.
3. Authorization to Bid. Authorization to bid on any items required to be
competitive bid shall be approved by the Board of Supervisors.
4. Responsible Bidders List. The Township Manager shall cause to be
established and maintained a bidders list for each type of goods or
service purchased by the Township. Inclusion on the bidders list shall
signify that a bidder is considered responsible either through previous
experience in business dealings with the Township or through an
investigation of the credit, reliability and performance of the bidder.
Once qualified as responsible, a bidder shall remain on the bidders list
indefinitely unless removed by reason of disqualification.
5. Disqualification of Bidders.
A. A bidder may be disqualified for reasons including but not limited
to the following:
(1) Documentation of unsatisfactory performance by the bidder or
of unsatisfactory goods or service provided by the bidder to the
Township or to other municipalities.
(2) Failure to submit a bid on two successive occasions.
(3) False or misleading statements about a product or service.
(4) An attempt by a bidder to influence the purchase of goods or
services by the Township through a gift, gratuity, favor or
benefit, or promise thereof, to a Township officer or employee.
(5) Collusion with another bidder in an attempt to regulate the
price, quality, or availability of goods or services to the
detriment of the Township.
§ 906 HOME RULE CHARTER § 906
Ch:95
B. Upon disqualification, a supplier shall be removed from the
responsible bidders list until requalified. Such requalification shall
consist of reasonable proof that the cause for disqualification shall
not recur.
6. Electronic Bidding. The electronic submission of bids and the electronic
receipt of bids for purchases of goods and services and for contracts by
the Township of Kingston is permitted so long as the Township of
Kingston has the electronic capability to maintain the confidentiality of
a bid until the bid opening time. [Added Res. No. R-2019-11, 6/12/
20195]
7. Invitation to Bid. When it is determined that a purchase is to be made
through competitive bidding, an invitation to bid shall be sent by mail to
all vendors appearing on the bidders list for the item to be purchased.
The invitation shall include:
A. A basic description of the item to be purchased.
B. The quantity to be purchased.
C. The method by which specifications and bid documents may be
obtained.
D. The date, time and place of the bid opening.
E. Any other specific requirements.
F. A notice that the bidding shall or shall not be conducted
electronically. [Added Res. No. R-2019-11, 6/12/2019]
8. Publication Requirements. A copy of the invitation to bid shall be placed
in a legal advertisement published at least one time in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. The legal advertisement shall
appear no later than 10 working days prior to scheduled bid opening.
9. Specifications. Specifications shall be prepared for all purchases made
through competitive bidding. Specifications shall consist of a specific,
complete, and accurate description of the item to be purchased, the
performance requirements and conditions and terms of purchase.
Specifications shall be clearly worded but shall not be so specific or
strict as to effectively eliminate acceptable products from competition.
If a maintenance bond is to be required before a contract is awarded,
the amount, manner and form shall be prescribed in the specifications.
All specifications for construction contracts with the Township shall
include a requirement for performance, labor, and materialman's
bonds.
10. Bid Deposits or Bond. A bid deposit or bond may be required for any
purchase made by the Township and shall be provided in an amount,
5. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections 6 through 12 as
Subsections 7 through 13, respectively.
§ 906 KINGSTON CODE § 906
Ch:96
§ 907. Emergency Purchases. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
manner, and form prescribed by the Township Manager. The bid deposit
of the best responsible bidder, as determined by the Board of
Supervisors, shall be forfeited to the Township if the product or service
purchased is not delivered as required in the specifications.
11. Bid Procedure. All bids shall be firmly sealed in an envelope and labeled
so as to indicate the specific purchase for which the bid is submitted
and the scheduled date and time of the bid opening. Bids shall be
opened at the appointed time by the Township Secretary. All bids
opening shall be opened in public. Any bids received after the bid
opening has commenced shall be returned to the bidder unopened.
Upon completion of bid opening, the bid will be analyzed and tabulated
by the Township Manager for conformance with the specifications and a
recommendation by the Township Manager will be made to the Board of
Supervisors as to the best responsible bid. All bids to be submitted and
received electronically shall be submitted in the manner and within the
time and the date specified in the invitation for bids. [Amended Res.
No. R-2019-11, 6/12/2019]
12. Bid Award. The Board of Supervisors shall review the recommendation
of the Township Manager and may award a contract to the best
responsible bidder. All such awards shall be made in a public meeting
by a majority vote of the Supervisors present. The Board of Supervisors
shall at all times reserve the right to reject any and all bids received or
to waive any informalities in the bids received if said informalities do
not conflict with this Administrative Code or the Home Rule Charter.
13. Filing of Bids. The Township Manager shall maintain on file all bids
received for a period of not less than three years and shall make such
files available for public inspection upon request.
1. When emergency circumstances as set forth in Section 1104 of the
Home Rule Charter, require that a purchase be made within a limited
period of time so as to preclude the competitive bidding process, the
Township Manager may waive the bid requirement and authorize an
emergency purchase. Such emergency purchases shall be limited to
situations where:
A. Delay in making the purchase would present a threat to the health,
safety or welfare of the residents of the Township.
B. The purchase is required by unforeseen circumstances and delay
would seriously hinder the effective delivery of essential Township
services.
C. There are no feasible alternatives to the emergency purchase.
2. Every effort shall be made to provide competitive conditions during the
emergency purchase. Quotations should be obtained from as many
vendors as possible although such quotations may be oral in nature. As
§ 906 HOME RULE CHARTER § 907
Ch:97
§ 908. Sale of Municipal Equipment and Supplies. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/
13/1985]
Upon authority of the Board of Supervisors, by resolution, the Township
Manager shall have the authority to dispose of unneeded, obsolete or
surplus equipment or supplies with a sale value of less than $500 in the
manner most beneficial to the Township. Sale of equipment with a sale
value of more than $500 shall be sold with the approval of the Board
of Supervisors through the competitive bidding process, except that
competitive bidding shall not be required for the sale of equipment,
supplies, or services to other political subdivisions.
§ 909. Independent Audit. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
In accordance with Section 711 of the Home Rule Charter, the Board of
Supervisors shall appoint, for the purpose of an independent annual audit
of all Township revenues, expenditures, and accounts, a certified public
accountant or a certified public accountant firm for each fiscal year not later
than February 15 of each succeeding year.
soon as possible after becoming aware of the need for an emergency
purchase, the Township Manager shall advise the Chairman or, in his
absence, the Vice Chairman of the Board of Supervisors. All emergency
purchases shall be reported to the Board of Supervisors at the next
regularly scheduled meeting.
§ 907 KINGSTON CODE § 909
Ch:98
Part 10
ORDINANCES AND CODES
§ 1001. General Provisions. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Ordinances shall be adopted by the Board of Supervisors in accordance
with the provisions of Article IV of the Home Rule Charter and this Part of
the Administrative Code. This Part contains certain provisions pertaining to
the adoption of ordinances and codes by reference which are not covered
under Article IV of the Home Rule Charter or which are expansions of the
provisions of Article IV.
§ 1002. Ordinance Adoption Procedures Generally. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/
13/1985]
1. All ordinances proposed for adoption shall be submitted in writing to
each Supervisor at least 48 hours prior to the time when the ordinance
is to be considered for adoption. Ordinances requiring prior public
notices as provided in Section 402(6) of the Home Rule Charter shall be
submitted to each Supervisor at least 48 hours prior to the time when
such ordinance is to be finally introduced.
A. For the purposes of this subsection "submission" shall be deemed
to mean delivery to the Supervisors residence.
B. The time requirements of this subsection may be waived by action
of a majority of the Supervisors present and entitled to vote at a
meeting open to the public.
2. Any public notice of a hearing to be held with respect to the adoption of
an ordinance shall specify the place where copies of such ordinance are
available for public examination during reasonable hours.
3. Each ordinance, when introduced, shall be assigned a bill number by
the Township Manager. The bill, if adopted, shall then be assigned a
chronological ordinance number. The assignment of the final ordinance
number need not be done during a public meeting.
4. The minutes of a meeting at which an ordinance is introduced may
identify such ordinance by bill number and title only. A permanent
record of all ordinances introduced shall be kept, in chronological bill
number order. This record of bill numbers (ordinances introduced) shall
contain a statement as to the disposition of each bill, including the
ordinance number assigned upon final adoption, if such is the case.
5. Ordinances shall be published after final adoption, such as provided in
Section 402(B) of the Home Rule Charter. If such publication consists
only of the title or a general summary of the substance of the ordinance,
the title or summary shall be of sufficient content to provide reasonable
public notice of the general purpose and effect of the ordinance. The
§ 1001 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1002
Ch:99
§ 1003. Adoption of Codes and Standards by Reference. [Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985]
§ 1004. Ordinance Codifications. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
publication shall also specify the place where copies of the ordinance
are available for public examination during reasonable hours.
6. Ordinances shall take effect as provided in Section 402(C) of the Home
Rule Charter or as may be specifically provided in the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; provided, however, that no ordinance
shall take effect immediately with respect to any person upon whom
personal service is made, unless otherwise stated by the laws of the
Commonwealth or the Home Rule Charter.
1. The Board of Supervisors may adopt by reference any nationally
recognized and/or professionally prepared code or standard, in whole
or in part, by adoption of an ordinance specifying:
A. The title of the code or standard.
B. The name of the agency or professional person or organization
responsible for the preparation of the code or standard.
C. The date of publication or preparation of the code or standard.
D. The general content and purpose of the code or standard.
2. Any amendments, deletions, or insertions to be made in a code or
standard adopted by reference shall be described in the ordinance
adopting the code or standard, and any penalty shall be specifically set
forth.
3. Upon introduction of an ordinance adopting a code or standard by
reference, at least two copies of such code or standard, marked so as to
indicate any amendments, deletions, or insertions, shall be placed on
file in the office of the Township Manager, available for public use and
examination. Upon final adoption of the ordinance, one of the two
copies of the code or standard shall be kept on file in the office of the
chief code enforcement officer for the code or standard. As much as is
possible, the Township shall make available to the general public, at a
reasonable charge, copies of such codes or standards.
4. The public notice of adoption of any ordinance adopting by reference a
code or standard shall specify the title of said code or standard,
indicating its general content and purpose, specify whether or not any
changes are being made in said code or standard and designate the
place where copies of said code or standard are on file for public
examination during reasonable hours.
1. In accordance with the provisions of Section 405(B) of the Home Rule
Charter, the Board of Supervisors shall provide for the codification of all
§ 1002 KINGSTON CODE § 1004
Ch:100
general and permanent ordinances of the Township. Such codification
shall be adopted by reference, by an ordinance duly enacted by the
Board of Supervisors. The adopting ordinance may provide for the
repeal of all ordinances of a general and permanent nature not included
in the codification, saving from repeal such ordinances as may be
desired, or the adopting ordinance may provide for the repeal of
specific ordinances.
2. The ordinance adopting a codification by reference shall be deemed to
validate any nonsubstantive organizational, numbering, and stylization
changes and grammatical corrections required in the preparation of the
codification, any substantive textual changes to previously adopted
ordinances and any new ordinances which may be authorized by the
Board of Supervisors during the process of codification.
3. At least two copies of the codification shall, upon introduction of the
adopting ordinance, be placed on file in the office of the Township
Manager and shall remain there on file for public use and examination
during the time when such codification is in effect. Copies of the
codification shall be made available for purchase by the general public
at a reasonable charge.
§ 1004 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1004
Ch:101

Part 11
TOWNSHIP EMPLOYEE MANUAL AND PERSONNEL SYSTEM
§ 1101. through § 1140. (Reserved)6
6. Editor's Note: The Township Employee Manual and Personnel System, as amended, is on
file in the Township offices.
§ 1101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1101
Ch:103

Part 12
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
ARTICLE A.
Police Pension Plan.
§ 1201. Establishment of Plan; Effective Date; Rights of
Participants; Effect on Other Provisions. [Ord. 7/30/1969; as
amended by Ord. 1972-1, 6/14/1972; by Ord. 1973-11, 11/17/1973;
by Ord. 1974-20, 8/14/1974; by Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; by Ord.
1989-1, 4/12/1989; by Ord. 1992-6, 3/11/1992; by Ord. 2004-1, 4/12/
2004; by Ord. 2009-1, 3/11/2009; by Ord. 2010-4, 4/14/2010; and by
Ord. 2011-7, 11/9/2011]
1. Chapter 1, Administrative Code, Part 12A, and all sections thereof, of
the Code of Ordinances of the Township of Kingston, which is an
ordinance enacted originally on July 30, 1969, and subsequently
amended by Ordinance No. 1985-1, enacted on December 13, 1985, is
hereby amended in its entirety as more particularly set forth in
Schedule A, which is attached hereto, made a part hereof, and
incorporated herein by specific reference made herein thereto.7
2. The effective date of the Kingston Township Police Pension Plan, as
stated in Section 1.4(b) of Schedule A, is declared to be, and it shall
remain, as July 30, 1969.
3. The effective date of the application and implementation of terms and
provisions of the amended Kingston Township Pension Plan is declared
to be January 1, 2008, and it is ordained hereby that the administration
of said pension plan shall comply with, in all respects, all federal and
state legislation and all regulations promulgated thereunder by
whatever authority in respect of a government-sponsored pension plan
and the rights vested in a participant in a government-sponsored
pension plan in effect as of January 1, 2008, and subsequent thereto to
the effective date of this Part 12A, as more fully stated in Section 1.4(b)
of Schedule A.
4. Notwithstanding the construction or application of any term or
provision stated in Schedule A of this Part 12A to the contrary, each
employee of the Kingston Township Police Department who is a
participant in the existing Kingston Township Police Pension Plan and
who was a participant in the existing Kingston Township Police Pension
Plan on January 1, 2008, shall remain fully a participant therein.
Further, no participant in the existing Kingston Township Police Pension
Plan prior to the effective date of this Part 12A shall receive a benefit
under the amended Kingston Township Police Pension Plan which is less
than the benefit that he was entitled to receive under said plan as of the
day prior to the effective date of this Part 12A.
7. Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 1201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1201
Ch:105
5. The provisions of the Kingston Township Code of Ordinances, only so
far as they are exactly the same as those ordinances and regulations in
force immediately prior to the adoption of this Part 12A, are intended as
a continuation of such ordinances and regulations and not as a new
enactment. The provisions of this Part 12A shall not affect any suit or
prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any prior ordinance
or regulation as contained in the Kingston Township Code of
Ordinances, except as otherwise provided by law.
§ 1201 KINGSTON CODE § 1201
Ch:106
ARTICLE B.
Social Security Coverage.
§ 1220. Social Security Authorized. [Res. 4, 10/7/1953]
Whereas, the Social Security Act has been so amended by the Congress of
the United States as to permit political subdivisions of the several states to
extend to their employees and officers the benefits of old age and survivors
insurance; and
Whereas, the 1951 session of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, in regular session, has enacted a statute known as Act
No. 491, which enables the political subdivisions of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to take all action necessary to effectuate the coverage of their
employees and officers under the Old Age and Survivors Insurance System;
and
Whereas, it is the opinion of the Board of Supervisors of Kingston Township,
County of Luzerne that the extension of this Social Security System will be
of great benefit not only to the employees of the Township of Kingston, but
to the Township of Kingston by attracting to it and enabling it to retain the
best of personnel and thus increasing the efficiency of its government; and
it is deemed that the payment by the Township of its portion of the cost of
said system is a payment for the purpose of the Township;
Now, therefore, be it resolved by the Board of Supervisors of Kingston
Township, County of Luzerne, that this Township become a participant in
the Social Security System and that the benefits of old age and survivors
insurance be extended to its employees and officers; and
Be it further resolved that the Board of Supervisors of Kingston Township
and the Secretary of said Board, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania are
authorized to execute and deliver to the Secretary of Labor and Industry
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the "state agency" charged with the
administration of the enabling Act, the Plan and Agreement required under
the provisions of Section 6 of said enabling Act and the Social Security Act,
to extend coverage to the employees and officers of this Township, and to
do all other things necessary to that end; and
Be it further resolved that the Secretary-Treasurer be, and he is hereby
authorized to make all required payments into the Contribution Fund
established by Section 7 of said enabling Act and to establish such system
of payroll deductions from salaries of officers and employees as may be
necessary to their coverage under said Old Age and Survivors Insurance
System; and
Be it further resolved that the Board of Supervisors of Kingston Township
hereby appropriate from the proper fund or funds of the said Township the
amounts necessary to pay;
Be it further resolved that the proper officials of Kingston Township, County
of Luzerne, do all things in accordance with the provisions contained in the
§ 1220 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1220
Ch:107
Plan and Agreement necessary to the continued implementation of said Old
Age and Survivors Insurance System; and
Be it further resolved that Kingston Township become a participant in the
Social Security System, and that such participation shall commence as of
January 1, 1951.
§ 1220 KINGSTON CODE § 1220
Ch:108
ARTICLE C.
Firemen's Relief Association.
§ 1231. Recognition of Firemen's Relief Association. [Res. 5/12/
1960; as amended by Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The Firemen's Relief Association of Shavertown and Trucksville are
recognized as the organizations formed for the purpose of maintaining
associations for beneficial and protective purposes for their members and
their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or permanent disability
or accident from the funds collected therein.
§ 1232. Foreign Fire Insurance Tax Monies Received. [Res. 5/12/
1960; as amended by Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The Firemen's Relief Association of Shavertown and Trucksville are
designated the proper associations to receive such funds as are due and
payable to the Kingston Township Treasurer by the Treasurer of the State
of Pennsylvania from the tax on premiums from foreign fire insurance
companies.
§ 1233. Annual Appropriation. [Res. 5/12/1960; as revised by Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985]
There is annually appropriated from the Kingston Township Treasury all
such sums of money that may hereafter be paid into the Kingston Township
Treasury by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania on account of taxes
paid on premiums of foreign fire insurance companies in pursuance of
72 P.S. § 2262 (1982) as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 1231 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1233
Ch:109

Part 13
FEES
ARTICLE A.
Schedule of Fees.
§ 1301. Fees. [Res. No. R-2018-8, 2/14/2018; amended by Res. No.
R-2019-8, 3/13/2019]
The following Schedule of Fees prevailing in and applicable to the Township
of Kingston is adopted and stated, as follows:
1. Zoning Maps (361.50) Actual invoiced cost to the
Township for printed documents
2. Photocopies (380.00) $0.30 per page ($0.25 Right-to-
Know Law)
A. Certified copy fee $5 mandated by Right-to-Know
Law
B. Notary fee for certified copies $15
C. Administrative cost DUI setup
fee
$25
D. Administrative cost for
mailings
Actual cost to the Township for
printed documents plus postage
and $5 handling fee
3. Subdivision Ordinance Booklets
(361.53)
Actual invoiced cost to the
Township for printed documents
4. Zoning Ordinance Booklets
(361.54)
Actual invoiced cost to the
Township for printed documents
5. Stormwater Ordinance Booklets Actual invoiced cost to the
Township for printed documents
6. Minor Subdivision (361.31)
A. Township filing fee $300
B. Township engineering review
and inspection fee
$2,000
C. Luzerne County review fee Actual cost of Luzerne County
review fees
D. Luzerne County road and
bridge review fee
Actual cost of Luzerne County
review fees
7. Major Subdivision (361.34)
A. Township preliminary plan
filing fee
$500
B. Township preliminary plan
engineering review and
inspection fee
§ 1301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1301
Ch:111
(1) 5 lots or fewer $2,000
(2) 6 lots or more $2,500 + $15 per lot or unit
C. Luzerne County review fee Actual cost established by
Luzerne County
D. Luzerne County Road and
Bridge Department review
fee
Actual cost established by
Luzerne County Road and Bridge
Department
E. Township revised plan filing
fee (plans given final approval
previously but requiring
modifications)
$200 each
F. Township revised plan
(engineering review and
inspection fee)
$150 + $15 per lot or unit
G. Township final plan filing fee $300 each
H. Township final plan
engineering review fee
(1) 5 lots or fewer $2,000
(2) 6 lots or more $2,500 + $15 per lot
All fees outlined above are payable at the time of plan
submission to the Township.
In the event that the review and inspection fees required by A, B, C,
D, E, F, G, and H in Paragraphs 6, 7, 8, 12, 15 and 30 increase
beyond the fees paid by the applicant at the time of plan submission,
the Township Manager shall have the authority to invoice the
applicant for the actual increased review and inspection fees, as
defined in Chapter 22, Part 3, § 302, and Part 6, § 611, of the
Kingston Township Code of Ordinances.
8. Land Development (361.34)
A. Township land development
preliminary plan filing fee
$500 each
B. Township land development
preliminary plan engineering
review and inspection fee
$2,000 each
C. Township land development
revised plan filing fee (plans
given final approval
previously but requiring
modifications)
$200 each
D. Township land development
revised plan engineering
review and inspection fee
$150 + $15 per lot or unit
§ 1301 KINGSTON CODE § 1301
Ch:112
E. Township land development
final plan filing fee
$300 each
F. Township land development
final plan engineering and
review and inspection fee
$1,000 each
9. Zoning Hearing (361.34)
Appeals and variances, plus the
actual cost of the transcript of
the stenographic notes, if
transcription is requested by a
party
$500 each
10. Curative Amendment to the
Zoning Ordinance
$500 each
11. Zoning Changes
Rezoning of property $500 each
A. Luzerne County Planning
Commission
Actual cost charged by the
Luzerne County Planning
Commission
12. Manufactured Home Parks Same as minor or major
subdivision fees
13. Road Damage Deposits (362.46)
Ordinance No. 1976-39 $1,000 for each road
14. Certificate of Occupancy Permits
A. Nonresidential $50 each
15. Conditional Use Applications
A. Application filing fee $500 each
B. Application filing fee for
wireless communications
towers
$3,000 each
C. Engineering review and
inspection fee for wireless
communications towers
$3,000 each
D. Application filing fee for oil
and gas development
$3,000 each
16. Recreation (383.30)
A. Recreation program
registration
(1) Kingston Township
resident child
$90 per child
(2) Dallas School District
nonresident child
$100 per child
§ 1301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1301
Ch:113
17. Roadway Occupancy Permit
(362.47)
To include all utility excavations
in the Township right-of-way,
except for those requested by the
Township or as part of a
Township project
A. Road pavement cut $100 each
B. Grass or dirt cut off pavement $65 each
18. Police Reports
Under authority of Pennsylvania
Motor Vehicle Code
A. Accident reports (361.11)
(1) Reportable $15 each
(2) Nonreportable $50 each
B. Incident reports $25 each
C. Fingerprinting (362.15) $20 each
D. Blood alcohol breath test $100 each
E. Parking ticket (331.12)
(1) First offense $10 each
(2) Repeat offense $25 each
19. Zoning Permits (362.48)
Issued for the following:
A. New homes $55
B. New nonresidential buildings $55
C. Additions for existing homes $55
D. Additions for nonresidential
buildings
$55
E. Garages (attached) $55
F. Decks (footer-framing-final) $55
G. Porches $55
H. Patios $55
I. Accessory buildings $55
J. Sheds (for storage only) $55
K. Retaining walls $55
L. Fences $55
M. Chimneys $55
N. Change of use $300
§ 1301 KINGSTON CODE § 1301
Ch:114
O. Conversions $55
P. Moving a building $55
Q. Metal carports $55
R. Detached garage, pool house,
pole barn
$55
20. Building Permits (362.41)
Issued for the following:
A. New homes GFA (gross floor area) x $120 per
square foot ÷ $1,000 x $8 =
permit
B. New nonresidential
construction
See B.I.U. Fee Schedule and add
20%
C. U.C.C. surcharge (statemandated
fee)
$4.50
D. Kingston Township surcharge
(362.50)
$3.50
E. New manufactured homes $250
F. Relocated manufactured
homes
$200
G. Detached garage, pool house,
pole barn, etc.
$55 for the cost up to $4,999; cost
of $5,000 and above is $4 for each
additional thousand
21. Exterior Repairs
A. Roof replacements $10 per $1,000 of cost
B. Additions for existing
buildings
$10 per $1,000 of cost
C. Interior and/or exterior
alterations
$10 per $1,000 of cost
22. Pool Permits
A. Aboveground (24 inches in
depth or greater)
$50
B. In-ground with fence $160
C. Road damage $500 deposit will be held in
escrow until approval and final
inspection
23. Transient Retail Business
(321.61)
A. Soliciting door to door $30 per person per day
B. Fixed location, 90 days or
less
$300
24. Driveways (322.80)
§ 1301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1301
Ch:115
A. New connections to Township
roadways
$75
B. Resurfacing of existing
connection to Township
roadway
$40
25. Amusements (322.90)
A. Applicant fee $150 deposit held in escrow until
obligations are met
B. Fireworks permit $55
26. Storage of Vehicles
A. Reclamation costs upon
impoundment
$50 per occurrence
27. Demolition Permits
A. Residential structures $100 each
B. Nonresidential structures $350 each
28. Spring Cleanup Permits (364.30)
A. Cars/small SUVs $5 (2 trips); $10 (unlimited)
B. Minivans/midsize SUVs/small
trucks
$10 (2 trips); $25 (unlimited)
C. Trucks/cargo vans less than 1
ton
$35 (1 trip)
D. Vehicles greater than 1 ton $90 (1 trip)
29. Fire/Burglar Alarm Permits
(321.30)
A. Installment permit $65
B. Service charges for multiple
false alarms
(1) Burglar alarm $75
(2) Fire alarm $95
30. Stormwater Drainage (362.53)
Plans Under Toby's Creek
Stormwater Ordinance
See stormwater attachment
31. Returned Check Fee
A. Bank fee Actual cost charged by bank
B. Administrative fee $25
32. Storage Fees on Unclaimed
Evidence
$10 per day
33. Signs (321.60) $5 per square foot
34. Open Fire Permits (per occasion) $0
§ 1301 KINGSTON CODE § 1301
Ch:116
35. Tax Collection (361.65)
A. Tax certifications $10 each
B. Duplicate bills $5 each
36. Outdoor Wood Boilers/Burners
(Ordinance 2008-1)
$40 each
37. Rental Property Inspections
(Ordinance 2007-2)
A. Initial inspection $55 per unit
B. Reinspection $35
38. Stray Dog Fee (331.40)
A. Capture and housing of stray
dogs
$50 per dog, per occasion
§ 1301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1301
Ch:117

Part 14
DRUG AND ALCOHOL PERSONNEL POLICY
§ 1401. Purpose. [Res. 95-7B, 12/13/1995, § I]
§ 1402. Application. [Res. 95-7B, 12/13/1995, § II]
§ 1403. Federal Regulations. [Res. 95-7B, 12/13/1995, § III]
The regulations of the Federal Highway Management Administration are
hereby adopted by reference insofar as they apply to this Township and this
Part.
§ 1404. Policy Established. [Res. 95-7B, 12/13/1995, § IV]
1. To comply with the requirements of employers pursuant to the Federal
legislation concerning commercial drivers licenses (CDL) pursuant to
the Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act of 1991 and the
federal regulations thereto insofar as they apply to this Township.
2. To conform the employment policies of this Township with the
requirements of said law and regulations.
3. To provide as an employment policy of this Township the requirement of
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter 1, Part 14, § 1401 et
seq., by the Janitorial Maintenance Worker employed by this Township.
[Added by Res. R-2015-10, 8/11/2015]
1. This Part shall apply only to those employees and applicants for
employment who are required to have a CDL license for their
employment by the Township and who are assigned to operate
Township owned, leased or borrowed vehicles or equipment requiring
CDL licensure.
2. Part 14 and all sections and subsections thereof shall apply similarly to
the Janitorial Maintenance Worker employed by this Township, and Part
14 shall constitute a specific term and condition of his/her employment
in such job capacity by the Township. The Janitorial Maintenance
Worker employed by this Township shall be subject to the same terms,
provisions and conditions of Part 14 as apply to employees required to
possess a commercial driver's license (CDL). [Added by Res.
R-2015-10, 8/11/2015]
1. Employees shall not use, sell, possess or receive alcohol or illegal
drugs, or distribute or sell prescription drugs while on duty. Violation of
these rules will subject the employee to discipline and/or dismissal
pursuant to the provisions of § 1407 of this Part, subject to any
applicable provisions and procedures of the collective bargaining
agreement in effect, if any.
§ 1401 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1404
Ch:119
§ 1405. Tests Established. [Res. 95-7B, 12/13/1995, § IV]
The following drug and alcohol test procedures shall be applicable to all
employees and applicants for employment to whom this Part applies:
2. Prescription drugs must be kept in their original container identifying
the drug, dosage, date of prescription and physician. Employees are
required to notify their designated supervisory personnel if they are
taking a prescription drug and shall file with the Township a statement,
on a form provided by the Township, from the doctor who issued such
prescription stating whether or not such prescription drug will impair
the employee's ability to operate a CDL vehicle or equipment. The term
"illegal drugs" shall include drugs for which the employee does not have
a valid prescription, and cocaine, phencyclidine (PCP), marijuana,
opiates (including heroin), amphetamines and such other illegal drugs
as may be identified from time to time.
A. Pre-Employment. All applicants for employment shall be tested for
drugs prior to acceptance for employment with the Township. Any
applicant testing positive shall not be considered for employment. The
Township will reimburse the applicant for the cost of this test if the test
is negative and if employment is offered to the applicant.
B. Random. The Township will implement a random testing procedure
which meets the requirements of the Federal regulations. The
procedure shall include Township-paid test of all affected employees on
a random basis and shall be conducted without any advance notice; but
shall be done not less than on a quarterly basis. The number of affected
employees selected shall be at least 50% of the employees for drug
testing and 25% of the employees for alcohol testing annually;
provided, however, that the requirements of this Part shall be satisfied
if the above percentages are selected from a pool of employees which
includes the Township's employees.
C. Reasonable Cause. Any employee giving reasonable cause to believe
that he or she is in violation of the policy established in § 1404 above
shall be subjected to Township-paid testing immediately upon
observation of such reasonable cause by trained supervisory personnel.
Reasonable cause shall be limited to behavior or conduct observed at
the workplace or en route to a workplace during working hours.
Observation shall be by supervisory personnel who have received at
least one hour of training in drug use detection and one hour of training
in alcohol use detection. Supervisory personnel making reasonable
cause observations shall make and file with the Township a written
report on a form provided by the Township of the attendant
circumstances. Such reports shall be confidential.
D. Post Accident. Any employee involved in an accident as defined herein
shall be tested at the Township's expense for drugs as soon after an
accident occurs as is possible, but not later than 32 hours, and for
§ 1404 KINGSTON CODE § 1405
Ch:120
§ 1406. Test Standards. [Res. 95-7B, 12/13/1995, § VI]
Any refusal or failure by the CDL employee or applicant to submit to any
test required by this Part or the applicable law shall be deemed a positive
result. Refusal to submit to a test under this Part shall include any act or
omission which prevents, thwarts or frustrates the objectives of this Part
including, without limitation, the following: (i) refusal to submit in a timely
fashion to testing; (ii) refusal or failure by the employee or applicant to
complete, sign or initial the required testing form; (iii) refusal or failure
without good cause to provide any sample or provide an adequate sample
for testing; and/or (iv) failure or refusal to otherwise cooperate with the
testing process in a way which prevents the completion of any required test.
alcohol as soon after an accident as possible, but not later than eight
hours, provided:
(1) Testing should not take precedence over needed medical treatment
of other needed emergency measures.
(2) If for any reason tests cannot be obtained within the times provide,
the tests shall not be administered. However, refusal to submit to
test or interfering with the successful completion of such test shall
be deemed a positive test result in accordance with § 1406 below.
(3) No employee shall consume alcohol or illegal drugs between the
time of the accident and the test administration.
(4) An accident shall include any occurrence involving a CDL vehicle
where the following conditions occur:
(a) There is a fatality, regardless of fault.
(b) There is issuance of a citation to the Township CDL employee
for a moving violation, and (i) bodily injury of any person
involved requiring transportation of the injured person away
from the accident scene; or (ii) vehicular damage requiring the
vehicle to be towed from the scene.
A. Alcohol Testing. Alcohol testing shall be conducted using a federally
approved breathalyzer. Any employee receiving a test result greater
than 0.02 but less than 0.04 breath alcohol level shall be removed from
safety sensitive duties as defined in the Act and regulations for 24
hours. Any test result greater than 0.04 breath alcohol level shall be
considered a positive test result and shall subject the employee to the
disciplinary provisions of § 1407 of this Part.
B. Drug Testing. Drug testing shall be conducted by urine sample which
shall be analyzed at a federally approved testing facility. Any test result
showing the presence of illegal drugs shall be considered a positive test
and shall subject the employee to the disciplinary provisions of § 1407
of this Part. Any employee testing positive for illegal drugs may request
a split sample of the same specimen to be retested, at the employee's
§ 1405 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1406
Ch:121
§ 1407. Positive Tests; Return to CDL Duty. [Res. 95-7B, 12/13/1995,
§ VII]
An employee who tests positive for a drug and/or alcohol test will be allowed
to return to CDL duty if this is the employee's first positive test and the
employee, prior to CDL duty:
§ 1408. Follow-Up. [Res. 95-7B, 12/13/1995, § VIII]
If an employee who tests positive for a drug and/or alcohol test is offered
the chance to return to CDL duty, that employee shall be subject to, and
pay for, unannounced follow-up drug and/or alcohol tests as directed by the
substance abuse professional for a period of 60 months following a return
to CDL duty. At least six unannounced follow-up drug and/or alcohol tests
shall be conducted in the first 12 months following return to CDL duty.
Such tests shall be conducted as directed by the assigned substance abuse
professional.
§ 1409. Test Results. [Res. 95-7B, 12/13/1995, § IX]
Employees will be notified of their positive test results. Test results shall
be retained by the Medical Review Officer responsible for analyzing the
employee's test results. Said results shall be held in strictest confidence
and shall be accessible only to the employee, the employer and such other
persons authorized by law and shall not be released to any other person
except with the written consent of the employee. The results of tests made
known to the Township may be released to future employers in accordance
with the federal regulations.
§ 1410. Confidentiality of Documents. [Res. 95-7B, 12/13/1995, § X]
All files, documents and records of the Township related to the application
of this Part to individual employees shall be deemed and kept confidential
by the Township.
§ 1411. Record Keeping. [Res. 95-7B, 12/13/1995, § XI]
expense. Employees should speak with the Medical Review Officer
about such request.
A. Consults such drug and alcohol abuse professionals to whom the
employee has been referred at the employee's expense.
B. Completes all recommended treatment at the employee's expense.
C. Completes all necessary drug and/or alcohol tests at the employee's
expense and obtains negative results.
Any subsequent positive result to a drug and/or alcohol test by this
same employee will subject that employee to immediate dismissal by
the Township.
§ 1406 KINGSTON CODE § 1411
Ch:122
§ 1412. Access to Test Results and Findings. [Res. 95-7B, 12/13/
1995, § XII]
No person may obtain the individual test results retained by the Medical
Review Officer, and no Medical Review Officer shall release the individual
test results to any person, without first obtaining written authorization from
the tested individual, unless otherwise requested by law.
§ 1413. Employee Assistance Program. [Res. 95-7B, 12/13/1995,
§ XIII]
The Township shall establish the following:
1. All of the records relating to the administration and results of the
Township's alcohol and drug testing program for its CDL drivers will be
maintained for a minimum period of five years, except that individual
negative test results will be maintained for a minimum of 12 months.
2. Tests will be conducted by a licensed facility and will be analyzed by a
Medical Review Officer. The Medical Review Officer who is appointed
shall be a licensed doctor of medicine or osteopathy with knowledge of
drug and alcohol abuse disorders and who is employed by the
Township, or a group which the Township has joined, to conduct alcohol
and drug testing in accordance with the Federal regulations. The
Medical Review Officer shall retain the reports of individual test results
for a minimum of five years.
3. The Township shall retain in the employee's file information indicating
only the following:
A. The employee submitted to a drug and/or alcohol test.
B. The date of such test.
C. The location of such test.
D. The identity of the person or entity performing the test.
E. The test result (e.g., "positive" or "negative").
The Township will also maintain an annual calendar year summary
of the records related to the administration and results of the
testing program for its drivers under the federal regulations.
A. A list of consultative and treatment services available in the area for
drug and alcohol abuse problems. Said list shall be given to each
employee or posted at a place readily accessible to employees.
B. A list of educational and training resources available in the area for
drug and alcohol abuse problems. Said list shall be given to each
employee or posted at a place readily accessible to employees.
§ 1411 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1413
Ch:123
§ 1414. CDL Information Contact. [Res. 95-7B, 12/13/1995, § XIV]
§ 1415. Miscellaneous. [Res. 95-7B, 12/13/1995, § XV]
C. A place or service for referring employees who test positive for drugs or
alcohol for consultation and treatment.
D. A one-hour training and educational program for employees.
E. One-hour training each in drug and alcohol detection and related
matters for supervisory personnel. Said training programs shall include
the following components:
(1) Effects of drug and alcohol abuse on health and safety.
(2) Manifestations of abuse and abuse detection.
(3) Documentation of training and implementation of this Part.
1. The following entity is designated by the Township for the purpose of
providing information to employees concerning the Federal laws and
regulations governing the testing of CDL employees and for
implementing and monitoring the Township's compliance with the
federal testing program:
PSATS CDL Drug and Alcohol Testing Program
3001 Gettysburg Road
Camp Hill, PA 17011
Phone: 1-800-235-7578
Fax: 1-717-763-9732
2. Designation of the PSATS Program as available to provide information
to the Township's employees shall continue for as long as the Township
is a member in good standing in the PSATS Program.
1. This Part shall be implemented with the constitutional and legal rights
of the employees subjected to it.
2. This Part shall not be deemed to be a covenant of employment or other
form of covenant or contract between the Township and any employee.
3. Any collective bargaining agreement entered by the Township
subsequent to the adoption of this Part shall conform with the
provisions of this Part.
4. Any agreement for the sharing, leasing, lending or other transfer of
CDL employees between the Township and any other municipality or
private enterprise shall address, in writing, the status of said employees
as to whether they are employees of the receiving entity during the
period of the transfer.
§ 1413 KINGSTON CODE § 1415
Ch:124
5. Any contract of services involving CDL employees shall expressly state
whether the contracting party is an independent contractor or
employee/agent of the Township.
6. The definition of terms shall be as contained in the relevant federal
regulations.
7. A copy of this Part shall be delivered to every employee and applicant
for employment who is subject to it and to all supervisory personnel.
Such employee shall sign an acknowledgment of receipt of this Part.
8. A copy of the law and federal regulations shall be maintained in the
Township offices and shall be accessible to employees, upon request.
9. This Part will be limited by any applicable federal or state law or
municipal ordinance, and by any applicable collective bargaining
agreements. Any portion of this Part which directly conflicts with such
law, ordinance or agreement will not be implemented in that
jurisdiction or bargaining unit, but shall be severable and shall not
affect the validity and enforcement of the remainder of the Part.
10. Employees agree to waive any liability against the Township arising out
of the Township's administration of this Part and its administration of
the program established pursuant to the Federal law or regulations
regarding the Township's responsibility for CDL drivers.
§ 1415 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1415
Ch:125

Part 15
OPEN RECORDS POLICY
ARTICLE A.
Open Records Policy.
§ 1501. Requests. [Res. 2003-1, 1/8/2003, § 1; as amended by Res.
2003-6, 1/8/2003, § 1]
§ 1502. Fees. [Res. 2003-1, 1/8/2003, § 2; as amended by Res.
2003-6, 1/8/2003, § 2]
Paper copies will be $0.30 per page per side. If mailing is requested,
the cost of postage will be charged. If a disk is requested, it will be
provided by the Township, if available, at the cost of $10 per disk. A new
disk will be necessary each time records are provided. Fax copies will be
available at the cost of $0.50 per page. If "True and Correct Certification"
is requested, an additional charge of $2 will be added. The Township will
require prepayment if the total fees are estimated to exceed $100.
§ 1503. Response. [Res. 2003-1, 1/8/2003, § 3; as amended by Res.
2003-6, 1/8/2003, § 3]
1. Public records will be available for inspection and copying at the
Kingston Township Municipal Building during the times and periods
stated below, with the exception of public holidays:
Mondays through Fridays: 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
2. Requests shall be in writing and directed to the Township Secretary at
the Kingston Township Municipal Building, 180 East Center Street,
Shavertown, Kingston Township, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania 18708.
Written requests shall be on a form provided by the Township, a copy of
which is attached hereto,8 and shall include the date of the request, the
name and address of the requester, and a clear description of the
record(s) sought.
1. The Township will make a good faith effort to provide the requested
public records as promptly as feasible. Township employees shall
cooperate with those requesting to review and/or duplicate original
Township documents while taking reasonable measures to protect
Township documents from the possibility of theft and/or modification.
2. The Township Secretary shall review all written requests for access to
public records. As soon as possible, but no later than five business days
after receiving a written request to access public records, the Township
Secretary shall respond to all such requests in a manner consistent with
Act 100 of 2002, the Pennsylvania Open Records Law.
8. Editor's Note: Form is available at the Township office.
§ 1501 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1504
Ch:127
§ 1504. Appeals Process. [Res. 2003-1, 1/8/2003, § 4; as amended by
Res. 2003-6, 1/8/2003, § 4]
1. If a written request is denied or deemed denied, the requester may file
exceptions with the Board of Supervisors within 15 business days of the
mailing date of the Township's denial. The exceptions shall state
grounds on which the requester asserts that the record is a public
record and shall address any grounds stated by the Township for
denying the request.
2. The Board of Supervisors shall make a final determination on the
exceptions within 30 days of the mailing date of the exceptions. The
Board of Supervisors may hold a hearing on the issue during the 30
days. If the Board determines that the denial was correct, it must
provide a written explanation to the requester.
3. The requester may appeal a final determination to the Court of Common
Pleas9 or District Justice within 30 days of denial or final determination.
9. Editor's Note: Resolutions 2003-1 and 2003-6 read: "Common Pleas of Court."
§ 1504 KINGSTON CODE § 1504
Ch:128
ARTICLE B.
Right To Know Law.
§ 1505. Definitions. [Res. R-2008-9, 12/10/2008]
As used in this Part 15B, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FINANCIAL RECORD — Any account, voucher or contract dealing with the
receipt or disbursement of funds or acquisition, use or disposal of services,
supplies, materials, equipment or property; or the salary or other payments
or expenses paid to an officer or employee, including the individual's name
and title; and a financial audit report, excluding the audit's underlying work
papers.
PUBLIC RECORD — A record, including a financial record, that is not
protected by a defined privilege or is not exempt from being disclosed under
one of the exemptions in Pennsylvania's Right-to-Know Law or under other
federal or state law or regulation or judicial decree or order.
RECORD — Information, regardless of physical form or characteristics, that
documents a Township transaction or activity and is created, received or
retained pursuant to law or in connection with a Township transaction,
business or activity, including a document, paper, letter, map, book, tape,
photograph, film or sound recording, information stored or maintained
electronically, and a data-processed or image-processed document.
REQUESTER — A legal resident of the United States, or an agency, who
requests access to a record.
RESPONSE — The Township's notice informing a requester of a granting of
access to a record or the Township's written notice to a requester granting,
denying, or partially granting and partially denying access to a requested
record.
§ 1506. Authority. [Res. R-2008-9, 12/10/2008]
The Board of Supervisors or any Township employee duly authorized by the
Board of Supervisors shall make the Township's public records available
for access and duplication to a requester, in accordance with law, Board
of Supervisors' policy, administrative regulations, and the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law, upon the condition that all of the terms
and provisions set forth herein are fully complied with.
§ 1507. Delegation of Responsibility. [Res. R-2008-9, 12/10/2008]
1. The Board of Supervisors shall designate an Open Records Officer, who
shall be responsible to:
A. Receive written requests for access to records submitted to the
Township.
§ 1505 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1507
Ch:129
§ 1508. Guidelines. [Res. R-2008-9, 12/10/2008]
B. Review and respond to written requests in accordance with law,
Board of Supervisors' policy, and administrative regulations.
C. Direct requests to other appropriate individuals in the Township's
employ or in another agency.
D. Track the Township's progress in responding to requests.
E. Issue interim and final responses to submitted requests.
F. Maintain a log of all record requests and their disposition.
G. Ensure Township staff are trained to perform assigned job
functions relative to requests for access to records.
2. Upon receiving a request for access to a record, the Open Records
Officer shall:
A. Note the date of receipt on the written request.
B. Calculate and note on the written request the day on which the fiveday
period for response will expire.
C. Maintain an electronic or paper copy of the written request,
including all documents submitted with the request, until the
request has been fulfilled.
D. If the written request is denied, maintain the written request for 30
days or, if an appeal is filed, until a final determination is issued or
the appeal is deemed denied.
1. Requesters may access and procure copies of the public records of the
Township during the regular business hours of the Township
administration offices.
2. A requester's right of access does not include the right to remove an
original record from the control or supervision of the Open Records
Officer.
3. The Township shall not limit the number of records requested.
4. When responding to a request for access, the Township is not required
to create a record that does not exist or to compile, maintain, format or
organize a record in a manner which the Township does not currently
use.
5. Information shall be made available to individuals with disabilities in an
appropriate format, upon request and with sufficient advance notice.
6. The Township shall post conspicuously at the administration office and
on the Township's web site, if the Township maintains a web site, the
following information:
§ 1507 KINGSTON CODE § 1508
Ch:130
A. Contact information regarding the Open Records Officer.
B. Contact information regarding the state's Office of Open Records
and the website of the state's Office of Open Records or other
applicable appeals officer.
C. The form to be used to file a request, with a notation that the
Pennsylvania State Office of Open Records form may also be used,
if the Township decides to create its own form.
D. This Part 15B of the Board of Supervisors and all administrative
regulations and procedures governing requests for access to the
Township's public records.
7. Request for access.
A. A written request for access to a public record shall be submitted
on the required form(s) and addressed to the Open Records Officer.
B. Written requests may be submitted to the Township in person, by
mail, to a designated facsimile machine, or to a designated e-mail
address.
C. Each request must include the following information:
(1) Identification or description of the requested record in
sufficient detail.
(2) Medium in which the record is requested.
(3) Name and address of the individual to receive the Township's
response.
D. The Township shall not require an explanation of the reason for the
request or the intended use of the requested record, unless
otherwise required by law.
8. Fees.
A. Except for the duplication fee established by the state, the Board of
Supervisors shall approve, by appropriate ordinance, a list of
reasonable fees relative to requests for public records. The
Township shall maintain a list of applicable fees and disseminate
the list to requesters and post a list of applicable fees
conspicuously in the administration building.
B. No fee may be imposed for review of a record to determine whether
the record is subject to access under law.
C. Prior to granting access, the Township may require prepayment of
estimated fees when the fees required to fulfill the request are
expected to exceed $100.
§ 1508 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1508
Ch:131
D. The Board of Supervisors may waive duplication fees when the
requester duplicates the record or the Board of Supervisors deems
it is in the public interest to do so.
9. Response to request.
A. Township employees shall be directed to forward immediately
requests for access to public records to the Open Records Officer.
B. Upon receipt of a written request for access to a record, the Open
Records Officer shall determine if the requested record is a public
record and if the Township has possession, custody or control of
that record.
C. The Open Records Officer shall respond as promptly as possible
under the existing circumstances, and the initial response time
shall not exceed five business days from the date the written
request is received by the Open Records Officer.
D. The initial response shall grant access to the requested record;
deny access to the requested record; partially grant and partially
deny access to the requested record; notify the requester of the
need for an extension of time to fully respond; or request more
detail from the requester to clearly identify the requested material.
E. If the Township fails to respond to a request within five business
days of receipt, the request for access shall be deemed denied.
10. Extension of time.
A. If the Open Records Officer determines that an extension of time is
required to respond to a request, in accordance with the factors
stated in law, written notice shall be delivered to the requester
within five business days of receipt of the request. The notice shall
indicate that the request for access is being reviewed, the reason
that the review requires an extension, a reasonable date when the
response is expected, and an estimate of applicable fees owed
when the record becomes available.
B. Up to a thirty-day extension for one of the above-listed reasons
does not require the consent of the requester. If the response is not
given by the specified date, it shall be deemed denied on the day
following that date.
C. A requester may consent, in writing, to an extension of time that
exceeds 30 days, in which case the request shall be deemed denied
on the day following the date specified in the notice if the Open
Records Officer has not provided a response by that date.
11. Granting of request.
A. If the Open Records Officer determines that the request will be
granted, the response shall inform the requester that access is
§ 1508 KINGSTON CODE § 1508
Ch:132
granted and either include information on the regular business
hours of the administration office, provide electronic access, or
state where the requester may go to inspect the records or
information electronically at a publicly accessible site. The
response shall include a copy of the fee schedule in effect, a
statement that prepayment of fees is required in a specified amount
if access to the records will cost in excess of $100, and the medium
in which the records will be provided.
B. A public record shall be provided to the requester in the medium
requested if it exists in that form; otherwise, it shall be provided in
its existing medium. However, the Township is not required to
permit use of Township computers.
C. The Open Records Officer may respond to a records request by
notifying the requester that the record is available through publicly
accessible electronic means or that the Township shall provide
access to inspect the record electronically. If the requester, within
30 days following receipt of the Township's notice, submits a
written request to have the record converted to paper, the
Township shall provide access in printed form within five days of
receipt of the request for conversion to paper.
D. A public record that the Township does not possess, but which is
possessed by a third party with whom the Township has contracted
to perform a governmental function and which directly relates to
that governmental function, shall be considered a public record of
the Township. When the Township contracts with such a third party,
the Township shall require the contractor to agree, in writing, to
comply with the request for such records and to provide the
Township with the requested records in a timely manner to allow
the Township to comply with law.
E. If the Open Records Officer determines that a public record
contains information both subject to and not subject to access, the
Open Records Officer shall grant access to the information subject
to access and deny access to the information not subject to access.
The Open Records Officer shall redact from the record the
information that is not subject to access. The Open Records Officer
shall not deny access to a record if information is able to be
redacted.
F. If the Open Records Officer responds to a requester that a copy of
the requested record is available for delivery at the administration
office and the requester does not retrieve the record within 60 days
of the Township's response, the Township shall dispose of the copy
and retain any fees paid to date.
12. Notification to third parties.
A. When the Township produces a record that is not a public record in
response to a request, the Open Records Officer shall notify any
§ 1508 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1508
Ch:133
§ 1509. Audio Recordings. [Added by Res. R-7-2009, 8/12/2009]
third party which provided the record to the Township, the person
that is the subject of the record, and the requester.
B. The Open Records Officer shall notify a third party of a record
request if the requested record contains a trade secret or
confidential proprietary information of a third party, in accordance
with law and administrative regulations.
13. Denial of request.
A. If the Open Records Officer denies a request for access to a record,
whether in whole or in part, a written response shall be sent within
five business days of receipt of the request. The response denying
the request shall include the following:
(1) Description of the record requested.
(2) Specific reasons for denial, including a citation of supporting
legal authority.
(3) Name, title, business address, business telephone number, and
signature of the Open Records Officer on whose authority the
denial is issued.
(4) Date of the response.
(5) Procedure for the requester to appeal a denial of access.
B. The Open Records Officer may deny a request for access to a
record if the requester has made repeated requests for that same
record and the repeated requests have placed an unreasonable
burden on the Township.
C. The Open Records Officer may deny a request for access to a
record when timely access is not possible due to a disaster or when
access may cause physical damage or irreparable harm to the
record. To the extent possible, a record's contents shall be made
accessible even when the record is physically unavailable.
D. Information that is not subject to access and is redacted from a
public record shall be deemed a denial.
E. If a written request for access to a record is denied or deemed
denied, the requester may file an appeal with the state's Office of
Open Records within 15 business days of the mailing date of the
Open Records Officer's response or deemed denial.
1. Any audio recording utilized for the purpose of assisting in the
preparation of the minutes of any public meeting of the Board of
Supervisors, any public meeting of the Kingston Township Planning
Commission, any public meeting of the Kingston Township Zoning
§ 1508 KINGSTON CODE § 1509
Ch:134
Hearing Board, or any public meeting at which a quorum of the Board
of Supervisors is present for the purpose of deliberating upon or for the
actual taking of official action shall be considered an accessible public
record, pursuant to § 1505, Definitions, of this Part 15B.
2. Any such audio recordings, as set forth in Subsection 1 hereof, shall be
retained by the Township of Kingston for a period of 30 days or until the
minutes are approved.
§ 1509 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1509
Ch:135

Part 16
AUTHORITY OF VOLUNTEER FIRE COMPANIES AND RESCUE
COMPANY TO SEEK REIMBURSEMENT
§ 1601. Authority. [Ord. 2003-6, 5/14/2003]
1. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Kingston, by and through
its authority and relationship with the aforementioned volunteer fire
companies and rescue company10 hereby grants the authority and
authorizes the volunteer fire companies and the rescue company to
recover the reasonable costs of fire fighting materials, equipment,
personnel hours and hazardous abatement materials involving any
hazardous material incident, or fire, or safety and rescue incident or
operation including, but not limited to, vehicular accidents.
2. Said reasonable costs as referred to above may be recovered directly by
the volunteer fire companies and rescue company(s), which are
recognized and designated by the Township of Kingston, through the
Township, with the consent of the Township Manager, or through a third
party billing service designated as an authorized agent for the
collections of said reasonable costs by the volunteer fire companies and
rescue company(s); from time to time. The utilization of PA Fire
Recovery Service shall be for those situations deemed by PA Fire
Recovery Service as appropriate for collections through the Agency,
principally those incidents involving the use of hazardous abatement
materials and/or rescue incidents directly involving the Luzerne County
Emergency Management Agency. [Amended by Ord. 2010-5, 8/11/
2010, § 2]
3. In addition to the aforementioned reasonable costs, the volunteer fire
companies or the rescue company(s) or PA Fire Recovery Service shall
be authorized to collect reasonable interest, as well as a reasonable
administrative fee for collecting the same, and any and all additional
fees as may be authorized by the Hazardous Material and Emergency
Planning and Response Act, or authorized by any other statute, case
law or common law. [Amended by Ord. 2010-5, 8/11/2010, § 3]
10.Editor's Note: The Township of Kingston has recognized and designated the Trucksville
Volunteer Fire Company and Shavertown Volunteer Fire Company (hereinafter referred to
as "volunteer fire companies"), and the Kingston Ambulance Association (hereinafter
referred to as "rescue company").
§ 1601 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1601
Ch:137

Part 17
ASSISTANT TOWNSHIP MANAGER
§ 1701. Creation of Office. [Ord. 2006-7, 10/11/2006, § 1]
The office of Assistant Township Manager of the Township of Kingston is
hereby created.
§ 1702. Appointment, Term of Office and Compensation. [Ord.
2006-7, 10/11/2006, § 2]
The Township Manager shall appoint an Assistant Township Manager for
an indefinite term to serve at the will of the Township Manager in
consideration of compensation to be fixed, from time to time, by the Board
of Supervisors.
§ 1703. Removal. [Ord. 2006-7, 10/11/2006, § 3]
The Township Manager may remove the Assistant Township Manager in
accordance with the procedures more particularly set forth in Article V,
Section 502, of the Charter.
§ 1704. Powers and Duties. [Ord. 2006-7, 10/11/2006, § 4]
1. The Assistant Township Manager shall be the assistant chief
administrative officer of the Township. He/She shall be responsible
primarily to the Township Manager and secondarily to the Board of
Supervisors for assistance and support to the Township Manager in the
administration of all Township affairs placed in his/her charge by the
Township Manager; more specifically, in providing assistance and
support to the Township Manager in the performance of those powers
and duties vested in the Township Manager by Article V, Section 504, of
the Charter and by the Administrative Code, except when to so act
would be a violation of the provisions of the Charter. The Assistant
Township Manager is and will be subordinate, at all times, to the
Township Manager in the administration of the business and affairs of
the Township of Kingston.
2. The general description of the functions to be performed by the
Assistant Township Manager, together with stated essential job
requirements and marginal job descriptions and qualifications of
appointment to the position, are attached hereto and made a part
hereof.11 Such document shall be incorporated into the Kingston
Township Department of Administrations, and it shall become, upon the
enactment of this Part, officially designated and cited thereafter as
"Administrative Code, Part 3, Township Organization, Section 301."
11.Editor's Note: See the Attachment at the end of this chapter.
§ 1701 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1705
Ch:139
§ 1705. Service as Acting Township Manager. [Ord. 2006-7, 10/11/
2006, § 5]
If it should become necessary for the Board of Supervisors to designate an
Acting Township Manager, pursuant to Article V, Section 503, the Assistant
Township Manager shall not be disqualified from acting in such temporary
office by reason of his/her service as Assistant Township Manager.
§ 1706. Interpretation of Administrative Code. [Ord. 2006-7, 10/11/
2006, § 8]
Wherever it may appear in any section, provision, or term of the
Administrative Code, or any amendment thereof, that the act or the
discretion of the Township Manager shall be implemented, performed or
exercised, such section, provision or term of the Administrative Code shall
be uniformly and absolutely interpreted to include the act or the discretion
of the Assistant Township Manager, unless to so act would constitute a
violation of any term or provision of the Charter or of the Code or of the
terms and provisions of this Part or be specifically contrary to the stated
direction and desire of the Township Manager.
§ 1705 KINGSTON CODE § 1706
Ch:140
Chapter 2
ANIMALS
§ 1706 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1706
Ch:141

Part 1
ANIMAL NUISANCES
§ 101. Animal Nuisance. [Ord. 94-11, 7/13/1994, § 1]
Any animal which scratches, digs or defecates upon any lawn, tree, shrub,
plant, building or other public or private property, other than the property of
the owner or person in charge or control of such animal is hereby declared
to be a nuisance.
§ 102. Nuisance Not Permitted. [Ord. 94-11, 7/13/1994, § 2]
No person, having possession, custody or control of any animal, shall
knowingly or negligently permit any dog or other animal to commit any
nuisance upon any gutter, street, driveway, curb or sidewalk in the
Township, or upon the floors or stairways of any building or place
frequented by the public, or used in common by the tenants, or upon the
outside walls, walkways, driveways, curbs or stairways of any building
abutting on a public street or park, or upon the grounds of any public park
or public area, or upon any private property other than the property of the
owner of such animal.
§ 103. Removal of Feces. [Ord. 94-11, 7/13/1994, § 3]
Any person having possession, custody or control of any dog or other animal
which commits a nuisance in any area other than the private property of the
owner of such dog or other animal, as prohibited in § 102, shall be required
to immediately remove the said feces from such surface and carry the feces
in a nonleaking container.
§ 104. Continuous/Incessant Noise Prohibited. [Ord. 94-11, 7/13/
1994, § 4]
It shall be illegal within the Township of Kingston for any person or persons
to own, possess, harbor or control any dog or animal which makes any
noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 10 minutes, or make
such noise intermittently for 30 minutes or more, to the disturbance of any
person any time of the day or night, regardless of whether the animal or
dog is physically situated in or upon private property, said noise being a
nuisance; provided, that at the time the animal or dog is making such noise,
no person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property
in or upon which the animal or dog is situated, nor is there any other
legitimate cause which justifiably provoked the animal or dog.
§ 105. Guide Dogs. [Ord. 94-11, 7/13/1994, § 5]
The provisions of §§ 101, 102 and 103 shall not apply to a guide dog
accompanying any blind person, or to a dog used to assist any other
physically handicapped person.
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 106
Ch:143
§ 106. Penalties. [Ord. 94-11, 7/13/1994, § 6; as amended by Ord.
97-3, 11/12/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 106 KINGSTON CODE § 106
Ch:144
Part 2
KEEPING OF ANIMALS
§ 201. Definitions. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
As used in this Part, the following terms, shall have the meanings indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ANIMAL — Any domestic animal or fowl, any wild animal or any household
pet.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any animal normally or ordinarily domesticated
or raised in this area and climate as livestock or for work or breeding
purposes, or normally or ordinarily kept as a household pet.
HOUSEHOLD PET — Any dog, cat, or other domestic animal normally and
ordinarily kept in or permitted to be at large in the dwelling of its owner.
LARGE ANIMAL — Any wild or domestic animal of the bovine, equine or
sheep family.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation.
SMALL ANIMAL — Any wild or domestic animal such as a rabbit, hare,
guinea pig, rat, mouse, or chinchilla; and any wild or domestic fowl such as
a chicken, turkey, goose, duck, or pigeon (excepting homing pigeons).
WILD ANIMAL — Any animal, including bird, fowl, or reptile not normally
or ordinarily domesticated; not normally or ordinarily raised in this area
and climate as livestock or for work or breeding purposes; or not capable of
being kept as a household pet.
In this Part, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include
the singular, and the masculine shall Include the feminine.
§ 202. Certain Animals Prohibited. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any pigs, hogs or swine at any
place within the Township, except those areas zoned for agriculture.
§ 203. Keeping of Animals Regulated. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any domestic animals, except
household pets, except as provided in this section:
1. Such animals shall be confined to areas zoned for agriculture.
2. Large animals shall be confined in quarters no part of which shall be
closer than 100 feet from the exterior limits of any dwelling or of any
property line.
3. Small animals shall be kept confined In quarters no part of which shall
be closer than 25 feet from the exterior limits of any dwelling or of any
property line.
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 203
Ch:145
§ 204. Household Pets. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as amended by
Ord. 1992-1, 2/12/1992, 52]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any household pet, except as
provided in this section:
§ 205. Violation of State Law. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Any violation of this Part that would also violate any state law shall be
prosecuted under that state law and not under this Part.
§ 206. Penalties. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as amended by Ord. 97-3,
11/12/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
4. The keeper of every such animal shall confine the same in an enclosure
sufficient to prevent such animal from running at large, and such
enclosure shall be of a size conducive to good sanitary practices and
adequate and sanitary drainage facilities shall be provided.
5. Every keeper of any animal shall cause the litter and droppings
therefrom to be collected daily in a container or receptacle that when
closed shall be rat-proof and fly-tight, and after every such collection
shall cause such container or receptacle to be kept closed. At least
twice a week, every such keeper shall cause all litter and droppings so
collected to be disposed of in such manner as not to permit the
presence of fly larvae.
6. Every keeper of any animal shall cause all feed provided therefor to be
stored and kept in a rat-proof and fly-tight building, box, container, or
receptacle.
1. If any such pet shall be kept in a dwelling owned or occupied by its
owner, such owner shall be required to follow such procedures and
practices, as to the number of such pets to be kept there, and as to
sanitation, to insure that no public nuisance shall be created or
maintained and no threat to the health of persons living elsewhere than
in such dwelling shall be created.
2. If any such pet shall be kept in an enclosure outside such dwelling, the
provisions of § 203 of this Part, insofar as the same applies to small
animals, shall be applicable to the keeping of such household pet.
3. No household shall contain more than five household pets*
4. All household pets must be kept from running at large and the owner
shall prevent the household pet from causing any damage of any nature
to public or private property.
§ 203 KINGSTON CODE § 206
Ch:146
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 206 HOME RULE CHARTER § 206
Ch:147
Chapter 3
BICYCLES
Chapter 4
BUILDINGS
See also: Chapter 5, Code Enforcement, Part 1, Building Code.
Chapter 5
CODE ENFORCEMENT
§ 206 KINGSTON CODE § 206
Ch:148
Part 1
(RESERVED)12
§ 101. (Reserved)
12.Editor's Note: Former Part 1, Building Code, Adopted 7/14/1999 By Ord. 99-3, Was
Repealed 8/9/2017 By Ord. 2017-3.
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 101
Ch:149

Part 2
(RESERVED)13
§ 201. (Reserved)
13.Editor's Note: Former Part 2, Electrical Code, Adopted 8/11/1976 By Ord. 1976-36, As
Amended, Was Repealed 8/9/2017 By Ord. 2017-3.
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 201
Ch:151

Part 3
(RESERVED)14
§ 301. (Reserved)
14.Editor's Note: Former Part 3, Fire Prevention Code, Adopted 7/14/1999 By Ord. 99-5, As
Amended, Was Repealed 8/9/2017 By Ord. 2017-3.
§ 301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 301
Ch:153

Part 4
(RESERVED)15
§ 401. (Reserved)
15.Editor's Note: Former Part 4, Plumbing Code, Adopted 7/14/1999 By Ord. 99-7, As
Amended, Was Repealed 8/9/2017 By Ord. 2017-3.
§ 401 HOME RULE CHARTER § 401
Ch:155

Part 5
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 501. Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code. [Ord.
No. 2019-3, 6/12/201916]
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, published in
January 2015 by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted in
its entirety. It is adopted and made a part of Chapter 5 of the Code of
Ordinances of the Township of Kingston (Code Enforcement).
§ 502. Incorporation of Draft of International Property
Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, and Adoption by Reference. [Ord.
No. 2019-3, 6/12/2019]
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, is specifically
incorporated herein and adopted by reference in this Part 5 as to the
provisions and terms more particularly set forth in that certain document,
three copies of which are on file in the Administration Office of Kingston
Township, being marked and designated as the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, as published in January 2015 by the
International Code Council, and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of Kingston Township for regulating and governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures;
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings
and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of
such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Property
Maintenance Code on file in the office of Kingston Township are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof by specific Incorporation, as
if fully set out in this Part, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, as more particularly stated herein.
§ 503. Additional Provisions. [Ord. No. 2019-3, 6/12/2019]
1. The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code,
2015 Edition, are added as a part of this Part 5, as follows:
A. Section 101.1. Insert "Township of Kingston."
B. Section 103.5. Insert "Township of Kingston Fee Schedule."
C. Section 304.14. Insert "June 1 — September 30."
D. Section 602.3. Insert "September 1 — May 31."
16.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Part 5, Property Maintenance Code,
adopted by Ord. No. 2005-1, 2/9/2005.
§ 501 HOME RULE CHARTER § 503
Ch:157
§ 504. Amendments. [Ord. No. 2019-3, 6/12/2019]
E. Section 602.4. Insert "September 1 — May 31."
F. Section 304.3, Premises Identification. The following "Premises
Identification" provisions are added to and made a part of Section
304.3 of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted
heretofore by the Township of Kingston, and the same shall follow
the last sentence of the present Section 304.3 thereof, as follows:
(1) All address numbers for buildings located a distance greater
than 60 feet from the road right-of-way shall be installed on a
post.
(2) The post shall not be located more than 10 feet from the
driveway servicing the building and more than 10 feet from the
road right-of-way. The post may be located on either side of the
driveway. The number shall be a minimum of four inches high.
Height of the number sign shall not be less than three feet nor
more than four feet above the ground. The numbers shall be
installed on both sides of the post and shall be perpendicular to
the road, and shall not be concealed from view from the road
by trees, shrubs, bushes or like vegetation or any other
obstruction of whatever nature.
(3) Reflective numbers must be affixed to all posts, so that the
same can be seen clearly from the road right-of-way during the
hours of darkness.
(4) The owner of the land on which a number sign is located shall
be responsible for the installation and maintenance of the sign
as specified herein.
1. The following amendments of Section 106 (violations) of the 2015
Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code are hereby
adopted and enacted as an integral part of this Part:
A. Section 106.3 Prosecution of Violation. Any person failing to
comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance
with Section 107 shall be subject to a criminal action brought by
the Township of Kingston before a District Justice under the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure for the
enforcement of a summary offense. Further, if the notice of
violation or order is not complied with, the Township of Kingston
shall institute appropriate proceedings at law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the renewal
or termination of the unlawful occupancy or condition of the
building or structure in violation of the provisions of the Code, or of
the Order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by
the Township of Kingston having jurisdiction over such structure,
building or premises shall be charged against the real estate upon
§ 503 KINGSTON CODE § 504
Ch:158
§ 505. Supplementary Provision. [Ord. No. 2019-3, 6/12/2019]
The section of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition,
designated as "Appendix A: Boarding Standard," and all of its sections, are
adopted entirely herein.
§ 506. Savings Clause. [Ord. No. 2019-3, 6/12/2019]
The provisions of the Township of Kingston Code of Ordinances, so far as
they are the same as those ordinances and regulations in force immediately
prior to the adoption of this Part, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and regulations and not as a new enactment. The provisions of
this Part shall not affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted
to enforce any of the prior ordinances and regulations except as otherwise
provided by law.
§ 507. Severability. [Ord. No. 2019-3, 6/12/2019]
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Board of Supervisors of
the Township of Kingston that the chapters, parts, sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses and phrases of this Part are severable. If any section,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Part is declared
unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid by the judgment or decree
of a court of competent jurisdiction, that invalidity shall not affect any of
the remaining chapters, parts, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or
phrases of this codification.
§ 508. When Effective. [Ord. No. 2019-3, 6/12/2019]
This Part shall become effective in accordance with law.
which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real
estate.
B. Section 106.4 Violation penalties. Any person or entity who
shall violate a provision of this code or fall to comply therewith or
with any of the requirements thereof shall be prosecuted for the
commission of a summary offense in the manner more particularly
provided in Section 106.3 hereof. The District Justice may levy
criminal fines not to exceed $1,000 per violation upon the
conviction of the person or entity of the summary offense so
charged. Each day that a violation continues, after due notice has
been served, shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 504 HOME RULE CHARTER § 508
Ch:159

Part 6
(RESERVED)17
§ 601. (Reserved)
17.Editor's Note: Former Part 6, Code Enforcement Agent, Adopted 7/18/1983 By Res. 1983-3,
Was Repealed 8/9/2017 By Ord. 2017-3.
§ 601 HOME RULE CHARTER § 601
Ch:161

Part 7
(RESERVED)18
§ 701. (Reserved)
18.Editor's Note: Former Part 7, Existing Structures Code, Adopted 2/10/1988 By Ord.
1988-3, Was Repealed 8/9/2017 By Ord. 2017-3.
§ 701 HOME RULE CHARTER § 701
Ch:163

Part 8
(RESERVED)19
§ 801. (Reserved)
19.Editor's Note: Former Part 8, Mechanical Code, Adopted 7/14/1999 By Ord. 99-4, Was
Repealed 8/9/2017 By Ord. 2017-3.
§ 801 HOME RULE CHARTER § 801
Ch:165

Part 9
CONSTRUCTION CODE BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 901. Establishment of the Construction Code Board of Appeals.
[Ord. 2004-6, 8/11/2004, § 1]
A Construction Code Board of Appeals is hereby created to implement the
adoption heretofore by the Township of the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code, 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq., which establishes
uniform standards for construction and the administration of the
enforcement of such standards.
§ 902. Powers and Duties of the Construction Code Board of
Appeals. [Ord. 2004-6, 8/11/2004, § 2]
The powers and duties of the Construction Code Board of Appeals shall be
only as prescribed in Section 501 of the Uniform Construction Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 35 P.S. § 7210.501, as may be amended
from time to time.
§ 903. Jurisdiction of the Construction Code Board of Appeals. [Ord.
2004-6, 8/11/2004, § 3]
An application for appeal shall be based only on a claim that the true intent
of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code or regulations under the
said Code has been correctly interpreted; the provisions of the said Code do
not fully apply; or an equivalent form of construction is to be used, subject,
however, to any future amendment(s) of the said Code in respect to appeals.
§ 904. Appointment, Vacancies, Removal, Residency Compensation
and Term of Office of Members of Construction Code Board of
Appeals. [Ord. 2004-6, 8/11/2004, § 4]
1. Appointment. The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors shall appoint
the members of the Construction Code Board of Appeals with the advice
and consent of the majority of all the members of the Board of
Supervisors. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the
unexpired portion of any term. Vacancies shall be filled by the Board of
Supervisors within 60 days of notification from the Chairman of the
Construction Code Board of Appeals that a vacancy occurs.
2. Number of Members. The Construction Code Board of Appeals shall
consist of five members, who shall meet the minimum qualifications of
Chapter 1 of the BOCA National Building Code, as the same may be
amended form time to time.
3. Residency of Members. Members of the Construction Board of Appeals
shall be residents of he Township, unless a position on the Board cannot
be filled with a person residing in the Township having the minimum
qualification of Chapter 1 of the BOCA National Building Code, in which
§ 901 HOME RULE CHARTER § 904
Ch:167
§ 905. Officers, Duties of Officers. [Ord. 2004-6, 8/11/2004, § 5]
§ 906. Meetings, Procedures for Meetings. [Ord. 2004-6, 8/11/2004,
§ 6]
case a qualified person, who resides outside of the Township, may serve
as a member.
4. Vacancies. The Board of Supervisors may declare a vacancy on the
Construction Code Board of Appeals upon the death, removal,
permanent disability or removal from the Township of any member of
the said Board. A qualified person shall be appointed to fill the
unexpired term of the vacated office.
5. Removal. Any member of the Construction Code Board of Appeals may
be removed prior to the expiration of an appointed term of the member
by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania applicable to the Pennsylvania
Construction Code. A member of the Construction Code Board of
Appeals shall serve at the will of the Board of Supervisors.
6. Term of Office. The term of office of a number of the Construction Code
Board of Appeals shall be for a period of three years. During the first
year of the effective date of this Part, one member shall be appointed
for a term expiring on December 31, 2004; two members shall be
appointed for a term each expiring on December 31, 2005; and two
members shall be appointed for a term each expiring on December 31,
2006. Thereafter, in each succeeding year, the Board of Supervisors
shall appoint members of the Construction Code Board of Appeals for
appropriate terms at the annual reorganization meeting of the Board of
Supervisors.
7. Compensation. No member of the Construction Code Board of Appeals
shall be compensated for duties performed in such office.
1. Chairman and Vice Chairman. A chairman and a vice chairman of the
Construction Code Board of Appeals shall be elected by the remaining
members in January of each year. Each such officer shall serve a oneyear
term.
2. Secretary. The member of the Construction Code Board of Appeals may
elect one of their own members to act as Secretary. The Secretary, if
elected from the membership shall serve a one-year term.
1. All meetings and hearings of the Construction Code Board of Appeals
shall be open to the public, unless otherwise permitted by law.
2. Regular and special meetings of the Board shall be held as necessary at
the call of the Chairman. The first meeting of each year shall constitute
the annual organization meeting of the Board.
§ 904 KINGSTON CODE § 906
Ch:168
§ 907. Expenditure of Public Funds. [Ord. 2004-6, 8/11/2004, § 7]
The Construction Code of Appeals shall have no authority to spend
Township funds unless provided for in the budget, as specifically approved
by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 908. Administrative Personnel. [Ord. 2004-6, 8/11/2004, § 8]
Within the limit of funds appropriated by the Board of Supervisors, the
Construction Code Board of Appeals may employ or contract, form time
to time, for secretaries, legal counsel, other than the Township Attorney,
consultants, and other technical and clerical services.
§ 909. Savings Clause. [Ord. 2004-6, 8/11/2004, § 9]
The provisions of the Township Code of Ordinances, so far as they are the
same as those ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the
adoption of this Part, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as a new enactment. The provisions of this Part shall
not affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any
of the prior ordinances or regulations except as otherwise provided by law.
§ 910. Severability of Part of Ordinance. [Ord. 2004-6, 8/11/2004,
§ 10]
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Board of Supervisors that
the chapters, parts, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases
of this Part are severable. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this Part is declared unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid
by the judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, that
invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining chapters, parts, sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this codification.
3. A quorum shall consist of at least a majority of all members of the
Board.
4. The Chairman or, in his absence, the Vice Chairman shall administer
oaths and may compel the attendance of witnesses when required by
law, in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the
Commonwealth.
5. The Secretary or his designee shall keep minutes of the Board
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or,
if absence or failing to vote, indicating such fact.
§ 906 HOME RULE CHARTER § 910
Ch:169

Part 10
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE
§ 1001. Administration and Enforcement of Act. [Ord. 2004-3, 6/7/
2004, § 1]
This Municipality hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.
§§ 7210.101-7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
§ 1002. Uniform Construction Code Adopted. [Ord. 2004-3, 6/7/
2004, § 2]
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa Code, Chapters
401-405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of this Municipality.
§ 1003. Methods of Administration and Enforcement. [Ord. 2004-3,
6/7/2004, § 3]
Administration and enforcement of the Code within this Municipality shall
be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the governing
body of this Municipality from time to time by resolution:
§ 1004. Board of Appeals. [Ord. 2004-3, 6/7/2004, § 4]
A Board of Appeals shall be established by ordinance of the governing body
of this Municipality in conformity with the requirements of the relevant
provisions of the Code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes
set forth therein.20 If at anytime enforcement and administration is
undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of
A. By the designation of an employee of the Municipality to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of the Municipality.
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Municipality.
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an inter-municipal
agreement.
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of this
Municipality.
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
20.Editor's Note: See Part 9 of this chapter.
§ 1001 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1004
Ch:171
Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
§ 1005. Prior Ordinances and Regulations. [Ord. 2004-3, 6/7/2004,
§ 5]
§ 1006. Fees. [Ord. 2004-3, 6/7/2004, § 6]
Fees assessable by the Municipality for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this Part and the Code shall be established by the
governing body by resolution from time to time.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by this Municipality on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal
or exceed the requirements of the Code shall continue in full force and
effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the Code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this Part and whose requirements are
less than the minimum requirements of the Code are hereby amended
to conform with the comparable provisions of the Code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of this Municipality not
governed by the Code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 1004 KINGSTON CODE § 1006
Ch:172
Chapter 6
CONDUCT
§ 1006 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1006
Ch:173

Part 1
CURFEW
§ 101. Curfew for Minors Set at 10:00 p.m. [Ord. 1972-8, 12/13/
1972, § 1]
No person under 18 years of age shall be or remain in or upon any of the
public streets, alleys or public grounds in the Township of Kingston at night
after the hour of 10:00 p.m., unless such person is accompanied by a parent,
guardian or other person having the legal custody of such minor person;
or such minor person is in the performance of an errand or duty directed
by such parent, guardian or other person having the care or custody of
such minor person, or whose employment makes it necessary to be upon
the streets, alleys or public grounds of the Township during such time.
This exception shall not apply when the person under such age is playing
or unnecessarily loitering in or upon the streets, alleys or public grounds,
whether alone or accompanied by a parent, guardian or any other person.
§ 102. Parent or Guardian to be Notified. [Ord. 1972-8, 12/13/1972,
§ 2]
No child or minor person arrested under the provisions of this Part shall
be placed in confinement until the parent or guardian of such person has
been notified of such arrest and has refused to be held responsible for such
actions of such minor.
§ 103. Parents, Guardians Responsible for Minors. [Ord. 1972-8, 12/
13/1972, § 3]
No parent, guardian or other person having legal care or custody of any
person under 18 years of age shall allow or permit any such child, ward or
other person under such age while in such legal custody, to go or be in or
upon any of the streets, alleys or public grounds of the Township within the
time prohibited in the preceding section, unless reasonable necessity exists
therefor.
§ 104. Minor May be Held as Delinquent. [Ord. 1972-8, 12/13/1972,
§ 4]
Any person under the age of 18 years who shall violate any provision of
this Part shall be considered a delinquent and the Police Department of the
Township of Kingston is hereby empowered to commence all necessary legal
proceedings against such delinquent minor in the form and in the manner
as provided by the law relating to delinquent minors. This provision shall
not apply unless the parent or guardian of such minor person has refused to
be held responsible for such actions of such minor.
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 105
Ch:175
§ 105. Penalties. [Ord. 1972-8, 12/13/1972, § 5; as amended by Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985; by Ord. 1995-2, 2/8/1995, § 2; and by Ord. 97-3,
11/12/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 105 KINGSTON CODE § 105
Ch:176
Part 2
FIREARMS
§ 201. Definitions of Firearms. [Ord. 86-2, 5/14/1986, § 1]
As used in this Part, the term "Firearm" shall include shotgun, air gun,
air pistol, spring gun or pistol, rifles and pistols of any caliber, or any
implement which implies a pellet of any kind with sufficient force capable of
causing property damage or bodily harm.
§ 202. Prohibiting Any Person To Fire Or Discharge Any Firearm.
[Ord. 86-2, 5/14/1986, § 2; as amended by Ord. 1992-7, 5/13/1992,
§ 1]
Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the use of any firearm by any person
who is properly licensed by the Pennsylvania Game Commission and who
is acting in compliance with the Pennsylvania Game and Wildlife Code
during the official Pennsylvania game season, or the use of any firearm
on an approved target range, as provided in § 203, hereof, or the use of
any firearm by any person licensed to carry and use a firearm for law
enforcement purposes.
§ 203. Exceptions. [Ord. 86-2, 5/14/1986, § 3]
It shall be permissible to use and otherwise to discharge a firearm under
the following conditions and circumstances in an Agricultural (A-1) District
or a Conservation (C-1) District of Kingston Township as follows:
§ 204. Police Authorized To Seize Discharged Weapons. [Ord. 86-2,
5/14/1986, § 4; as amended by Ord. 1992-7, 5/13/1992, § 2]
Any police officer of the Township of Kingston, lawfully engaged in his law
enforcement duties within the Township of Kingston, is hereby authorized
to seize any firearm, as defined herein, which shall be fired or discharged
1. The use of a firearm in a zoning district designated as "Agricultural" or
"Conservation" during any official Pennsylvania game season, provided
that said firearm is not discharged within 200 yards of any building or
structure, and that said firearm is used in accordance with the game
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; and
2. The use of any type of firearm on a target range, as approved by the
Board of Supervisors of Kingston Township and for which a special
permit has been issued by the Manager of Kingston Township, in a
zoning district designated as "Agricultural" or "Conservation" by the
Kingston Township Zoning Ordinance (i) while under adult supervision,
and (ii) only for target shooting, and (iii) only during the hours from
noon until dusk; and
3. The use of firearms by any person or persons licensed to carry and to
discharge such firearms for law enforcement purposes.
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 204
Ch:177
or used generally in violation of this Part. Upon such seizure, the Police
Department of the Township shall issue to the owner of the firearm a written
receipt stating the make, model, caliber and serial number of said firearm.
The firearm shall be held by the Police Department of the Township of
Kingston, and it shall be disposed of in the manner ordered by any court in
any proceeding brought before the court under § 205 hereof.
§ 205. Penalties. [Ord. 86-2, 5/14/1986, § 5; as amended by Ord.
97-3, 11/12/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 206. Severability. [Ord. 86-2, 5/14/1986, § 7]
If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this Part is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared
as the intent of the Township of Kingston that this Part would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause,
section or part thereof not been included herein.
§ 204 KINGSTON CODE § 206
Ch:178
Part 3
PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 301. Definition and Interpretation. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
As used in this Part, the term PERSON shall include any individual,
corporation, partnership, association, firm or other legal entity. The singular
shall include the plural; the plural shall include the singular; and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 302. Tampering with Public Property on Streets, Alleys or Public
Ground Prohibited. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
No person shall destroy, injure, tamper with or deface any public property
of the Township, or any grass, walk, lamp, ornamental work, building or
streetlight on or in any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public grounds in
the Township.
§ 303. Tampering with Stakes, Posts and Monuments Prohibited.
[Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
No person shall in any manner interfere or meddle with, or pull, drive,
change, alter, or destroy any stake, post, monument, or other marking,
made, placed or set, or hereafter made, placed or set, or caused to be done
by the authorities of the Township, to evidence the location, elevation, line,
grade, corner, or angle of any public street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter,
drain, or other public work, or thing.
§ 304. Tampering with Warning Lamps, Signs or Barricades
Prohibited. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
No person shall destroy, remove, deface, obliterate or cover up any lamp,
sign or barricade erected as a warning of danger by the authorities of the
Township or by any person doing work by permission of the authorities
of the Township on any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or bridges in the
Township or on any public grounds of the Township, within or without the
Township.
§ 305. Removal of Material from Streets, Alleys or Public Grounds
Prohibited. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
No person shall take any earth, stone, or other material from any street,
alley, or public grounds in the Township.
§ 306. Deposit of Harmful Substances on Streets, Alleys, Sidewalks
or Public Grounds Prohibited. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
No person shall pour, throw or deposit any harmful or destructive substance
or matter on any street, alley, sidewalk or public grounds in the Township.
§ 301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 307
Ch:179
§ 307. Exceptions. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
This Part shall not apply to normal activities in connection with
construction, maintenance and repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks, and
public grounds and the structures and fixtures located thereon or therein,
or to incidental results of work done thereon or therein upon permit from or
by authority of the Township.
§ 308. Penalties. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as amended by Ord. 97-3,
11/12/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 307 KINGSTON CODE § 308
Ch:180
Part 4
OBSCENITY
§ 401. Legislative Finding and Purpose. [Ord. 1976-40, 11/10/1976,
§ 1]
The Board of Supervisors of Kingston Township finds that the crass
commercial explicit sexual conduct through the public exhibition of obscene
films and the sale of obscene publications and devices, and the use of socalled
massage parlors and model studios for the purpose of lewdness,
assignation or prostitution, constitutes a debasement and distortion of a
sensitive key relationship of human existence, central to family life,
community welfare and the development of human personality; is indecent
and offensive to the senses and to public morals and interferes with the
comfortable enjoyment of life and property, in that such interferes with the
interest of the public in the quality of life and total community environment,
the tone of commerce in the Township, property values, and the public
safety; and that the continued operation of such activities is detrimental
to the best health, safety, convenience, good morals and general welfare
of the Township of Kingston, and of the residents, citizens, inhabitants and
businesses thereof. Accordingly, the Township of Kingston hereby declares
such activities to be illegal as hereinafter set forth, and further, that such
activities are, and are hereby declared to be and constitute a public
nuisance, and herein establishes penalties for such activities.
§ 402. Distribution of Obscene Matter. [Ord. 1976-40, 11/10/1976,
§ 2]
Any person who, with knowledge of the character and content, either
sells, gives away, lends, distributes, exhibits, shows, transmutes, or offers
either to sell, give away, lend, distribute, exhibit, show or transmute, or
has in his possession or under his control with intent either to sell, give
away, lend, distribute, exhibit, show or transmute to another, any obscene
motion picture film or any obscene literature, book, magazine, pamphlet,
newspaper, story book, paper, comic book, writing, drawing, photograph,
figure, image, or any written or printed matter of an obscene nature or
any device, article or instrument of an obscene nature shall be guilty of a
summary offense.
§ 403. Preparation of Obscene Matter. [Ord. 1976-40, 11/10/1976,
§ 3]
Any person who designs, copies, draws, photographs, prints, utters,
publishes or in any matter manufactures or prepares any obscene motion
picture film, or any obscene book, picture, film, drawing, magazine,
pamphlet, newspaper, story book, paper, comic book, writing, figure, image,
matter, device, article or instrument of an obscene nature, shall be guilty of
a summary offense.
§ 401 HOME RULE CHARTER § 404
Ch:181
§ 404. Obscene Performance. [Ord. 1976-40, 11/10/1976, § 4]
Any person who, with knowledge of the character and content, produces,
presents or directs any obscene performance or participates in the portion
thereof which is obscene shall be guilty of a summary offense.
§ 405. Assisting Obscenity. [Ord. 1976-40, 11/10/1976, § 5]
Any person who knowingly participates in, supports or in any way aids or
assists any person in selling, lending, distributing, giving away, or showing
any obscene motion picture film, or any obscene literature, book, magazine,
pamphlet, newspaper, story book, paper, comic book, writing, drawing,
photograph, figure or image, or any written or printed matter of an obscene
nature, or any device, article or instrument of an obscene nature, shall be
guilty of a summary offense.
§ 406. Use of Premises for Obscene Purposes. [Ord. 1976-40, 11/10/
1976, § 6]
Any person, being the owner of any premises or having control thereof, who
knowingly permits within or upon said premises the exhibition, projection
or showing of any motion picture film, show, presentation or performance of
an obscene picture film, show, presentation or performance of an obscene
nature, or permits anyone to sell, lend, distribute, exhibit, give away or
show any obscene literature, book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story
book, paper, comic book, writing, drawing, photograph, figure or image, or
any written or printed matter of an obscene nature, or any device, article,
or instrument of an obscene nature, shall be guilty of a summary offense.
§ 407. Advertising Obscenity. [Ord. 1976-40, 11/10/1976, § 7]
Whoever knowingly writes, prints, publishes or utters, or causes to be
printed, published or uttered, any advertisement or notice of any kind giving
information directly or indirectly, stating or purporting to state where, how
or whom or by what means, any obscene motion picture film, picture, book,
writing, paper, comic book, figure, image, matter, article or thing of an
obscene nature can be seen, purchased, obtained or had, shall be guilty of
a summary offense.
§ 408. Involving Minors in Obscene Matters. [Ord. 1976-40, 11/10/
1976, § 8]
No person within the Township of Kingston, shall wilfully or knowingly
engage in the business of selling, lending, giving away, showing, advertising
for sale or distributing to any person under the age of 17 years, or have in
his possession with intent to engage in the said business or to otherwise
offer for sale or commercial distribution to any individual under the age of
17 years, any obscene motion picture film or any still picture or photograph,
or any book, pocket book, pamphlet or magazine, the cover or content of
which exploits, is devoted to, or is principally made up of descriptions or
depictions of illicit sex or sexual immorality, or which is obscene, or which
§ 404 KINGSTON CODE § 408
Ch:182
consists of pictures of nude or partially denuded figures posed or presented
in a manner to provoke or arouse lust or passion or to exploit sex, lust or
perversion for commercial gain, or any device, article or instrument of an
obscene nature.
§ 409. Displaying Obscene Matter to Minors. [Ord. 1976-40, 11/10/
1976, § 9]
No person within the Township of Kingston shall display at newsstands or
any other business establishment frequented by minors under the age of 17
years or where said minors are or may be invited as a part of the general
public, any obscene motion picture film or any still picture or photograph
of any book, pocket book, pamphlet or magazine, the cover or content of
which exploits, is devoted to, or is principally made up of descriptions or
depictions of illicit sex or sexual immorality, or which is obscene, or which
consists of pictures of nude or partially denuded figures posed or presented
in a manner to provoke or arouse lust or passion or to exploit sex, lust or
perversion for commercial gain, or any device, article or instrument of an
obscene nature.
§ 410. Definitions. [Ord. 1976-40, 11/10/1976, § 10]
COMMUNITY STANDARDS — The standards of the community from which
the jury is drawn or would be drawn if it were the trier of the fact.
ILLICIT SEX or SEXUAL IMMORALITY —
KNOWINGLY — Having knowledge of the character and content of the
material involved or failure on notice to exercise reasonable inspection
which would disclose the content and character of the same.
NUDE OR PARTIALLY DENUDED FIGURES —
OBSCENE —
1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
2. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy;
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or female breast.
3.
Less than completely and opaquely covered: (a) human genitals; (b)
pubic regions; (c) buttock, and (d) female breast below a point of
immediately above the top of the areola; or
1.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
2.
Whether the average person applying contemporary community
standards would find that the subject matter taken as a whole appeals
to the prurient interest;
1.
§ 408 HOME RULE CHARTER § 410
Ch:183
PATENTLY OFFENSIVE — So offensive on its face as to affront current
standards of decency, and shall be deemed to include any of the following
described forms of sexual conduct, if depicted or described in a patently
offensive way:
PERSON — A natural person, partnership or corporation. Whenever used
in a clause describing or imposing a fine or term of imprisonment, or both,
the term "person" as applied to partnership shall mean the partners or
members thereof, and as applied to corporations, shall mean the officers
thereof.
§ 411. Massage Parlors and Model Studios. [Ord. 1976-40, 11/10/
1976, § 11]
No person shall own, operate or maintain any massage parlor or model
studio, which, as a regular course of business, is used for the purpose of
lewdness, assignation or prostitution, and every such massage parlor or
model studio in or upon which acts of lewdness, assignation or prostitution
Whether the subject matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive
way sexual conduct of a type hereinafter described; and
2.
Whether the subject matter taken as a whole lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value.
3.
An act of sexual intercourse, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
real or animated, including genital-genital, anal-genital or oral-genital
intercourse, whether between human beings or between a human being
and an animal.
1.
Sadomasochistic abuse meaning flagellation or torture by or upon a
person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a revealing costume,
or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically
restrained on the part of the one so clothed.
2.
Masturbation, excretory functions, and lewd exhibition of the genitals,
including any explicit close up representation of a human genital organ
or spread-eagle exposure of female genital organs.
3.
Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the clothed or pubic
area or buttocks of a human male or female, or the breasts of the
female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite
sex, or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual
stimulation or gratification.
4.
A device designed and marketed as useful primarily for stimulation of
the human genital organs.
5.
Male or female genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, or
covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
6.
Fellatio, cunnilingus, anal sodomy, seminal ejaculation, or any other
excretory function.
7.
§ 410 KINGSTON CODE § 411
Ch:184
are held or occur, is declared to be a public nuisance. Any such person
violating this section shall be guilty of a summary offense.
MASSAGE — Any method of treating the superficial soft parts of the human
body for remedial, hygienic or other purposes, consisting of rubbing,
stroking, kneading, or any similar treatment, accomplished by hand, or by
the use of any instrument.
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any building or structure or portion thereof, located
within the Township of Kingston which is open to members of the general
public, with or without the payment of a fee, at which massage services are
offered.
MODEL STUDIO —
§ 412. Enforcement and Remedies. [Ord. 1976-40, 11/10/1976k
§§ 2-7, 11; as amended by Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as amended by
Ord. 97-3, 11/12/1997]
Any premises on which there is conducted the business of furnishing
figure models who pose in the nude for the purpose of being observed
or viewed by any person or of being sketched, painted, drawn,
sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted for persons
who pay a fee, or other consideration or compensation or a gratuity, for
the right or opportunity so to depict the figure model, or for admission
to, or for permission to remain upon, or as a condition for remaining
upon the premises; or
1.
Any premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing
or providing or procuring, for a fee or other consideration or
compensation or gratuity, figure models who pose in the nude to be
observed or viewed by any person or to be sketched, painted, drawn,
sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted.
2.
Exception — The words "model studio" do not include:
Any studio which is operated by any college or junior college,
public school, or any governmental agency where the person, firm,
association, partnership, or corporation operating it has met the
requirements of the State of Pennsylvania for the issuance or
conferring of and is in fact authorized thereunder to issue and
confer, a diploma or honorary diploma; or
A.
Any premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing,
providing or procuring figure models solely for any studio
described in subsection A of this section.
B.
Any studio operated by a tax exempt, nonprofit corporation devoted
to the development of art and its appreciation.
C.
3.
1. Enforcement Notice.
§ 411 HOME RULE CHARTER § 412
Ch:185
A. If it appears to the Township that a violation of this Part has
occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this Section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the violator and, if
applicable, the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation
has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to
receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel and to any other
person requested in writing by the owner of record.
C. An Enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(1) The name of the violator and, if applicable, the owner of record
and any other person against whom the Township intends to
take action.
(2) The location of the violation and, if applicable, the property in
violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provision of this Part.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Board of Supervisors within a period of 10 days.
(6) That the failure to comply with the notice within the time
specified, unless extended by appeal to the Board of
Supervisors, constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions
clearly described.
2. Enforcement Remedies.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this Part shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than
$600 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of
determination of a violation by the district justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues or each Section of
this Part which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute
a separate offense.
§ 412 KINGSTON CODE § 412
Ch:186
B. Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this Section.
C. District justices shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings
brought under this Section.
§ 412 HOME RULE CHARTER § 412
Ch:187

Part 5
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION
§ 501. Short Title. [Ord. 86-6, 8/13/1986, § 1]
This Part shall be known and may be cited as "Alcohol Consumption
Ordinance" of the Township of Kingston.
§ 502. Definitions. [Ord. 86-6, 8/13/1986, § 3]
The following words when used in this Part shall have the meaning ascribed
to them in this Section, except in those instances where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
ALCOHOL — Any alcohol or other liquid defined, regulated and/or governed
by the Liquor Code Act of 1951 April 12, P.L. 90, Article I, § 101 et. seq., 47
P.S. § 101 et. seq., as amended.
§ 503. Alcohol Consumption Prohibited. [Ord. 86-6, 8/13/1986, § 4]
No person shall be permitted to consume alcohol from any bottle, glass, can,
cup or other container upon any of the streets, alleys roads, parks, public
grounds, public places or public vacant lots in the Township of Kingston.
§ 504. Penalties. [Ord. 86-6, 8/13/1986, § 5; as amended by Ord.
97-3, 11/12/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 505. Severability. [Ord. 86-6, 8/13/1986, § 6]
The provisions of this Part are severable. If any sentence, clause or section
of this Part is for any reason to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid,
such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair
any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses or sections of this
Part. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors
of the Township of Kingston that this Part would have been adopted had
such unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid sentence, clause or section not be
included herein.
§ 501 HOME RULE CHARTER § 505
Ch:189

Part 6
OFFENSIVE AND ANNOYING NOISES
§ 601. Purpose and Scope. [Ord. 1995-8, 12/13/1995, § 1]
It is the purpose and scope of this Part to secure and promote the public
health, comfort, convenience, safety and welfare, and the peace and quiet
of the Township and its inhabitants, by limiting and prohibiting certain
offensive and annoying noises.
§ 602. Applicability. [Ord. 1995-8, 12/13/1995, § 2]
This Part shall apply to:
§ 603. Exempt Devices. [Ord. 1995-8, 12/13/1995, § 3]
The following devices are exempt from the provisions of these regulations:
§ 604. Definitions. [Ord. 1995-8, 12/13/1995, § 4]
APPLIANCE — Any device or combination of devices used, or capable of
being used, as a means of accomplishing a desired end, such as, but not
limited to, a window air conditioning unit, a radio, a stereo.
EQUIPMENT — Any device or combination of devices to accomplish a
desired end such as, but not limited to, a chain saw, bulldozer, backhoe,
hammer, power saw, lawn mower, radio, stereo equipment, C.D. player.
NOISE — Any sound emitted by a person, animal, vehicle, appliance,
equipment, container, machinery or other devices or objects creating
noises, and its environmental interaction.
A. All types of vehicles, appliances, equipment, containers, machinery or
other devices or objects creating noises, whether privately or publicly
owned or leased, which disturb the public peace and quiet in the area.
B. Sounds or noises of any time duration, as hereinafter specified.
C. Both the owner or owners, operator or operators, lessee or lessees of
vehicles, appliances, equipment, containers, machinery, or other
devices or objects creating noises and/or of the real estate where such
noises are being created.
A. Aircraft (except model aircraft).
B. Police, fire, ambulance and other governmental emergency vehicles.
C. Back up alarm devices on trucks and other equipment when installed
and operated in accordance with Society of Engineers recommended
practice.
D. Governmental warning devices (i.e. civil defense or fire sirens, etc.).
E. Snowblowers.
§ 601 HOME RULE CHARTER § 604
Ch:191
ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any person appointed by the
Township of Kingston with the responsibility of enforcing Township
ordinances including, but not limited to, the Police Department and Zoning/
Code Enforcement Officer of the Township of Kingston.
PERSON — Individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations,
businesses, churches, schools, nonprofit organizations including their
lessees, assignees, employees, servants, trustees, receivers, executors,
administrators or other successors in interest, and including any owner
or operator of vehicles, appliances, machinery, equipment, containers or
devices, and the owners and lessees of real estate, where such vehicle,
appliance, machinery, equipment, container or device is located.
VEHICLE — Any device or combination of devices used for, or capable of
being used for, transporting persons or property. "Vehicles" include, but
are not limited to, the following: automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles,
motorized bicycles, snowmobiles, scooters, all-terrain vehicles, go-carts,
racers and like devices, farm graders and semitrailers and tractor trailers.
§ 605. Loud or Unnecessary Noises Prohibited. [Ord. 1995-8, 12/13/
1995, § 5]
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue to cause to be made
or continue any loud, unnecessary, excessive or unusual noise which either
annoys, disturbs, injures, interferes with or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the Township, or is
annoying to a person of ordinary sensibilities as hereinafter set forth.
§ 606. Enumeration of Prohibited Noises. [Ord. 1995-8, 12/13/1995,
§ 6]
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, excessive,
disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this Part and are
prohibited, but such enumeration shall not be deemed exclusive, namely:
A. Horns and Signaling Devices, Etc. The sound of any horn or signaling
device on any vehicle, within the limits of the Township, except as a
danger warning; the creation, by means of horns or such signaling
device, of any unreasonably loud, excessive, disturbing, unnecessary or
harsh sound and the sounding of any such device for any unnecessary
and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device or
horn except one operated by hand or by electricity; the use of any horn,
whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the
unreasonable use of any horn or signaling device when traffic is, for any
reason, held up.
B. Racing Motors. The unnecessary or excessive or unnatural
acceleration, deceleration or racing of motors in vehicles, whether in
motion or at rest, within the limits of the Township.
C. Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
stationary internal combustion engine or vehicle, except through a
§ 604 KINGSTON CODE § 606
Ch:192
muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive
noises therefrom.
D. Defect in Vehicle or Load. The use of any vehicle or other piece of
machinery, equipment, appliance, container or device so out of repair,
or so loaded or in such manner as to create loud or unnecessary or
excessive grating, rattling or other noise.
E. Sound Equipment. The using, operating or permitting to be played,
used or operated, of any radio receiving sets, musical instruments,
sound amplifiers, phonographs, radios, stereos, tape players, compact
disc players, car or vehicle radios or stereos, or other machines or
devices for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as
to disturb the peace, quiet, comfort and repose of the neighboring
inhabitants, or at any time with louder volume than necessary for
convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room,
vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and
who are voluntary listeners thereof. The operation of any such set,
instrument, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50
feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be
prohibited and shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
Section.
F. Loudspeakers and Amplifiers for Advertising. The using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is
cast upon the public street for the purpose of commercial advertising or
attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure.
G. Yelling and Shouting, Etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or
singing on the public street or public property, particularly between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., or at any time or place, including
private property, so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose
of persons in any school, church or office, or in any dwelling, hotel or
other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
H. Loading, Unloading and Opening Boxes, Dumpsters and Other
Containers. The creating of noise in connection with loading or
unloading any vehicle, dumpsters or other containers or the opening
and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers from 11:00 p.m.
to 6:00 a.m. is prohibited.
I. Animals and Birds, Etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by
causing frequent or long-continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or
repose of any persons in the vicinity.
J. Construction, Maintenance or Repairing of Buildings or Lands. The
erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, maintenance or
repair of any streets, highways, sidewalks, lands, trees, lawns,
landscaping and building between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Monday
§ 606 HOME RULE CHARTER § 606
Ch:193
§ 607. Penalties. [Ord. 1995-8, 12/13/1995, § 7; as amended by Ord.
97-3, 11/12/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 608. Enforcement. [Ord. 1995-8, 12/13/1995, § 8]
through Friday, inclusive, and between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on
Saturday and Sunday, except in the urgent necessity in the interest of
public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the Township
Manager, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed
three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit
may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency
continues.
K. Hawkers and Peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers
and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
L. Noise from Premises or Property. No person owning, leasing, occupying
or otherwise in possession or control of any building, land or premises
shall use the same, or permit the use of same, or permit any equipment,
machinery, appliance, container or other device to be used at said
building, land or premises, if such use shall disturb or destroy, or annoy
the peace of the neighborhood, or otherwise be dangerous or
detrimental to health or quiet enjoyment.
M. Equipment Noise. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any
construction equipment, tractor trailer, power saw, backhoe, lawn or
landscaping equipment or other mechanical equipment operated by
fuel or electric power between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
Monday through Friday, inclusive, and between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
on Saturday and Sunday, except for emergency work on public
improvements, Township services and/or except by special permit as
issued by the Township Manager or for a duration of three days as
provided for in subsection (J) of this Section, if such equipment
produces noise prohibited by this Part.
1. Any emission of noise from any source in violation of this Part shall be
deemed and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be
abated, in addition to the administrative proceeding, fines and penalties
herein provided. Such abatement may be made by any police officer or
at his direction, or by his designee, or by the Zoning/Code Enforcement
Officer, or by the Court of Common Pleas of Luzerne County on
§ 606 KINGSTON CODE § 608
Ch:194
complaint, petition or action filed by, or on behalf, of the Township of
Kingston.
2. The Police Department of the Township of Kingston and/or the Zoning
Officer shall have the authority to enforce this Part.
3. Nothing in this Part shall be construed to impair any cause of action or
legal remedy thereof of any person or the public from injury or damage
arising from the emission or release into the atmosphere or ground,
from any source whatever, of noise and in such place or manner or at
such levels which may give rise to such cause of action.
4. The Police Department and/or Zoning/Code Enforcement Officer, should
circumstances require, are authorized, but not required, to issue a
warning to persons considered in violation of this Part.
§ 608 HOME RULE CHARTER § 608
Ch:195
Chapter 7
FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE PROTECTION
§ 608 KINGSTON CODE § 608
Ch:196
Part 1
SMOKE DETECTORS
§ 101. Detectors Required in All New Construction. [Ord. 1979-8, 1/
10/1979, § 1]
All residential dwelling units which shall be constructed after the effective
date of this Part 1 shall be equipped with one approved smoke detector
sensing visible and invisible particles of combustion for each floor of the
structure.
§ 102. Approved Detectors. [Ord. 1979-8, 1/10/1979, § 2]
The manufacture and type of smoke-detection device shall be as approved
by Underwriters' Laboratories and bear the seal of Underwriters'
Laboratories.
§ 103. Detectors Required for Occupancy. [Ord. 1979-8, 1/10/1979,
§ 3]
No certificate of occupancy shall be granted by the Zoning Officer of the
Township of Kingston for a new residential dwelling unit constructed after
the effective date of this Part 1 unless the owner of the new residential
dwelling unit complies with the provisions of this Part 1.
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 103
Ch:197

Part 2
OPEN BURNING21
§ 201. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2019-2, 6/12/2019]
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Part, shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them:
BURNING — The act of consuming by fire; to flame, char, scorch, or blaze.
As used in this Part, "smoldering" shall have the same meaning as burning,
and any smoldering shall be deemed a burning.
COMMERCIAL — Of or pertaining to any wholesale, retail, industrial,
manufacturing, transportation, or financial or professional service or office
enterprise, business, or establishment.
COMPOSTING — The process by which organic solid waste is biologically
decomposed under controlled anaerobic or aerobic conditions to yield a
humus-like product.
GARBAGE — All putrescible animal and vegetable matter resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INSTITUTIONAL — Any establishment engaged in service to persons,
including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, orphanages, schools,
universities, churches, and social or fraternal societies and organizations.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained
gaseous material, resulting from the operation of residential, municipal,
commercial, or institutional establishments and from community activities,
and any sludge not meeting the definition of "residual or hazardous waste"
as defined in the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act from a
municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant,
wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term does
not include source-separated recyclable materials.
OPEN BURNING — A fire in which any solid fuel or waste is burned in the
open or in a receptacle other than a furnace or an incinerator permitted by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation for profit or not
for profit, association, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department, board,
bureau or agency of the commonwealth or the federal government, political
subdivision, municipality, district, authority, or any other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
RECYCLABLES — Materials designated as recyclable in Chapter 20, Solid
Waste and Recycling, or required by the terms of that chapter, any
amendment thereto or designated by resolution of the Township to be kept
separate from municipal waste and recycled, including leaf waste.
21.Editor's Note: Former Part 2, Open Burning, Adopted 10/9/1968, As Amended, Was
Repealed By Ord. 2017-2, 8/9/2017.
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 201
Ch:199
RESIDENTIAL — Any dwelling unit used as a place of human habitation and
which is not commercial, municipal, institutional, or a community activity.
Home occupations incidental to be residential use within a building are
considered residential.
RESPONSBILE PERSON — An individual 18 years or older, who is not under
the influence of drugs or alcohol or suffering from any other disability,
which would impair his or her ability to properly supervise a fire.
RUBBISH — Solid waste exclusive of garbage (e.g., nonrecyclable glass,
metal, paper or plastic) and noncompostable plant material, wood or
nonputrescible solid waste.
SOLID WASTE — Waste, including, but not limited to, municipal, residual
or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, garden residue, tree trimmings,
chipped wood waste, and other vegetative material.
§ 202. Open Burning Prohibited; Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2019-2, 6/
12/2019]
1. Subject only to the exceptions hereinafter specifically set forth, open
burning of materials in the Township of Kingston is strictly prohibited,
including, but not limited to, garbage; municipal waste; recyclables;
rubbish, solid waste; yard waste; plastic products of any kind; building
materials, either new or used, including but not limited to wood and
lumber, treated wood and lumber, roofing shingles, tar paper, insulation
of any kind, vinyl or composite siding, synthetic and composite decking
and lumber, flooring materials of any kind, plastic or Tyvek-type house
wrap, PVC or other plastic-type pipe, rubber products, paint and stain,
carpet and carpet padding, glues and adhesives, and any materials used
to package or otherwise contain any of the aforementioned materials;
furniture and mattresses; tires; flammable and combustible liquids,
motor oil, waste oil or any other liquid fuels capable of being burned,
unless used in a furnace or stove designated to burn such liquids by the
manufacturer; newspapers, magazines, cardboard and other recyclable
paper products; leaves, trimmings, twigs, branches and similar yard
waste unless in the case of twigs and branches used for campfires or
cooking fires, grills, outdoor fireplaces, chimineas or similar devices;
any other material able to be recycled at a recycling facility designated
by the Township of Kingston at the time of adoption of this Part or in the
future.
2. The following are exceptions to the prohibition of open burning:
A. A fire set to prevent or abate a fire hazard, when approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection's Regional Air Quality
Program office and set by or under the supervision of a public
officer.
§ 201 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:200
§ 203. General Restrictions and Conditions. [Ord. No. 2019-2, 6/12/
2019]
B. Any fire set for the purpose of instructing personnel in firefighting
when approved by the Department of Environmental Protection's
Regional Air Quality Program office.
C. A fire set for the prevention and control of disease or pests, when
approved by the Department of Environmental Protection's
Regional Air Quality Program office.
D. A fire set in conjunction with the production of agricultural
commodities in their unmanufactured state on the premises of the
farm operation.
E. A bonfire, providing that the fire is set with natural wood and wood
products only.
F. A fire set solely for cooking food or for warmth, fellowship,
recreational or ceremonial purposes such as a campfire, grill,
outdoor fireplace, fire ring, chiminea or similar device, provided
that the fire is set with charcoal, natural wood and wood products
only. Small amounts of paper may be used to start or kindle fires as
well as commercially manufactured fire starters and fire logs.
G. A cooking grill or outdoor heater manufactured specifically for the
use of propane or natural gas fuels, or liquid fuels such as
kerosene.
1. Fires that are permitted by this Part shall be subject to the following
conditions:
A. Fires shall be permitted only when conditions are not such that
there is an undue chance of conflagration or wildfire due mainly,
but not limited to, extremely dry conditions as determined by the
Township Manager; upon notification by the Code Enforcement
Office of the Township of Kingston of such determination, the
Township Manager shall be authorized to place a Township burn
ban into effect. The Township Manager shall only lift a burn ban
upon recommendation by the Code Enforcement Officer. No
burning of any kind shall be permitted during burning bans placed
in effect by the Township;
B. With the exception of permitted fires pursuant to § 202, Subsection
2A through E, fires shall not be permitted within 100 feet of any
structure or within 50 feet or other combustible materials or areas
not intended to be burned. A fire set solely for cooking food or for
warmth, fellowship, recreational or ceremonial purposes such as a
campfire shall be exempt from this provision, provided that it is
contained, located so that other combustible materials cannot be
ignited and a means of extinguishment is readily available;
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 203
Ch:201
§ 204. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2019-2, 6/12/2019]
The Township of Kingston Zoning Officer/Code Enforcement Officer and the
Kingston Township Police Department shall serve as the parties designated
and responsible for the enforcement of this Part.
§ 205. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2019-2, 6/12/2019]
This Part shall be enforced by an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person,
partnership, corporation or other entity who or which violates or permits a
violation of the provisions of this Part shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding, pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 per
violation, plus all court costs and reasonable attorneys fees incurred by
the Township of Kingston in the enforcement proceedings, and/or be
imprisoned to the extent allowed by law for the punishment of summary
offenses. Each day or portion thereof that a violation exists or continues
shall constitute a separate violation. Each section of this Part that is violated
shall also constitute a separate violation. Further, the appropriate officers
or agents of the Township of Kingston are hereby authorized to seek
equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance with this Part.
All fines, penalties, costs and reasonable attorneys fees collected for the
violation of this Part shall be paid to the Township of Kingston for its general
use.
C. All fires shall be attended by a responsible person at all times until
completely extinguished;
D. Means to extinguish the fire, including but not limited to an
adequate supply of water or other extinguishable agent or heavy
equipment such as a backhoe or bulldozer, shall be readily
available at all times while the fire is burning;
E. Fires shall not be permitted to spread beyond the original location
or beyond property lines;
F. Fires shall not be permitted to be ignited if wind speeds exceed 10
miles per hour. If wind speeds increase to exceed 10 miles per hour
after a fire has been ignited, it shall promptly be extinguished until
wind conditions are more favorable;
G. Fires shall not be permitted within 50 feet of adjoining property
lines;
H. No fire shall be permitted to burn in such a manner that produces
smoke so as to interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of
adjoining premises;
I. No person shall burn, ignite, incinerate, maintain or otherwise
permit any fire upon any of the streets, roads, alleys and/or public
rights-of-way situated in the Township of Kingston.
§ 203 KINGSTON CODE § 206
Ch:202
§ 206. Citations. [Ord. No. 2019-2, 6/12/2019]
The Kingston Township Zoning Officer/Code Enforcement Officer and the
Township of Kingston Police Department are hereby authorized to issue
citations for the violation of this Part.
§ 207. Additional Costs Related to Conviction for Violations. [Ord.
No. 2019-2, 6/12/2019]
§ 208. Limited Liability. [Ord. No. 2019-2, 6/12/2019]
Kingston Township, its supervisors, agents, officials and representatives
shall not, under any circumstances, be liable or responsible for any
damages caused to any person or property by reason of provisions of this
or by reason of the conduct of any burning activity in compliance with the
terms and provisions of this Part. The individual person or party responsible
for any such fire shall bear sole liability for any damages caused as a result
thereof.
§ 209. Severability. [Ord. No. 2019-2, 6/12/2019]
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Board of Supervisors of
the Township of Kingston that the chapters, parts, sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses and phrases of this Part are severable. If any section,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Part is declared
unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid by the judgment or decree
of a court of competent jurisdiction, that invalidity shall not affect any of
the remaining chapters, parts, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or
phrases of this codification.
1. In the case of a fire requiring firefighters and/or equipment and upon
conviction of any violation of this Part, the violator shall also pay
charges in order to cover the firefighting costs. Charges shall be
assessed for use of the following firefighting equipment:
A. Pumpers and tankers.
B. Brush Busters. Brush busters are all-wheel-drive vehicles equipped
for off-road or wooded area use with a water tank of at least 100
gallons' capacity and an appropriately sized pump.
C. Chain saws.
2. Additional labor charges shall be assessed under this Part based upon
an hourly rate for all firefighters engaged in the firefighting activities.
3. The Board of Supervisors shall determine by resolution a reasonable
schedule of costs based upon mileage, operating labor costs and
firefighting equipment and staff hours. These charges shall be in
addition to and not in lieu of any penalties provided elsewhere by this
Part.
§ 206 HOME RULE CHARTER § 210
Ch:203
§ 210. Repealer. [Ord. No. 2019-2, 6/12/2019]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Township of Kingston expressly
conflicting with the provisions of this Part are hereby repealed to the extent
of such conflict.
§ 211. When Effective. [Ord. No. 2019-2, 6/12/2019]
This Part shall become effective in accordance with law.
§ 210 KINGSTON CODE § 211
Ch:204
Part 3
(RESERVED)22
§ 301. (Reserved)
22.Editor's Note: Former Part 3, Fire Safety And Prevention Officer, Adopted 9/11/1985 By
Ord. 1985-3, As Amended, Was Repealed 8/9/2017 By Ord. 2017-2.
§ 301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 301
Ch:205

Part 4
RECOGNITION AND DESIGNATION OF AMBULANCE AND FIRE
DEPARTMENT SERVICES
§ 401. Ambulance Service Recognized and Designated. [Ord.
2000-8, 1/10/2001, § 1; as amended by Ord. 2009-5, 7/8/2009]
The Board of Supervisors shall provide, by resolution adopted from time
to time, for the recognition and designation of a primary provider of
emergency medical services (EMS) and rescue services for the Township
of Kingston, all consistent with the relevant provisions of the Pennsylvania
Emergency Services Act, 35 P.S. § 6921 et seq., as the same may be
amended from time to time, and all case law thereunder.
§ 402. Fire Service Recognized and Designated. [Ord. 2000-8, 1/10/
2001, § II]
The Shavertown Volunteer Fire Department and the Trucksville Volunteer
Fire Department, nonprofit corporations organized and existing under the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, with the principal place of
business of the Shavertown Volunteer Fire Department at 170 North Main
Street, Shavertown, Kingston Township, Pennsylvania 18708, and the
principal place of business of the Trucksville Volunteer Fire Department at
11 Carverton Road, Trucksville, Kingston Township, Pennsylvania 18708,
are hereby recognized and designated as the primary providers of fire
protection for Kingston Township.
§ 403. Effect of Ambulance Designations. [Ord. 2000-8, 1/10/2001,
§ III; as amended by Ord. 2009-5, 7/8/2009]
The Board of Supervisors shall provide, by resolution adopted from time
to time, for the designation of a primary provider of emergency medical
services for the Township of Kingston, which shall act as the first-due EMS
responder for all emergencies requiring basic life support care, treatment
or transportation in the Township of Kingston. Further, in like manner,
by resolution adopted from time to time, the Board of Supervisors shall
provide for the designation of a first-due EMS responder for all emergencies
requiring advanced life support (ALS) care, treatment or transportation in
the Township of Kingston. Further, the Board of Supervisors shall direct
the Luzerne County Communications Center to dispatch such designated
ambulance service and designated paramedic service as the first-due
provider for all emergencies arising within the limits of the Township of
Kingston. In addition, in such resolution, the Board of Supervisors shall
provide for one or more designation(s) of ambulance service(s) and
paramedic service(s) as substitute emergency service provider(s) in the
event that the designated emergency first-due responders are unavailable
for service for any reason. The designation of such substitute emergency
providers, together with all services to be provided by them, shall be
stated in a written agreement between the Township of Kingston and the
substitute emergency provider(s). In the absence of such designated
§ 401 HOME RULE CHARTER § 403
Ch:207
substitute emergency provider(s), the next-closest basic life support (BLS)
and/or advanced life support (ALS) emergency provider(s) shall be
dispatched.
§ 404. Effect of Fire Department Designations. [Ord. 2000-8, 1/10/
2001, § IV]
The Shavertown Volunteer Fire Department and the Truckville Volunteer
Fire Department, as the primary providers of fire service for all fire
emergencies, shall be the first-due fire service providers in their respective
service areas for fire emergencies. The Board of Supervisors directs the
Luzerne County Communications Center to dispatch these fire departments
as the first-due provider for all emergencies requiring the fire service within
the Township limits. In the event that Shavertown and Trucksville Volunteer
Fire Departments are unavailable for any reason, the next closest available
fire department should be dispatched, or any such second or third-due
provider as the fire departments may designate, or any fire department with
which Shavertown or Truckville Fire Department may have a mutual aid
agreement in place.
§ 403 KINGSTON CODE § 404
Ch:208
Chapter 8
FLOOD PLAINS
§ 404 HOME RULE CHARTER § 404
Ch:209

Part 1
REPEALER; AUTHORIZATION
§ 101. Repeal of Ordinance. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012, § 1]
Ordinance No. 1981-1, Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Part 1 through Part
8, inclusive, is hereby repealed in its entirety.
§ 102. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012, § 2]
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,23 delegated the
responsibility to local government units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Supervisors of Kingston Township does
hereby enact this Chapter, providing as follows.
23.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 102
Ch:211

Part 2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 201. Intent. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012, § 2.01]
It is the intent of the regulations as set forth in this Chapter to:
§ 202. Applicability. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012, § 2.02]
§ 203. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/
2012, § 2.03]
The regulations set forth in this Chapter supersede any other conflicting
provisions which may be in effect in floodplain areas. However, any other
Kingston Township ordinance provisions, except the provisions of
Ordinance No. 1981-1, Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Part 1 through Part
8, inclusive, which is repealed in its entirety hereby, shall remain in full
force and effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive. If
there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this Chapter, the more
restrictive provisions(s) shall apply.
§ 204. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/
2012, § 2.04]
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and State floodplain management requirements.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within Kingston Township unless a permit has
been first obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
2. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
1. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this Chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This Chapter does
not imply that areas outside any floodplain areas or that land uses
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 204
Ch:213
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
2. This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of Kingston Township
or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on the provisions of this Chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 204 KINGSTON CODE § 204
Ch:214
Part 3
DEFINITIONS
§ 301. General Interpretation. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012, § 3.01]
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this Chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 302. Specific Definitions. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012, § 3.02]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood").
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, and A1-30 indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
§ 301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 302
Ch:215
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse, and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in States which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 302 KINGSTON CODE § 302
Ch:216
area, used solely for the parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this Chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after November 2, 2012, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after April 1,
1988, and before November 2, 2012, is subject to the zoning ordinance
in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided that the start of
construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERMIT — A zoning permit which is required by the Kingston Township
Zoning Ordinance for the use of property as set forth in the applicable
provisions of the Kingston Township Zoning Ordinance relating to the
application and grant of zoning permits. The regulations contained within
this Chapter shall be deemed to be supplemental as an overlay to the
underlying regulations contained in the Zoning District in which a property
is located.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
§ 302 HOME RULE CHARTER § 302
Ch:217
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single chassis;
not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE), plus
a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, AI-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was commenced
within 180 days from the date of the permit and shall be completed within
12 months after the date of issuance of the permit, unless a time extension
is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation,
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading,
and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on
the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above the ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
§ 302 KINGSTON CODE § 302
Ch:218
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the State floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the applicable floodplain management regulations of
Kingston Township set forth in this Chapter. A structure or other
development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other
evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3),
(e)(4) or (e)(5) and within this Chapter is presumed to be in violation until
such time as that documentation is provided.
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement.
This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage
(or repetitive loss when a repetitive loss provision is used) regardless of
the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include
any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
A.
Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement as defined in this Chapter must
comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause
removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the
Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any
exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
B.
§ 302 HOME RULE CHARTER § 302
Ch:219

Part 4
ADMINISTRATION
§ 401. Designation of Floodplain Administrator. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/
10/2012 § 4.01]
§ 402. Permits Required. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012 § 4.02]
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of Kingston Township.
§ 403. Specific Duties and Responsibilities of Floodplain
Administrator. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012 § 4.03]
1. The Zoning Officer of Kingston Township is hereby appointed to
administer and enforce the provisions of this Chapter and is referred to
herein as the "floodplain administrator."
2. General Duties of Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain
Administrator may A) fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in
these regulations, B) delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in
these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners,
inspectors, and other employees, or C) upon approval of the Board of
Supervisors enter into a written agreement or written contract with
another agency or private sector entity to administer specific provisions
of these regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by
another entity shall not relieve the municipality of its responsibilities
pursuant to the participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44
CFR Section 59.22.
3. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Kingston Township
Manager, or another person designated by the Board of Supervisors as
an interim Flood Administrator, until the appointment of or the return
to duty of the Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this Chapter and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by State and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended); and the United States
Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be
issued until this determination has been made.
§ 401 HOME RULE CHARTER § 403
Ch:221
§ 404. Application Procedures and Requirements. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/
10/2012 § 4.04]
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
issues can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this Chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board of Supervisors for
whatever action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated with
the requirements of this Chapter, including, but not limited to,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to the FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
I. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be temporarily delegated to
another person designated by the Board of Supervisors. However, the
ultimate responsibility lies with the person identified in the Floodplain
Ordinance as the Floodplain Administrator.
J. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 International Building Code and the 2009
International Residential Code or latest revisions thereof.
1. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by Kingston Township.
Such application shall contain the following:
A. Name and address of the applicant.
§ 403 KINGSTON CODE § 404
Ch:222
B. Name and address of the owner of the land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
C. Name and address of the contractor.
D. Site location, including address.
E. A listing of other permits required.
F. A brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including
a breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the
building before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
G. A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
2. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform to the requirements of this Chapter and all
other applicable codes and ordinances;
B. All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
D. Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
E. Building materials are flood-resistant;
F. Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
G. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and/or
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
3. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
A. A completed zoning permit application form.
B. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale, and date;
§ 404 HOME RULE CHARTER § 404
Ch:223
(2) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(3) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
C. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(1) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(2) The elevation of the base flood;
(3) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 International Building Code or the 2009
International Residential Code.
D. The following data and documentation:
(1) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood elevation.
(2) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(3) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within a special floodplain area, as defined
herein, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the base flood elevation more
than one foot at any point.
(4) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
§ 404 KINGSTON CODE § 404
Ch:224
§ 405. Review by County Conservation District. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/
2012 § 4.05]
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 406. Review of Application by Others. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012
§ 4.06]
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
(5) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
"Storage," as defined herein, and "Development Which May
Endanger Human Life," as defined herein,24 including:
(a) The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in § 507F (Storage) and § 508
(Development Which May Endanger Human Life) which
are intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
(b) A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
during a base flood of the dangerous materials or
substances listed in § 508.
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
E. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to
Kingston Township, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
24.Editor's Note: See § 507F, Storage, and § 508, Development Which May Endanger Human
Life, respectively.
§ 404 HOME RULE CHARTER § 407
Ch:225
§ 407. Changes. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012 § 4.07]
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the
applicant to the Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 408. Placards. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012 § 4.08]
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit and the date of
its issuance and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 409. Start of Construction. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012 § 4.09]
§ 410. Enforcement. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012 § 4.10]
1. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within 12
months after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall
expire, unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The actual start of construction means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
2. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for
the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request.
1. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
Chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
§ 407 KINGSTON CODE § 410
Ch:226
§ 411. Appeals. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012, § 4.11]
A. Be in writing;
B. Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
C. Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for the
performance of any act it requires;
D. Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this State;
E. Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
2. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this Chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall pay a fine to
Kingston Township of not less than $25 nor more than $600 plus costs
of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are
hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this Chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this Chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue, and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated in noncompliance with this Chapter may be declared by the
Board of Supervisors to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
1. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
Chapter may appeal to the Kingston Township Zoning Hearing Board.
Such appeal must be filed in writing within 30 days after the decision,
determination or action of the Floodplain Administrator.
2. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall convene a
hearing in accordance with the procedures set in Part 5, hereof, and the
Kingston Township Zoning Ordinance.
3. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Kingston Township Zoning
Hearing Board may seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as
provided by the laws of Pennsylvania, including the Pennsylvania Flood
Plain Management Act.
§ 410 HOME RULE CHARTER § 411
Ch:227

Part 5
IDENTIFICATION OF FLOODPLAIN AREAS
§ 501. Designation of Floodplain Areas. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012,
§ 5.01]
§ 502. Description and Special Requirements of Identified
Floodplain Areas. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012, § 5.02]
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
1. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of Kingston Township
classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs)
dated November 2, 2012, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study.
2. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by Kingston Township and
declared to be a part of this Chapter.
A. The Floodway Area/District identified as a floodway in the FIS, which
represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more than one
foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas which
have been identified in other available studies or sources of information
for those special floodplain areas where no floodway has been identified
in the FIS.
(1) Within any floodway area, encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development,
shall not be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection regional office.
B. The AE Area/District without floodway shall be those areas identified as
an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for
which base flood elevations have been provided in the FIS but no
floodway has been delineated.
(1) No permit shall be granted for any construction, development, use,
or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway unless it is
§ 501 HOME RULE CHARTER § 502
Ch:229
§ 503. Changes in Identification of Area. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012,
§ 5.03]
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Kingston
Township Board of Supervisors where studies or information provided by a
qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision. However,
prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the
date such information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of
the changes by submitting technical or scientific data.
§ 504. Boundary Disputes. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012 § 5.04]
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Kingston Township Floodplain
Administrator, and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development would not, together with all other existing and
anticipated development, increase the base flood elevation than
one foot at any point.
(2) No new construction or development shall be located within the
area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse, unless a permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection regional office.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no onepercent-
annual-chance flood elevations have been provided. For these
areas, elevation and floodway information from other Federal, State, or
other acceptable source shall be used when available. Where other
acceptable information is not available, the elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site. In lieu
of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine
the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the municipality.
D. The Shallow Flooding Area/District shall be those areas identified as
Zones AO and AH on the FIRM and in the FIS. These areas are subject
to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance shallow flooding where
average depths are between one foot and three feet. In Zones AO and
AH, drainage paths shall be established to guide floodwaters around
and away from structures on slopes.
§ 502 KINGSTON CODE § 504
Ch:230
may appeal to the Kingston Township Zoning Hearing Board. The burden of
proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 505. Technical Provisions. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012 § 5.05]
1. General.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities
which may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality and until all required permits or approvals have
been first obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection regional office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the
activity will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of
the watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and Pennsylvania Department of
Community and Economic Development shall be notified prior
to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
B. Technical or scientific data shall be submitted by Kingston
Township to FEMA for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) as soon as
practicable but within six months of any new construction,
development, or other activity resulting in changes in the BFE. The
situations when an LOMR or a Conditional Letter of Map Revision
(CLOMR) is required are:
(1) Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway; or
(2) Any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and AE without a
designated floodway which will cause a rise of more than one
foot in the base flood elevation; or
(3) Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited
to installing culverts and bridges).
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed
within any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict
compliance with the provisions contained in this Chapter and any
other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
D. Within any identified floodplain area, as defined herein, new
construction or development shall be located within the area
measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse.
§ 504 HOME RULE CHARTER § 506
Ch:231
§ 506. Elevation and Floodproofing Requirements. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/
10/2012 § 5.06]
1. Residential Structures.
A. In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
B. In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 502C of this Chapter.
C. In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
D. The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405 as amended) shall be utilized.
2. Nonresidential Structures.
A. In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(1) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(2) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
B. In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 502C of this Chapter.
C. In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have its lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the FIRM.
D. Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
§ 506 KINGSTON CODE § 506
Ch:232
accordance with the WI or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which States that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above-referenced standards.
E. The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405 as amended) shall be utilized.
3. Space Below the Lowest Floor.
A. Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall
be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
B. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
4. Historic Structures. See the definition of "substantial improvement" in
Part 3 for requirements for the substantial improvement of any historic
structures.
5. Accessory Structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
A. The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
§ 506 HOME RULE CHARTER § 506
Ch:233
§ 507. Design and Construction Standards. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/
2012 § 5.07]
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
B. Floor area shall not exceed 750 square feet.
C. The structure will have a low damage potential.
D. The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
E. Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
F. Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
G. Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
H. The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical foot to two horizontal feet, unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
§ 506 KINGSTON CODE § 507
Ch:234
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage Facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall insure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities and Systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area, except in strict compliance with all State
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348 (Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages), and the
"International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
D. Other Utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 508 (Development Which May Endanger Human Life),
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation and/or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of Buildings and Structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
§ 507 HOME RULE CHARTER § 507
Ch:235
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, Walls and Ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and Adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical Components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel Supply Systems. All gas and oil-supply systems shall be designed
to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code Coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as
§ 507 KINGSTON CODE § 507
Ch:236
§ 508. Development Which May Endanger Human Life. [Ord.
2012-5, 10/10/2012 § 5.08]
amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this Chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of
this Chapter:
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612 and 3402 and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109 and R323, Appendix
AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J.
1. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development, as required by the Act, any new or
substantially improved structure, which will be used for the production
or storage of any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or
will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of
more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or will
involve the production, storage, or use of any amount of radioactive
substances shall be subject to the provisions of this section and in
addition to all other applicable provisions. The following is a list of
materials and substances that are considered dangerous to human life:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Sodium
Sulphur and sulphur products
§ 507 HOME RULE CHARTER § 508
Ch:237
§ 509. Special Requirements for Subdivisions. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/
2012, § 5.09]
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard areas
where base flood elevation data are not available shall be supported by
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 510. Special Requirements for Manufactured Homes. [Ord.
2012-5, 10/10/2012, § 5.10]
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides)
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise
regulated
2. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection 1, above, shall be prohibited.
3. Within any floodplain area, any new or substantially improved structure
of the kind described in Subsection 1, above, shall be prohibited within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse.
4. Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in Subsection 1, above, shall
be elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up to
at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation and designed to prevent
pollution from the structure or activity during the course of a base flood
elevation. Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below
the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (United
States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992),
or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
1. Within any FW (Floodway Area), manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
2. Within any approximate floodplain or special floodplain area,
manufactured homes shall be prohibited within the area measured 50
feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
3. Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured homes,
and any improvements thereto, shall be:
A. Placed on a permanent foundation.
§ 508 KINGSTON CODE § 510
Ch:238
§ 511. Special Requirements for Recreational Vehicles. [Ord.
2012-5, 10/10/2012, § 5.11]
Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
§ 512. Prohibited Uses. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012, § 5.12]
The development of the following uses and/or activities, including new
construction, expansion, enlargement, and/or substantial improvement, is
hereby prohibited in any area of a designated one-hundred-year floodplain:
§ 513. Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas. [Ord.
2012-5, 10/10/2012, § 5.13]
B. Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
C. Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
4. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development's "Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, shall apply and
34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through 405.
5. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34
Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturer's standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the unit's proposed installation.
A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
C. Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 510.
A. Hospitals.
B. Nursing homes (public or private).
C. Jails, prisons, or any similar detention facility.
D. Manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision.
1. Existing Structures. The provisions of this Chapter do not require any
changes or improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures.
However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the
provisions of § 574.2 (Variance Procedures and Conditions) shall apply.
§ 510 HOME RULE CHARTER § 513
Ch:239
§ 514. Variances. [Ord. 2012-5, 10/10/2012, § 5.14]
2. Improvements. The following provisions shall apply whenever any
improvement is made to an existing structure located within any
identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any floodway area that would cause any increase in
the elevation of the base flood elevation.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any special floodplain area that would, together
with all other existing and anticipated development, increase the
BFE more than one foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or
more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial
improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with
the provisions of this Chapter.
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
E. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter.
1. General. If compliance with any of the requirements of this Chapter
would result in an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder,
developer or landowner, the Zoning Hearing Board of Kingston
Township may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of
the requirements.
2. Variance Procedures and Conditions. Requests for variances shall be
considered by the Zoning Hearing Board of Kingston Township in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 411 (Appeals) of this
Chapter and the following:
A. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any identified floodplain that would cause
any increase the base flood elevation.
B. No variance shall be granted for any use, activity and/or
development that is prohibited under § 512 (Prohibited Uses) of
this Chapter.
C. Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
§ 513 KINGSTON CODE § 514
Ch:240
regulated by § 508 (Development Which May Endanger Human
Life).
D. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
E. In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board of Kingston
Township shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and
safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare and to achieve the objectives of this
Chapter.
F. Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board of
Kingston Township shall notify the applicant in writing that:
(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(2) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
G. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board
of Kingston Township shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(1) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(2) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(3) That the granting of the variance will:
(a) Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense; nor
(b) Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public
or conflict with any other applicable State or local
ordinances and regulations.
H. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Zoning Hearing Board of Kingston Township.
In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall
be included in the annual report to the FEMA.
3. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual-chance flood.
§ 514 HOME RULE CHARTER § 514
Ch:241
Chapter 9
GRADING AND EXCAVATING
Chapter 10
HEALTH AND SAFETY
§ 514 KINGSTON CODE § 514
Ch:242
Part 1
STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 101. Repealer. [Ord. 2009-8, 9/9/2009]
The Township of Kingston Ordinance No. 1985-1 (Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 10, Part 1) (Storage of Motor Vehicles), and all amendments
thereof, are hereby repealed in their entirety
§ 102. Enactment. [Ord. 2009-8, 9/9/2009]
This Part 1 is enacted as Ordinance No. 2009-8 (Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 10, Part 1) and provides, inter alia, for the regulation of the storage
of motor vehicles.
§ 103. Definitions. [Ord. 2009-8, 9/9/2009]
As used in this Part 1, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any type of mechanical device, propelled by a motor,
in which persons or property may be transported upon public streets or
highways, including trailers or semitrailers pulled thereby.
NUISANCE — Any condition which shall constitute a threat or potential
threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of the Township
of Kingston, within the purview of the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
OWNER — The owner, agent or custodian of the real property on which
motor vehicles are stored, whether an individual, partnership, association
or corporation.
PERSON — A natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
§ 104. Prohibited Motor Vehicle Storage. [Ord. 2009-8, 9/9/2009]
1. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, or lessee of any real property
situated in the Township of Kingston to park, keep, maintain, or store
upon the open and unenclosed real property of such person, owner or
lessee any inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle or any motor vehicle
which shall be in a state of major disassembly, major disrepair, or in the
process of being stripped or dismantled or unable to move under its
own power.
2. A motor vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul,
including painting and body work, provided that such work is
performed inside a fully enclosed structure or similarly enclosed area
approved for such purposes by the Zoning Officer and Code
Enforcement Officer of the Township of Kingston after an inspection of
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 104
Ch:243
the structure or enclosure. In all such cases, the motor vehicle shall not
contain any gasoline, oil or other flammable fluid.
3. In addition to the provisions of Subsection 1 above, the storage of any
motor vehicle owned by any person upon any open and unenclosed real
property situated in the Township of Kingston for a period of 30
consecutive days in any calendar year is prohibited if such motor
vehicle has any of the following defects:
A. Broken windshields, mirrors or other glass, with sharp edges.
B. One or more flat or open tires or tubes, which could permit vermin
harborage.
C. Missing doors, windows, hood, trunk, or other body parts, which
could permit animal harborage.
D. Any body parts with sharp edges, including holes resulting from
rust.
E. Missing tires, resulting in unsafe suspension of the motor vehicle.
F. Upholstery which is torn or open, that could permit animal and/or
vermin harborage.
G. Broken headlamps or taillamps with sharp edges.
H. Disassembled chassis parts apart from the motor vehicle stored in a
disorderly fashion or loose in or on the vehicle.
I. Protruding sharp objects from the chassis.
J. Broken vehicle frame suspended from the ground in an unstable
manner.
K. Leaking or damaged oil pan or gas tank, which could cause fire or
explosion.
L. Exposed battery containing acid.
M. Inoperable locking mechanism for doors or trunk.
N. Open or damaged floor boards, including trunk and firewall.
O. Damaged bumpers pulled away from the perimeter of the vehicle.
P. Broken grill with protruding edges.
Q. Loose or damaged metal rims and clips.
R. Broken radio or communication equipment antennas with sharp
points.
S. Suspended or unstable supports.
§ 104 KINGSTON CODE § 104
Ch:244
§ 105. Enforcement. [Ord. 2009-8, 9/9/2009]
This Part 1 shall be enforced by the Kingston Township Police Department.
§ 106. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 2009-8, 9/9/2009]
§ 107. Effect on other regulations. [Ord. 2009-8, 9/9/2009]
This Part 1 supersedes and has precedence over the provisions of Chapter
27, Zoning, of the Township of Kingston, the provisions of Chapter 5, Part
5, Property Maintenance Code (International Property Maintenance Code),
and the provisions of any other ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation
relating to the storage of motor vehicles in the Township of Kingston.
T. Such other conditions or defects which could threaten the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township of Kingston and
could create a public nuisance.
1. A violation of any provision of this Part 1 shall constitute a summary
offense and shall be enforced by the commencement of an action before
a District Justice by the Kingston Township Police Department in the
manner provided for enforcement of summary offenses under the
applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure
and the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 166601(C.1)(2), or any
amendment thereof. If so designated by the Board of Supervisors, the
Solicitor of the Township of Kingston may assume charge of the
prosecution of such violation(s) in a manner consistent with the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure relating to trial of summary
cases, as the same may be amended from time to time.
2. Any person, who shall be found to have violated any provision of this
Part 1, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 and all costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of said fine, be subject to imprisonment to the extent allowed
by law for the punishment of summary offenses. Each day that a
violation of this Part 1 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
3. In addition to all other remedies provided herein for violations of this
Part 1, the Township of Kingston shall have the right to proceed in any
court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of obtaining an
injunction, restraining order, or other appropriate remedy to compel
compliance with the provisions of this Part 1. The remedies provided
herein for the enforcement of this Part 1, or any remedy provided by
law, shall not be deemed mutually exclusive; rather they may be
employed simultaneously or consecutively, at the option of the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 104 HOME RULE CHARTER § 108
Ch:245
§ 108. Continuation; Effect on Pending Actions. [Ord. 2009-8, 9/9/
2009]
The provisions of the Township of Kingston Code of Ordinances, so far as
they are the same as those ordinances and regulations in force immediately
prior to the adoption of this Part 1, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and regulations and not as a new enactment. The provisions of
this Part 1 shall not affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted
to enforce any of the prior ordinances or regulations except as provided by
law.
§ 108 KINGSTON CODE § 108
Ch:246
Part 2
VECTOR CONTROL
§ 201. Definitions. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
As used in this Part, terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A detached structure which is not used or not
intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants and which is
located on or partially on any premises.
BREEDING AREA — Any condition which provides the necessary
environment for the birth or hatching of vectors.
COLLECTION OF WATER — Water contained in ditches, pools, ponds,
streams, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults,
fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs, urns, cans, boxes,
bottles, tubs, buckets, roof gutters, tanks of flush closets, reservoirs,
vessels, receptacles of any kind, or other containers or devices which may
hold water.
COVERED RECEPTACLE — A container of metal, wood, heavy-duty plastic
or synthetic material of solid construction, with a tight-fitting cover secured
against wind and leakage.
DER — Department of Environmental Resources, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
DILAPIDATED — Fallen into partial ruin or decay.
DISPOSAL — Storage, collection, disposal or handling of refuse.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of vectors by eliminating
their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that
may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, fogging,
larviciding, trapping or by any other recognized and legal vector control
elimination methods approved by the local or State authority having such
administrative authority.
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking or consumption of food.
HARBORAGE — Any place where vectors can live, nest or seek shelter.
OCCUPANT — Any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or
eating in or actually having possession of a dwelling unit or a rooming unit;
in dwelling units a guest will not be considered an occupant.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others shall
have:
Legal title to any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or
1.
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 201
Ch:247
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, or
corporation.
REFUSE — All solid wastes, except human body wastes, and including
handling of refuse.
RUBBISH — Glass, metal, paper, plant growth, wood, or nonputrescible
solid wastes.
VECTOR — A rodent, arthropod, or insect capable of transmitting a disease
or infection, including but not limited to rats, mosquitoes, cockroaches, flies
and ticks.
VECTORPROOFING — A form of construction to prevent ingress or egress
of vectors to or from a given space or building or gaining access to food,
water, or harborage, including, but not limited to, rat-proofing, fly-proofing
and mosquito-proofing.
§ 202. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
It shall be unlawful:
Charge, care, or control of any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit, as
owner or agent of the owner, or an executor, administrator, trustee or
guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing
the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this
ordinance and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto,
to the same extent as if he were the owner.
2.
1. For any person to deposit or to knowingly permit any person acting as
agent, employee, or servant of said person to deposit any refuse, offal,
pomace, dead animals, decaying matter, or organic substance of any
kind in or upon any private lot, building, structure, accessory structure,
premises, or in or upon any street, avenue, alley, parkway, ravine, ditch,
gutter, or into any of the waters of the Commonwealth so that the same
shall or may afford food, harborage or breeding areas for vectors.
2. For any person to deposit or permit to accumulate in or upon any
premises, improved or vacant, or on any open lot, or alley, any lumber,
boxes, barrels, bottles, cans, glass, scrap iron, wire, metal articles,
pipe, broken stone or cement, broken crockery, broken plaster, or
rubbish of any kind, unless the same may be kept in covered
receptacles or placed on open racks that are elevated not less than 18
inches above the ground, and evenly piled or stacked; or unless
disposed of in a manner approved by DER.
3. To maintain a junkyard or a place for the dumping or wrecking or
disassembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any
kind or of any of the parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of any
machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or by other
persons, in such a manner as to afford harborages or breeding areas for
vectors.
§ 201 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:248
§ 203. Responsibilities of Owners and Occupants. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/
13/1985]
§ 204. Vector-Proofing. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
4. To store refuse in containers other than covered receptacles, which
shall be kept clean by rinsing and draining as often as necessary so as
not to provide food or breeding areas for vectors.
5. To dump, burn, bury, destroy, or otherwise dispose of refuse except at
an approved refuse disposal site.
6. To collect, haul, transport, or convey garbage in open, unenclosed,
nonleak-proof vehicles.
7. To construct, maintain or use a sewage system, privy, urinal, cesspool,
or other receptacle for human excrement so that vectors may have
access to the excrementitious matter contained therein.
8. To have, keep, maintain, cause or permit any collection of standing or
flowing water except for agricultural or industrial purposes in which
mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water
is treated or maintained so as effectually to prevent such breeding.
1. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall
maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of
the dwelling and premises thereof, in such a manner as to prevent
breeding areas and harborages for vectors.
2. Every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than
one dwelling unit shall be responsible for extermination within his
dwelling unit. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to
maintain a dwelling in a rodent-proof or reasonable insect-proof
condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any
dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two
or more dwelling units, extermination shall be the responsibility of the
owner.
1. Any dwelling, building, structure, accessory structure, premises or any
other place shall be required to be vector-proofed when found to
provide harborage or breeding areas for vectors, upon written notice at
least 10 days prior to a hearing, and upon hearing by the Board of
Supervisors with an opportunity for the owner to be present, to crossexamine
witnesses, and to receive a written decision to be rendered
within 10 days after the hearing and with a court appeal.
2. It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, contractor, public utility
company, plumber or any other person to remove and fail to restore in
like condition the vector-proofing from any building, structure or
accessory structure for any purpose.
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 205
Ch:249
§ 205. Private Vector Control Programs. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
A program plan and specifications for private vector control programs
shall be required to be submitted by the owner to the Township upon
determination of the necessity by the Vector Control Program Director.
Said determination shall be served on the owner personally or by certified
mail. Within 10 days of said service the owner may contest the necessity
of the program by requesting a hearing to be conducted in accordance
with § 204 of this Part. Said program plan shall be submitted by the owner
to the Board of Supervisors within 10 days of notice. The program plan
shall state the type of vectors to be controlled, the name of the company
contracted to carry out the program, if any, and any and all work to be
conducted in an effort to control said vectors. The Vector Control Program
Director shall review the program plan, and if the plan is found to be
inadequate or incomplete, additional information may be required as well
as additional control methods. The owner may request a hearing on the
Director's determination in accordance with § 204 of this Part.
§ 206. Authority to Abate Vector Problems. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
§ 207. Penalties. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as amended by Ord. 97-3,
11/12/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
1. From and after passage of this ordinance, the Township of Kingston
and/or a representative of the vector control program is empowered to
make periodic inspections of the interior and exterior of all dwellings,
buildings, structures, and accessory structures, premises, collections of
water, or any other places to determine full compliance with this
ordinance, and to determine evidence of vector infestation and the need
for vector-proofing or additions or repairs to existing vector-proofing.
2. Whenever it shall be determined by the Board of Supervisors that any
dwelling, building, structure, accessory structure, premises, collection
of water, or any other place is in violation of this Part, a notice shall be
issued setting forth the alleged violation(s), and advising the owner,
occupant, operator, or agent that such violation(s) must be corrected.
The time for the correction of said violation(s) must be given as well as
the necessary methods to be employed in the correction.
3. Whenever any violation(s) shall fail to be corrected within the time set
forth, and an extension of time is not deemed to be necessary, the
Municipality may proceed to abate the violation(s) in the manner
provided by law.
4. The owner shall have the right to appeal from said determination by
hearing in accordance with § 204 of this Part 2.
§ 205 KINGSTON CODE § 207
Ch:250
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 207 HOME RULE CHARTER § 207
Ch:251

Part 3
VEGETATION NUISANCE
§ 301. Vegetative Growth a Nuisance Under Certain Conditions.
[Ord. 1985-2, 9/11/1985, § 1; as amended by Ord. 94-8, 5/11/1994,
§ 1]
No person, firm or corporation, owning or occupying any improved property
within the Township of Kingston, including, but not limited to, residential
lots and lots lying within residential subdivisions, shall permit any grass or
weeds or any vegetation whatsoever, not edible or planted for some useful
or ornamental purpose, to grow or remain upon such premises including,
but not limited to, within drainage swales or stormwater detention basins,
so as to exceed a height of six inches, or to throw off any unpleasant or
noxious odor, or to conceal any filthy deposit, or to create or produce pollen.
Any grass, weeds or other vegetation growing upon any such premises in
the Township in violation of any of the provisions of this Section is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness
and comfort of the inhabitants of the Township.
§ 302. Property Owners to Remove, Trim or Cut Grass, Weeds or
Other Vegetation, Responsibility of Occupants. [Ord. 1985-2, 9/11/
1985, § 2]
The owner of any such premises, whether occupied by the owner or not,
shall be responsible to remove, trim or cut all vegetation growing or
remaining upon such premises in violation of the provisions of the first
section of this Part. Both the owner and the occupant, shall be jointly
responsible for the compliance with this Part.
§ 303. Notice to Owner and Occupants of Premises. [Ord. 1985-2, 9/
11/1985, § 3]
In addition to the penalties as hereafter imposed in this Part, the Township
Zoning Officer or any officer or employee of the Township designated
thereby for the purpose, is hereby authorized to give notice, by personal
service or by United States Certified Mail to the owner or the occupant,
or either of them of a violation of the terms and conditions of this Part,
directing and requiring such occupant or owner or both of the them to
remove, trim, spray or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation, so as to conform
to the requirements of this Part, within five days after issuance of such
notice.
§ 304. Violation of Provisions of This Part. [Ord. 1985-2, 9/11/1985,
§ 4; as amended by Ord. 97-3, 11/12/1997]
If any such owner and/or occupant shall neglect to comply with such notice
within the period of time stated herein, the Township authorities shall have
the following remedies:
§ 301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 304
Ch:253
1. They may remove, spray, trim or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation so
as to comply with the provisions of this Part; and the reasonable cost
thereof, together with an additional penalty of 10% of reasonable costs
may be collected by the Township from such owner or occupant as a
penalty under the provisions of this Part, or in any other manner
provided by law. This right as herein vested in the Township shall be in
addition to penalties prescribed by the provisions of this Part for the
conviction of the owner or occupant as aforesaid to comply with the
terms of this Part.
2. They may initiate summary proceedings against any person, firm or
corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this Part who,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
Each day that a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this
Part which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 304 KINGSTON CODE § 304
Ch:254
Part 4
IDENTIFICATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
§ 401. Identification Requirements. [Ord. 87-2, 6/10/1987, § 1]
Hazards of materials on premises in the Township of Kingston shall be
identified by color and order of severity indicated numerically on placards
made of metal or plastic 18 inches by 18 inches in size and paid for and
installed by the owner or occupant of the premises on the exterior of any
structure containing the same.
1. Identification of the health hazard shall be made on placards indicated
hereinbefore which is blue in color and marked numerically as to
severity as follows:
A. Materials which on very short exposure could cause death or major
residual injury even though prompt medical treatment was given is
to be marked No. 4.
B. Materials which on short exposure could cause serious temporary
or residual injury even though prompt medical treatment was given
is to be marked No. 3.
C. Materials which on intense or continued exposure could cause
temporary incapacity or possible residual injury unless prompt
medical treatment is given is to be marked No. 2.
D. Materials which on exposure would cause irritation but only minor
residual injury even if no treatment is given to be marked No. 1.
E. If there is no special hazard, it is to be marked zero.
2. Identification of inflammability shall be made on a placard as indicated
hereinbefore which is red in color and marked numerically as to
severity as follows:
A. Materials which will rapidly or completely vaporize at atmospheric
pressure and normally ambient temperature which are readily
dispersed in air and which will burn steadily is to be marked No. 4.
B. Liquids and solids that can be ignited under almost all ambient
temperature conditions is to be marked No. 3.
C. Materials that must be moderately heated or exposed to relatively
high ambient temperatures before ignition can occur is to be
market No. 2.
D. Materials that must be preheated before ignition can occur is to be
marked No. 1.
E. If there is no special hazard it is to be marked zero.
§ 401 HOME RULE CHARTER § 401
Ch:255
§ 402. Materials Safety Data Sheet. [Ord. 87-2, 6/10/1987, § 2]
The owner or lessee of any premises upon which hazardous materials are
stored or otherwise maintained shall deliver to the Kingston Township
Police Department and the fire companies within Kingston Township within
10 days of the placement of hazardous materials upon any premises a
Materials Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) with respect to each hazardous
material. Said Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) shall be a written
document prepared by a manufacturer, supplier, or importer, as prepared
in conformity with the "Pennsylvania Right to Know Law", Act of October
5, 1984, P.L. 734, No. 159, 35 P.S. § 7317, for the purpose of transmitting
information concerning a chemical.
3. Identification of reactivity shall be made on a placard as indicated
hereinbefore which is yellow in color and marked numerically as to
severity as follows:
A. Materials which in themselves are readily capable of detonation or
of explosive decomposition or reaction at normal temperature and
pressure is to be marked No. 4.
B. Materials which in themselves are capable of detonation or of
explosive reaction but require a strong initiating source or which
must be heated under a confinement before ignition or which react
explosively with water is to be marked No. 3.
C. Materials which in themselves are normally unstable and readily
undergo violent chemical change but do not detonate and also
materials which may violently react with water or which may form
potentially explosive mixtures is to be marked No. 2.
D. Materials which in themselves are normally stable which can
become unstable at elevated temperatures and pressures or which
may react with water with some release of energy but not violently
is to be marked No. 1.
E. If there is no special hazard, it is to be marked zero.
4. Identification of materials indicating unusual reactivity with water shall
be made on a placard as indicated hereinbefore which is white in color.
5. The aforesaid placards are to be installed at least on two sides of the
building in which the hazardous materials are contained and of which at
least one of the placards can be easily seen and identified by anyone
without trespassing on said premises.
6. The Fire Safety and Prevention Officer or his representatives of the
Township of Kingston shall inspect all buildings containing hazardous
materials whether they are commercial, industrial, or domestic, at least
once a year, to ascertain whether there is compliance with the
provisions of this Part.
§ 401 KINGSTON CODE § 403
Ch:256
§ 403. Penalties. [Ord. 87-2, 6/10/1987, § 3; and by Ord. 97-3, 11/12/
1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 403 HOME RULE CHARTER § 403
Ch:257

Part 5
REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES FOR PROTECTIVE ACTION
SERVICES
§ 501. Definitions. [Ord. 90-22, 12/12/1990, § 1]
EXTRAORDINARY EXPENSES — Those expenses, and those related costs
and fees that are incurred by the Township, local, State or Federal
department or agency, emergency services organization and from the
private sector for actual costs or charges for labor, materials, and any other
costs associated with the use of specialized extinguishing or abatement
agent, chemical neutralizer or similar equipment or material that is
employed to monitor, extinguish, confine, neutralize, contain, clean, or
remove any hazardous material that is or may be involved in a fire, or
released into the air, ground or water or the potential threat of any release
or fire, and any and all activities associated with the implementation of a
protective action (i.e. evacuation) to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
EXTRAORDINARY SERVICE — A service performed by any Township
department or employees, or any public or private sector organization
agency or company directly associated with mitigating the hazard or
potential hazard or involved in providing services to implement a protective
action. Extraordinary services may include, but are not limited to, the
abatement and disposition of hazardous materials, spills, releases, or the
threat of spills or releases of hazardous materials, utility line breaks or
leakages, and other imminent or perceived or potential threats to the
health, safety and welfare of the public that may be detailed or
contemplated in the definition of "extraordinary expenses," above.
§ 502. Administration. [Ord. 90-22, 12/12/1990, § 2]
The Board of Supervisors of the Township or its designee shall collect all
fees as follows:
1. Fees and costs (including overhead costs) shall encompass all
personnel, equipment, materials and maintenance expenses in such a
form as to insure for full reimbursement for charges from both the
public and private sectors actually rendered.
2. Within 30 days of the date of the extraordinary or dangerous
occurrence giving rise to the extraordinary service, the affected public
agencies, department or private companies shall submit its
extraordinary service-related costs, fees, charges and expenses to the
Township Supervisors for review. At such time as all costs, fees, charges
and expenses related to the extraordinary service have been collected
and reviewed, but in any case not later than 60 days from the date of
determining the combined cost of rendering extraordinary services, the
Township Supervisors shall submit a bill for all costs, fees, charges and
expenses, to the owner, agent or manager of the vehicle or fixed facility
§ 501 HOME RULE CHARTER § 502
Ch:259
§ 503. Litigation. [Ord. 90-22, 12/12/1990, § 3]
The Township may enforce the provisions of this Part by civil action in
a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of any amounts due
hereunder, plus attorneys' fees or for any other relief that may be
appropriate.
§ 504. Emergency Services. [Ord. 90-22, 12/12/1990, § 4]
Nothing in this Part shall authorize any Township bureau, department, or
personnel or staff members to refuse or delay an emergency service to
any person, firm, organization or corporation, that has not reimbursed the
Township for extraordinary services. Furthermore, nothing in this Section
shall be construed to demand reimbursement to the Township for those
municipal services that are normally provided to Township residents and
others as a matter of the Township's general operating procedure, and for
which the levying of taxes, or the demand for reimbursement is normally
made.
which caused the need for extraordinary services, with a demand that
a full remittance be made within 30 days of receipt.
3. In cases of hardship, or where circumstances are such that a full
remittance cannot be made to the Township within the thirty-day
period, the Township Supervisors shall hereby authorize the Township
Solicitor to enter into negotiations with the owner or his agent for an
installment payment for a period of time not to exceed six months.
4. All monies received under the provisions of this Part shall be placed in
the General Fund and reimbursement be made to all public and private
sector departments, agencies which submitted related costs, fees,
charges and expenses for providing an extraordinary service as
outlined herein.
§ 502 KINGSTON CODE § 504
Ch:260
Part 6
TRANSFER OF FIRE INSURANCE PROCEEDS TO TOWNSHIP
§ 601. Township Manager. [Ord. 1992-15, 1/13/1993, § 1]
The Township Manager or his designee is hereby appointed as the
designated officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and
duties stated herein.
§ 602. Transfer of Insurance Proceeds. [Ord. 1992-15, 1/13/1993,
§ 2]
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the
Township of Kingston (hereinafter the "Municipality") where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds
$5,000, unless that named insured or insuring agent is furnished by the
Municipality with a municipal certificate pursuant to § 508(B) of Act 98 of
1992 and unless there is compliance with § 508(C) and (D) of Act 98 of 1992
and the provisions of this Part.
§ 603. Regulations. [Ord. 1992-15, 1/13/1993, § 3]
Where pursuant to § 508(B)(1)(I) of Act 98 of 1992, the Municipality issues
a certificate indicating that there are no delinquent taxes, assessments,
penalties or user charges against real property, the insuring agent shall pay
the claim of the named insured; provided, however, that if the loss as agreed
upon by the named insured and the insuring agent equals or exceeds 60%
of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building
restructure, the following procedures must be followed:
A. The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
designated officer of the Municipality in the aggregate of $1,000 for
each $20,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that amount of a claim,
this Section to be applied such that if the claim is $20,000 or less, the
amount transferred to the Municipality shall be $1,000; or,
B. If at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named insured
and the insuring agent, the name insured has submitted a contractor's
signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure, the insuring agent shall transfer to the
Municipality from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the
estimate.
C. The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rata basis by all companies,
associations or exchanges insuring the building or other structure.
D. After the transfer, the names insured may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
other structure, and the designated officer shall return the amount of
§ 601 HOME RULE CHARTER § 603
Ch:261
the funds transferred to the Municipality in excess of the estimate to
the named insured, if the Municipality has not commenced to remove,
repair or secure the building or other structure.
E. Upon receipt of proceeds under this Section, the Municipality shall do
the following:
(1) The designated officer shall place the proceeds in the separate fund
to be used solely as security against the total costs of removing,
repairing and securing the building or structure which are incurred
by the Municipality. Such costs shall include, without limitation,
any engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the
Township in connection with such removal, repair or securing of
the building or any proceedings related thereto; and,
(2) It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the Municipality with the name and address of
the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the
name and address of the named insured, the designated officer
shall contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have
been received by the Municipality and notify the named insured
that the procedures under this subsection shall be followed; and,
(3) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the Municipality and the required proof
of such completion received by the designated officer, and if the
Municipality has not incurred any costs or repairs, removal or
securing, the fund shall be returned to the named insured. If the
Municipality has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of
the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the
fund and if excess funds remain, the Municipality shall transfer the
remaining funds to the named insured; and,
(4) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
Municipality pursuant to this Section, and not returned to the
named insured, such interest shall belong to the Municipality. To
the extent that proceeds are returned to the named insured,
interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named
insured at the time that the proceeds are returned.
F. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Municipality to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to prohibit the Municipality and the
named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the
transfer of funds to the named insured of some other reasonable
disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
§ 603 KINGSTON CODE § 604
Ch:262
§ 604. Procedures and Regulations Established by Resolution. [Ord.
1992-15, 1/13/1993, § 4]
The Township of Kingston may, by resolution, adopt procedures and
regulations to implement Act 98 of 1992 and this Part and may by resolution
fix reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities or services
provided pursuant to Act 98 of 1992 and this Part including, but not limited
to, issuance of certificates and bills, performance of inspections and
opening separate fund accounts.
§ 605. Penalties. [Ord. 1992-15, 1/13/1993, § 5; as amended by Ord.
97-3, 11/12/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 604 HOME RULE CHARTER § 605
Ch:263

Part 7
OUTDOOR SOLID FUEL FURNACES
§ 701. Purpose. [Ord. 2008-1, 3/25/2008, § 1]
§ 702. Definitions. [Ord. 2008-1, 3/25/2008, § 2]
The following words or phrases, as the same are used herein or as the
same appear in the context hereof, unless otherwise indicated, shall have
the following meaning(s) ascribed to them in this part:
APPLIANCE — An outdoor solid fuel furnace and all appurtenances thereto,
including, but not limited to, all equipment and all components necessary
to and used in connection with the installation, use and maintenance of the
outdoor solid fuel furnace.
1. The Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Article 1,
Section 27, provides in pertinent part, that "the people shall have a
right to clean air"; and
2. In response to the enactment by the Congress of the United States of
the Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq., and in recognition of the
mandate of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the
Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has enacted the Air
Pollution Control Act, Act 1992-95, § 14, as amended, 35 P.S. § 4001 et
seq., which, in Section 4012 thereof, provides that a Township may
enact an ordinance(s) in respect to air pollution, so long as the
provisions of such ordinance(s) will not be less stringent than the
provisions of the "Air Pollution Control Act"; and
3. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Kingston has considered
with care certain publications, studies, reports, and advisories
prepared by international, national and state research and regulatory
agencies and organizations inquiring into the effects and impact of the
types of fuel used in and the scale and duration of the emissions
produced by outdoor solid fuel furnaces. Upon that basis, the Board of
Supervisors, while recognizing the economical alternatives to
conventional heating systems provided by outdoor solid fuel furnaces,
has determined that such appliances may create uncontrolled offensive
emissions of smoke, fumes, and odors into the ambient air, which can be
potentially detrimental to the health and safety of the residents of the
Township and can deprive neighboring residents of the rightful use and
enjoyment of their property. Accordingly, the Board of Supervisors of
the Township of Kingston, upon the enactment of this part, does hereby
establish and impose various restrictions upon the installation,
maintenance, use, and operation of outdoor solid fuel furnaces within
the Township of Kingston, so that such appliances do not create a
private or public nuisance and, further, for the purpose of securing and
promoting the health, comfort, convenience, safety and welfare of the
person and property of the residents of the Township.
§ 701 HOME RULE CHARTER § 702
Ch:265
EXISTING APPLIANCE — An appliance that has been installed, constructed,
used and maintained on or before the effective date of this part.
NEW APPLIANCE — An appliance that has been installed, constructed,
used, and maintained after the effective date of this part.
OUTDOOR SOLID FUEL FURNACE — Any equipment, structure, device or
associated apparatus and related appurtenances, which is installed, affixed,
or situated outdoors for the primary purpose of the combustion of approved
solid fuels to produce heat or energy by the distribution, through pipes,
of a fluid heated in the device and used as the primary or secondary or
supplementary heating system, which provides heat for interior space and/
or domestic water within a structure located on residential premises and
is not located within the structure to be heated or to be provided with hot
water.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, governmental entity or agency, enterprise or any other legal
entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and
duties.
SETBACK — The minimum horizontal distances between the front right-ofway
line or rear or side lines of any lot of parcel of land. When two or more
lots under one ownership are used, the exterior property line so grouped
shall be used is determining a setback.
STRUCTURE — A building constructed and used for human habitation,
housing of farm animals, or storage of equipment or materials of whatever
nature.
§ 703. Requirements for Installation, Maintenance and Use of
Outdoor Solid Fuel Furnaces. [Ord. 2008-1, 3/25/2008, § 3]
1. All existing appliances shall be inspected within 90 days of the effective
date of this part to determine compliance with the manufacturers'
installation specifications and use instructions in respect to its
electrical and plumbing equipment and components only. If the existing
appliance is determined as being used and maintained in compliance
with such manufacturer's electrical and plumbing installation
specifications and use instructions, the existing appliance shall be
registered and recorded in a registry permanently maintained by the
Township of Kingston. Such registry shall duly and accurately note the
appliance's owner(s), street location, the placement of the appliance on
the lot of the owner, the manufacturer, the date of installation, the date
of inspection, and the date of the registration of the appliance. Such
registry shall be available for public inspection upon request.
2. Any new appliance shall be inspected to determine compliance with its
complete manufacturer's installation and use instructions within 30
days of the completion of its installation. If the installation and use of
the new appliance are determined to be in full compliance with such
complete manufacturer's installations and use instructions, the owner
§ 702 KINGSTON CODE § 703
Ch:266
§ 704. Emissions From Outdoor Solid Fuel Furnaces as a Public
Nuisance. [Ord. 2008-1, 3/25/2008, § 4]
of the new appliance shall be granted a permit, as provided in § 705 of
this part.
3. The location of all new appliances shall be in such place on a parcel or
lot of land as is recommended in the manufacturers' installation
specifications and use instructions in respect to setbacks from the lot
lines of adjoining property owners, but in no event shall any new
appliance be located less than 25 feet from the lot lines of adjoining
property owners.
4. The only fuels permitted to be burned in an existing appliance or a new
appliance shall be those fuels recommended in its manufacturer's
installation specifications and use instructions.
5. The residue of the spent fuel used in any outdoor solid fuel furnace shall
not be disposed of in any manner that would constitute a violation of the
rules and regulations of Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection or the ordinances of the Township of Kingston. The residue
of spent fuel and any fuel debris shall not be accumulated on the
premises for a period in excess of 90 days.
6. All appliances shall be operated only between September 1 and May 31,
annually, unless the appliance is used as the sole source of residential
interior heat and/or domestic hot water service.
1. Notwithstanding full compliance with all of the terms and provisions of
this part or, the grant of a permit for the installation, maintenance and
use of an existing or new appliance, or full compliance with all air
quality control and management provisions of any federal, state,
regional, or local statutes, ordinances, or rules and regulations, the
Township of Kingston may suspend a permit and declare the existence
of a public nuisance created by emissions from any appliance, upon the
grounds that it is necessary to so act to protect the public health, safety
and welfare of the residents of the Township of Kingston and their
property, if any of the following conditions occur:
A. Malodorous air emissions from the appliance are detectable by
persons or the public generally beyond the property of the owner
on whose premises the appliance is located.
B. The emissions from the appliance interfere with the rightful use
and enjoyment of life and of property of another or cause severe
annoyance or discomfort or is offensive or is objectionable, or all of
the foregoing conditions, to any person, who lives within the range
of the emissions from the appliance into the ambient air.
C. The emissions from the appliance cause damage to vegetation or
the property of another person.
§ 703 HOME RULE CHARTER § 704
Ch:267
§ 705. Permits and Permit Fees. [Ord. 2008-1, 3/25/2008, § 5]
D. The emissions from the appliance are or may be harmful to the
health of any person or to the public generally.
2. Nothing contained in this part shall be construed to authorize any
installation, maintenance, or use of any appliance that is or becomes a
public or private nuisance, regardless of compliance with the terms and
provisions of this part.
3. This part shall not be a defense to any civil claims.
1. No person or entity shall cause, allow, or maintain the installation or
use of an appliance without first having it registered as an existing
appliance or inspected and having obtained a permit issued by the
Township of Kingston as a new appliance within the periods of time
stated in § 703 of this part.
2. An application for the registration of an existing appliance or for a
permit for a new appliance or for a permit for any modified or
suspended appliance shall be made to the Township of Kingston Zoning
and Code Enforcement Officer on forms furnished by the Township of
Kingston. The applicant shall furnish the following information on the
application:
A. Name and address of the applicant (owner of appliance) and the
property owner, if the appliance is installed, maintained and used
on premises owned by a person other than the owner of the
appliance.
B. Legal description of the property.
C. A sketch or drawing of the dimensions of the applicant's complete
premises, including locations of all structures thereon and of the
appliance's proposed location relative to adjoining property lines
and the front street line and the distances from all adjoining
property lines measured from the proposed location of the
appliance.
D. A copy of the appliance manufacturer's installation and
specifications and use instructions.
3. Prior to the registration of an existing appliance or the issuance of a
permit for a new, modified, or suspended appliance, the Township of
Kingston Zoning and Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the
appliance and all associated equipment and appurtenances thereto to
determine compliance with its manufacturer's installation
specifications and use instructions, as provided in § 703 and
Subsections 4 and 5 of this Section of this part. Prior to the registration
of an existing appliance or the grant of a permit for a new, modified or
suspended appliance, such officer shall issue a written report of such
inspection; the original of which shall be maintained as a permanent
§ 704 KINGSTON CODE § 705
Ch:268
record of the Township of Kingston and a copy thereof shall be
delivered to the owner of such appliance.
4. In the event that the maintenance and use of an appliance is suspended
for any reason whatsoever for a period of 18 consecutive months, such
appliance must be inspected by the Township of Kingston to determine
full compliance with all of the manufacturer's installation specifications
and use instructions in the manner provided for new appliances in § 703
of this part. Should such full compliance be determined, a new permit
shall be issued in the manner herein provided. A suspended appliance
shall be considered as a new appliance hereunder.
5. In the event that an appliance is modified in any way or for any reason
whatsoever, such appliance must be inspected by the Township of
Kingston to determine full compliance with all of the manufacturer's
installation specifications and use instructions; provided, however, if it
is an existing appliance, which has not been relocated on the premises,
the manufacturer's installation and use instructions as to setbacks will
not apply. Should such compliance be determined, a permit shall be
issued in the manner herein provided.
6. All appliances, associated equipment and materials and fuel used shall
be subject to inspection by the Township of Kingston Code Enforcement
Officer at any reasonable time to assure compliance with the terms and
provisions of this part. The Township of Kingston Code Enforcement
Officer is authorized to enforce all provisions of this part. In furtherance
of his duty and right to such enforcement, he may enter upon and
inspect any parcel of land for the purpose of ascertaining compliance
with the provisions of this part upon the presentation of his credentials
to the occupant(s) of such parcel of land.
7. A registration or a permit may be suspended at any time for a violation
by the owner/operator of the appliance and the owner of the premises
to comply with all of the terms and provisions of this part or to protect
the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Township of
Kingston.
8. A suspended registration or a permit may be reinstated when the
Township of Kingston Code Enforcement Officer determines that the
condition(s), which resulted in the suspension, is/are remedied and
written reasonable assurances of the owner/operator of the appliance
and the owner of the premises are given that such condition(s) shall not
occur again. Recurrence of a condition, which has previously resulted
in the suspension of a registration or a permit, shall be considered as a
violation of this part and shall be subject to the penalties provided
herein.
9. The fee for the issuance of permits hereunder shall be the sum of $40,
upon the enactment of this part, and shall be subject to subsequent
amendment from time to time by an ordinance(s) of the Township of
Kingston.
§ 705 HOME RULE CHARTER § 706
Ch:269
§ 706. Effect of Other Regulations. [Ord. 2008-1, 3/25/2008, § 6]
Nothing contained herein shall authorize or allow burning within and
emissions from or burning or combustion associated with or generated by
appliances, which acts and conditions are or may in the future be prohibited
by codes, laws, rules or regulations promulgated by the United States
Environmental Agency, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, or any other federal, state, regional or local agency authorized
to exercise jurisdiction over air quality control management. All new
appliances, and all electrical, plumbing or associated equipment or
appurtenances used in connection with existing appliances, shall be
installed, operated, and maintained in strict conformity with the
manufacturers' installation specifications and use instructions and any and
all local, state and federal ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations.
§ 707. Enforcement. [Ord. 2008-1, 3/25/2008, § 7]
Before commencing any action in the nature of a violation of this part, the
Township of Kingston Zoning and Code Enforcement Officer shall first give
notice to the person charged with violating this part. Such notice shall be
in writing and shall be served personally upon such person or by posting
a copy of such written notice on the premises or attaching a copy of the
written notice to each building or structure on the premises. In addition,
a copy of the written notice shall be sent by United States Postal Service
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the land, building,
structure or premises in or on which the appliances is located at the owner's
last known address. The notice shall specify that failure to remedy the
violation within 10 days of the date of personal service or 12 days from the
date of mailing may result in penalties to be levied against the owner of the
premises if the specified violations are not remedied.
§ 708. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 2008-1, 3/25/2008, § 8]
1. A violation of any provision of this part shall constitute a summary
offense and shall be enforced by the commencement of an action before
a District justice in the same manner provided for enforcement of
summary offenses under the applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. The Solicitor of the Township of Kingston may
assume charge of the prosecution of such violations in a manner
consistent with the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure relating
to trial of summary cases, as the same may be amended from time to
time.
2. Any person, who shall violate any provision of this part, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500
and all costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of said fine, be
subject to imprisonment to the extent allowed by law for the
punishment of summary offenses.
3. In addition to all other remedies provided herein for violations of this
part, the Township of Kingston shall have the right to proceed in any
§ 706 KINGSTON CODE § 708
Ch:270
§ 709. Township Exempt From Liability. [Ord. 2008-1, 3/25/2008,
§ 9]
The Township of Kingston, and its agents, officers, officials and
representatives shall not, under any circumstance, be liable or responsible
for damages caused to any person or property by the registration of or
the issuance of any permit under the provisions of this part, or by reason
of the construction, installation, maintenance, or use of any registered
or permitted appliance in compliance with the terms and provisions of
this part. The person who owns or uses and maintains such registered
or permitted appliances shall bear sole liability for any damages or harm
caused as a result thereof. The foregoing shall be an express condition
of the grant of any permit hereunder, and this statement shall be printed
conspicuously on the face of all such registrations and permits, and the
owner shall acknowledge in writing this notice of the Township's exemption
from liability and the release of the Township therefrom.
§ 710. Savings Clause. [Ord. 2008-1, 3/25/2008, § 10]
The provisions of the Township of Kingston Code of Ordinances, so far as
they are the same as those ordinances and regulations in force immediately
prior to the adoption of this part, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and regulations and not as a new enactment. The provisions of
this part shall not affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted
to enforce any of the prior ordinances or regulations except as otherwise
provided by law.
court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of obtaining an
injunction, restraining order, or other appropriate remedy to compel
compliance with the provisions of this part.
§ 708 HOME RULE CHARTER § 710
Ch:271

Part 8
FIREWORKS
§ 801. Definitions. [Ord. 2014-5, 4/8/2014]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of Kingston
Township, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS — Shall be the same as are defined in 27 CFR
555.11, and they are any small firework device designed to produce visible
effects by combustion and which must comply with the construction,
chemical composition, and labeling regulations set forth in the rules of
the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (Title 16, Code of Federal
Regulations, Parts 1500 and 1507). Some small devices designed to produce
audible effects are included, such as whistling devices, ground devices
containing 50 milligrams or less of explosive materials, and aerial devices
containing 130 milligrams or less of explosive materials. Consumer
fireworks are classified as fireworks by the United States Department of
Transportation, 49 CFR 172.101. This term does not include fused set
pieces containing components which together exceed 50 milligrams of
salute powder.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS — Large fireworks shall be the same as are defined
in 27 CFR 555.11, and they are designed primarily to produce visible
or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, and detonation. This term
includes, but is not limited to, salutes containing more than two grains (130
milligrams) of explosive materials, aerial shells containing more than 40
grams of pyrotechnic compositions, and other display pieces which exceed
the statutory and regulatory limits of explosive materials for classification
as consumer fireworks. Display fireworks are classified as fireworks by
the United States Department of Transportation (49 CFR 172.101). This
term also includes fused set pieces containing components which together
exceed 50 milligrams of salute powder.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The enforcement officer, or in his absence or
unavailability, the assistant enforcement officer, both being duly designated
by the Township of Kingston.
FIRE CHIEF — Any one of the duly authorized Fire Chiefs of a fire
department serving and based in the Kingston Township, or in his absence
or unavailability, the Assistant Fire Chief.
FIREWORKS — Both consumer and display fireworks, as defined herein,
unless specifically identified as either consumer or display fireworks herein.
RESIDENT — An adult individual who is a bona fide resident of Kingston
Township, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania, and who can produce proof
thereof upon demand made by any enforcement officer hereunder.
§ 802. Use Restricted; Consumer Fireworks. [Ord. 2014-5, 4/8/2014]
§ 801 HOME RULE CHARTER § 802
Ch:273
1. Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any person,
copartnership, association or corporation to offer for sale, expose for
sale, sell at retail, or use, detonate, or explode any type of fireworks,
including, but not limited to, consumer fireworks and display fireworks,
at any time or in any place within Kingston Township.
2. Consumer Fireworks. Consumer fireworks may be possessed, used, and
detonated by a resident of Kingston Township, subject to the following
conditions:
A. The consumer fireworks to be possessed, sold, used or detonated
hereunder must qualify as strictly as consumer fireworks under the
statutes and regulations of the agencies of the United States
government and the laws and agencies of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. The consumer fireworks hereunder must be
manufactured, transported, sold, possessed and used in strict
compliance with the aforesaid statutes, regulations, laws and
governmental agencies, and the burden to demonstrate such
compliance falls upon the resident.
B. Any bona fide resident of Kingston Township who desires to
possess, sell, use, detonate, or explode any consumer fireworks
hereunder must be 18 years of age or older.
C. Any adult bona fide resident of Kingston Township who desires to
possess, sell, use or detonate any consumer fireworks in Kingston
Township must first register the specific type of consumer
fireworks with the designated enforcement officer of Kingston
Township and specify the identity, age, and address of the resident
and the time and place where it is desired to possess, sell, use or
detonate such consumer fireworks and the specific location of the
consumer fireworks until the same are used or detonated. Upon
registration of such consumer fireworks when transporting such
fireworks, the resident must maintain upon his or her person a
written authorization of registration issued by the designated
enforcement officer stating that the resident is authorized to
possess, sell, use, detonate, or explode only the consumer fireworks
specified as set forth in detail in the written authorization of
registration issued by the designated enforcement officer.
D. No written authorization of registration of possession, sale, use, or
detonation of any consumer fireworks shall be valid for a period
greater than 30 days following its original date of issuance by the
enforcement officer.
E. Any aforesaid authorization of registration of consumer fireworks
shall be issued only upon the payment to Kingston Township of the
then prevailing consumer fireworks registration fee as stated in the
Schedule of Fees of Kingston Township.25
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, Part 13 of this Code.
§ 802 KINGSTON CODE § 802
Ch:274
§ 803. Display Fireworks. [Ord. 2014-5, 4/8/2014]
The Board of Supervisors shall have the power to grant permits for
supervised public displays of display fireworks to be held by municipalities,
fair associations, civic organizations, religious organizations, amusement
parks and other like organizations or groups of individuals. Such displays
can be open to the public by admission tickets or no admission tickets.
Every such display shall be implemented and overseen by a competent and
licensed pyrotechnic operator to be approved by the enforcement officer or
a Fire Chief representing a fire company situated within the Township of
Kingston. Such public displays of display fireworks shall be of such a nature
and shall be so located, and shall be discharged or detonated, only so as not
to be hazardous to property and shall not endanger any person or persons
when displayed as, in the controlling opinion of the enforcement officer and/
or the Chief of the Fire Department and/or such other officer, after proper
inspection.
§ 804. Permits. [Ord. 2014-5, 4/8/2014]
Applications for permits for public displays of display fireworks shall be
made in writing to Kingston Township at least 15 days in advance of
the date of the display. After such privilege shall have been granted, the
sales, possession and use of the display fireworks for such display event or
purposes shall be lawful for that submitted purpose only. No permit granted
hereunder shall be transferable.
F. No consumer fireworks shall be used, exploded or detonated
without the prior approval of a duly authorized representative of
Kingston Township, and no authorized and registered consumer
fireworks can be exploded or detonated, as follows:
(1) Within any enclosed structure;
(2) Within a four-hundred-foot area of any structure, property line,
vehicle or roadway;
(3) Within a fifty-foot area of any other person or persons than the
authorized resident;
(4) Within any area of Kingston Township designated by Kingston
Township as a residential or commercial zoning district;
(5) Before 12:00 noon and after 9:00 p.m. on any day of the week,
unless otherwise provided in the written authorization of
registration issued by the enforcement officer.
G. No consumer fireworks may be sold, exploded, or detonated in any
location in Kingston Township other than the specific place or
location designated therefor in the written authorization of
registration.
§ 802 HOME RULE CHARTER § 805
Ch:275
§ 805. Bond Required. [Ord. 2014-5, 4/8/2014]
The Board of Supervisors of Kingston Township hereby requires a bond
to be provided by any permittee hereunder to conduct a fireworks display
in Kingston Township in an amount not less than $1,000,000, which shall
be a condition for approval of the grant of permit and is conditioned
for the payment of all damages which may be caused either by or to
a person or persons or to property by reason of the permitted display
and arising from any acts of the permitee, his or her agents, employees
or subcontractors. The Township also requires proof of liability insurance
issued to the permittee in the amount of at least $l,000,000 per claim for
the aforesaid purpose from a reputable insurance company authorized to
conduct business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Kingston Township
shall be a named co-insured in such policy of such liability insurance.
Further, the licensee or permitee shall indemnify, save harmless and defend
Kingston Township from any injury to persons or damage to property arising
out of the use by the permittee of display fireworks by a writing executed
prior to the grant of any permit.
§ 806. Continuance of Permit. [Ord. 2014-5, 4/8/2014]
If, by reason of unfavorable weather, the display for which a permit has been
granted does not take place at the time so authorized, the person to whom
such permit was issued may, within 24 hours, apply to Kingston Township
setting forth, under oath, the fact that such display was not made, stating
the reason therefor, and requesting the continuance of such permit for a day
designated therein, not later than one week after the day fixed originally in
said permit.
§ 807. General Restrictions on All Fireworks. [Ord. 2014-5, 4/8/
2014]
Each of the restrictions imposed on the possession, use, explosion or
detonation of all types of fireworks, whether consumer fireworks or display
fireworks, stated hereunder in § 702.2, shall apply equally to all types
of fireworks sold, used, possessed, detonated, or exploded in Kingston
Township, and, accordingly, § 702.2 hereof shall be specific restrictions
generally applicable to the sale, possession and use of all fireworks in
Kingston Township.
§ 808. Stopping Fireworks for Violations or Public Safety. [Ord.
2014-5, 4/8/2014]
In the event of any violation of this Part or the terms, conditions, or
limitations noted on a written registration authorized for the use of
consumer fireworks or on a permit for the display of display fireworks, or in
the event of any unsafe condition occurring before or during the course of a
fireworks public display, or in the event of any unsafe condition occurring as
a result of any use of consumer, display, or other fireworks within Kingston
Township, the Pennsylvania State Police, the Kingston Township police,
§ 805 KINGSTON CODE § 808
Ch:276
a Fire Chief of a fire company located in Kingston Township responsible
for fire protection at the place of the event or the appropriate Township
designee or any other duly authorized Township representative may, before
or during the unsafe and/or violating occurrence, order such fireworks use
or display to be stopped in the interest of public safety.
§ 809. Conflicts With Other Provisions. [Ord. 2014-5, 4/8/2014]
Kingston Township hereby recognizes the authority of the United States
government and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the fireworks laws,
rules, or regulations of each jurisdiction, as the same may be amended
from time to time, regarding the manufacture, transport, holding, offering
or exposing for sale, and the display, use, and possession, of combustible
materials and items commonly referred to as "fireworks." Whenever there is
any conflict between the terms of this Part and a statute, rule or regulation
of the United States government or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the
more strict provision(s) shall apply.
§ 810. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 2014-5, 4/8/2014]
Any person, individual, partnership, copartnership, association or
corporation violating the provisions of this Part shall be guilty of a summary
criminal offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding 60 days, or by both
fine and imprisonment.
§ 808 HOME RULE CHARTER § 810
Ch:277
Chapter 11
HOUSING
See also: Property Maintenance Code, Chapter 5, Part 5.
§ 810 KINGSTON CODE § 810
Ch:278
Part 1
REQUIREMENTS OF RENTAL UNIT OWNERS
§ 101. Supplying Tax Collector a Complete List of Tenants and Their
Addresses. [Adoptedx Ord. 2000-1, 2/9/2000, § 1]
Every owner of a residential or commercial rental unit or units must file a
list of all tenants and their addresses with the Tax Collector's office on or
before January 15th of each year and thereafter file a letter of notification
within 30 days of any change occurring in occupancy from the initial list
submitted.
§ 102. Penalty. [Adoptedx Ord. 2000-1, 2/9/2000, § 2]
Each owner or manager of a residential or commercial rental unit or units
who fails to submit such a list or lists set forth above shall, upon conviction
in a summary proceeding, be liable to a fine not exceeding $100 for each
and every day that such a person is in violation of providing such a list on
the date that it is due, it being the intent of this Part that such failure to file
such list on its due date be a continuing violation that will not end until the
day when such list(s) are ultimately filed.
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 102
Ch:279

Part 2
RENTAL PROPERTY INSPECTIONS
§ 201. Title and Purpose. [Adoptedx Ord. 2007-2, 12/12/2007, § 1]
§ 202. Definitions. [Adoptedx Ord. 2007-2, 12/12/2007, § 2]
As used in this Part, the following terms have the following meaning
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
CODE — Any property maintenance code, as the same may be amended
from time to time, and as adopted or enacted by an Ordinance of the
Township of Kingston.26
OWNER — Any person, copartnership, association, corporation or fiduciary
having legal or equitable title, or any right, title or interest in any real
property. Whenever used in any clause herein, the term "owner," as applied
to copartnerships and associations, shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Any structurally enclosed area or space including
or intended to be used as living space, quarters, or unit for one or more
persons.
REGULATED RENTAL UNIT/REGULATED DWELLING UNIT — A
residential unit occupied by a person or persons other than the owner.
PUBLIC HOUSING UNIT — All housing units owned and occupied or
managed by a public housing authority under contract with any local,
county, state or federal housing agency. "Public housing unit" does not
include Section 8 or other equivalent program(s).
STRUCTURE — Any thing that is built or constructed upon real property or
a portion thereof.
1. This Part shall be known as the "Kingston Township Rental Inspection
Ordinance."
2. The Township of Kingston has experienced problems with the
maintenance of nonowner-occupied residential properties from time to
time. The health, life, safety and welfare of occupants of these nonowner-
occupied premises within the Township of Kingston is a great
concern. The purpose of this Part is to enhance the safety of non-owneroccupied
premises, structures and properties by a system of
inspection(s), which focuses upon compliance with basic property
maintenance code(s).
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Code Enforcement.
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 203
Ch:281
§ 203. Prohibition of Occupancy. [Adoptedx Ord. 2007-2, 12/12/
2007, § 3]
No residential unit shall be occupied by other than the owner thereof
unless a certificate of occupancy is issued, following inspection thereof,
and maintained on file by the owner or the owner's designated agent, as
required by the provisions of this Part.
§ 204. Inspection Requirements. [Adoptedx Ord. 2007-2, 12/12/
2007, § 4]
Residential units and residential rental units/regulated dwelling units shall
be subject to inspection in accordance with the provisions of this Part.
A. Purpose. Inspections required by this Part shall be for the purpose of
determining compliance with all of the terms and provisions of the
International Property Maintenance Code, as amended from time to
time, and as adopted by the Township of Kingston by ordinance and in
full force and legal effect in the Township of Kingston at the time of any
inspection required by this Part.
B. Permitted Inspectors. Inspections required by this Part shall be
conducted by the Code Enforcement Officer of the Township of
Kingston or by any other person(s) specifically empowered to conduct
such inspections by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Kingston.
C. Timing of Inspections.
(1) In respect of any residential unit or any regulated rental unit/
regulated dwelling unit, unoccupied by the owner on or after the
effective date hereof, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued,
following an inspection, and maintained on file by the owner and
the Township of Kingston prior to occupancy of such residential
unit or regulated rental unit/regulated dwelling unit by any person
or persons other than the owner.
(2) Any property or premises, which has been inspected hereunder and
for which a certificate of occupancy has been previously issued,
and thereafter becomes vacant for any period of time must be
reinspected, and a certificate of occupancy must be reissued prior
to occupancy by any person or persons as a residential unit or
regulated rental unit/regulated dwelling unit.
(3) A residential unit or regulated rental unit/regulated dwelling unit,
which is subject to the inspection requirements of this Part, shall be
required to be reinspected 24 months after the initial inspection
and reinspected every 24 months thereafter, and a new certificate
of occupancy shall be issued thereafter, based upon such
reinspection(s).
§ 203 KINGSTON CODE § 204
Ch:282
§ 205. Public Housing Units. [Adoptedx Ord. 2007-2, 12/12/2007,
§ 5]
§ 206. Issuance and Filing of Certificate of Occupancy. [Adoptedx
Ord. 2007-2, 12/12/2007, § 6]
(4) Upon the transfer of title to a new owner, no residential unit or
regulated rental unit/regulated dwelling unit shall be occupied, in
whole or in part, until an inspection of the premises or structure
and a certificate of occupancy is issued hereunder. All transfers of
title, by whatever means, of a residential unit or regulated rental
unit/regulated dwelling unit or any property, premises, or structure
intended to be used thereafter as a rental residential unit or
regulated rental unit/regulated dwelling unit shall be occupied, in
whole or in part, only following an inspection thereof and the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy in accordance with the terms
of this Part. Any transfer of title to a new owner of such premises or
property or structure shall be reported to the Code Enforcement
Officer of the Township of Kingston within 60 days upon transfer of
the title to any new owner.
1. A public housing unit is exempt from the terms and conditions of this
Part, provided that:
A. The housing units owned and operated or managed by a public
housing authority are required to be inspected at least annually to
ensure compliance with HUD's Housing Quality Standards, 24 CFR
Part 882, as the same may be amended from time to time, and so
long as said standards are comparable to the International
Property Maintenance Code in force and of legal effect and as
adopted by the Township of Kingston by Ordinance;
B. The inspections are conducted by authorized representatives of
HUD, the public housing authority, or its duly authorized agent; and
C. The inspection reports are available for inspection by the Code
Enforcement Officer of the Township of Kingston, and a list of the
properties so inspected is filed with the Code Enforcement Officer
of the Township of Kingston annually.
2. Nothing contained in this exception or exemption shall be deemed to
exclude such premises, structures or properties from being subject to
any of the property maintenance codes then in full force and of legal
effect in the Township of Kingston.
1. General Provision. Upon completion of an inspection, and that there is
proof produced that all applicable real estate taxes are paid and
current, and that there are no determined and specified violations of
the Code(s), as in effect on the date of the inspection, or that any such
violations have been corrected in accordance with said codes, the Code
Enforcement Officer of the Township of Kingston shall issue a
§ 204 HOME RULE CHARTER § 206
Ch:283
§ 207. Notice Requirements. [Adoptedx Ord. 2007-2, 12/12/2007,
§ 7]
certificate of occupancy for the structure, premises or property in
respect to each individual residential unit or regulated dwelling unit
therein, that was inspected and listed specifically upon said certificate
of occupancy. The certificate of occupancy shall be kept in the file of
the owner or designated agent of the owner and made available to the
Code Enforcement Officer upon request and, further, the same shall be
made available to any rental occupant upon written request made to
the owner or owner's authorized agent.
2. Form of Proof of Inspection. Proof of inspection and absence of any
violations of the Code(s) shall be in such form, as approved from time to
time, by the Code Enforcement Officer of the Township of Kingston.
3. Report of Inspection Appeals. A report of inspection, which indicates
any violation of any Code(s), shall be provided by written notice to the
owner within 15 days of the date of inspection. Any appeals from the
report of inspection shall be filed and adjudicated in the manner
provided for in this Part.
4. Multi-Unit Structures. The units within a structure, which are in
compliance with the Code(s), may continue to be occupied, if such other
units in any portion(s) of the structure do not apply to this Part, because
they are owner-occupied, or have they passed inspection. If any unit in
a multi-unit structure, however, creates a foreseeable hazard to the
health, life and safety to the persons occupying such other units in
compliance, such other units must be vacated.
5. Compliance with Code(s). The issuance of a certificate of occupancy
does not relieve the owner from complying with all terms and
provisions of all of the real property codes, as the same exist and are in
full force and of legal effect at the time in the Township of Kingston.
1. Newspaper Advertisement. The Code Enforcement Officer of the
Township of Kingston shall each year cause notice to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation within the Township of Kingston. The
notice shall set forth that the Township of Kingston requires, pursuant
to its Rental Inspection Ordinance, the inspection of residential units/
regulated rental units/regulated dwelling units before the same can
become occupied by any person(s) other than the owner, and the
place(s) in the Township of Kingston where a copy of this Part may be
obtained.
2. Written notice must be given by the Code Enforcement Officer to the
property owner or the authorized agent of the owner prior to any
inspection. The property owner or agent shall provide the rental
occupant(s) with reasonable notice of the inspection and provide proof
of such rental occupant(s)'s notice to the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 206 KINGSTON CODE § 208
Ch:284
§ 208. Responsible Party. [Adoptedx Ord. 2007-2, 12/12/2007, § 8]
The owner of any residential units/regulated rental units/regulated dwelling
units, which is subject to the inspection requirements of this Part, shall be
responsible for compliance with the provisions of this Part. All owners of
residential units and regulated rental units/regulated dwelling units, who do
not reside in the Township of Kingston, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania, shall
designate, in writing, an authorized agent residing in or maintaining an
office in the County of Luzerne, Pennsylvania, who shall be responsible for
receiving all notices issued by the Township of Kingston pertaining to such
rental premises, structures or properties. The owner shall also provide, in
writing, the business address and telephone number of the person or entity
that the owner designates as the authorized agent of the owner.
§ 209. Scope of Inspection. [Adoptedx Ord. 2007-2, 12/12/2007, § 9]
All residential units and regulated rental units/regulated dwelling units,
which are subject to the inspection requirements of this Part, shall be
inspected by the Code Enforcement Officer of the Township of Kingston to
determine compliance with the International Property Maintenance Code,
as amended from time to time, and as adopted by the Township of Kingston
by ordinance and, further, as contained in the Code of Ordinances of the
Township of Kingston relating to all matters pertaining to zoning of real
property and structures.
§ 210. Grounds for Denial, Nonrenewal, Suspension or Revocation
of Certificate of Occupancy. [Adoptedx Ord. 2007-2, 12/12/2007,
§ 10]
1. General. The Code Enforcement Officer may initiate violation
proceedings against an owner that may result in a formal warning,
nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of the owner's certificate of
occupancy for the violation of any provision of this Part that imposes a
duty upon the owner and/or for failing to regulate any action(s) by any
occupants in violation of the provisions of this Part, as stated herein,
subject, however, to the right to appeal, as provided in this Part.
A. In order to obtain or retain a certificate of occupancy, the property,
structure, or premises of the owner, qualifying hereunder, must
comply with the minimum general standards mandated by the
International Property Maintenance Code of the Township of
Kingston, as amended from time to time, and particularly, the
following minimum standards:
(1) Interior and exterior sanitary conditions.
(2) Infestation and rodent harborage.
(3) Structural numbers and foundation walls.
(4) Plumbing/water system(s).
§ 208 HOME RULE CHARTER § 210
Ch:285
(5) Heating/mechanical systems and ventilation systems.
(6) Electrical system hazards.
(7) Smoke detection system(s).
(8) Fire escape routes.
(9) Over occupancy.
(10) A working smoke detector on each floor level, including
basement and accessible attics.
(11) A working smoke detector must be located in each room used
for sleeping purposes.
(12) A working smoke detector located within 10 feet of each
sleeping area and mounted 18 inches from the wall or ceiling.
(13) A fire extinguisher visibly mounted in the kitchen area near the
point of egress from the structure. The fire extinguisher must
be of a minimum size (2 1/2 pounds), dry chemical, ABC Type
UL approved.
(14) All closets with incandescent bulbs over shelves shall be
protected with permanent covers over the bulbs.
(15) An existing acceptable sixty-ampere service or greater with
three-wire service.
(16) Electrical service panels shall be legibly and durably marked to
indicate their purpose.
(17) All kitchens, bathrooms, powder rooms, laundry rooms,
garages within six feet of a water source and all exterior
outlets must be protected with a ground fault circuit
interrupter receptacle (GFCI).
(18) Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two
separate and remote receptacle outlets. All junction boxes,
switches and outlets must have covers.
(19) A three-way switch at top and bottom of stairs leading to
habitable rooms.
(20) All multi-electric ranges must be installed with a wall mounted
plug-in receptacle connection at the rear of the range.
(21) All gas ranges must be supplied with shut-off valves installed
behind the range (hand-turn type).
(22) All interior gas lines must be marked every six feet with fourinch-
wide yellow markings from point of entry to each
appliance using gas.
§ 210 KINGSTON CODE § 210
Ch:286
(23) Minimum plumbing facilities and fixtures must be provided
and be in good working order with no leaking pipes or faucets.
(24) Adequate heating facilities.
(25) All properties must have four-inch numbers outside the
property in clear view of the street designating the correct
street number of the property.
(26) The property must be in a clean, safe and sanitary condition,
both interior and exterior.
(27) All exterior wood must be free of flaking and peeling paint.
(28) All exterior window caulking must be in good repair, no broken
glass with sharp edges or holes are permitted.
(29) Handrails are required for stairs with four or more risers at
any location (except Bilco-type stairs to basement) and any
landing over 30 inches high.
(30) Oil tank fill pipes to be two-inch black iron and one-and-onehalf-
inch black iron vent pipes (no copper or PVC).
(31) All potable or heating sources must have pressure/
temperature relief valves and hard piping of 3/4 inch in size
pipe to six inches of floor.
(32) An emergency shut-off switch for oil heating units to be
mounted in stairway and marked in red.
(33) A sump pump may not be connected to the public sewer line,
but it must be connected to a GFCI outlet.
(34) A responsible adult must accompany the Code Enforcement
Officer on all inspections of all premises, structures or
properties.
(35) Code Enforcement Officers are not responsible to open locked
boxes and perform inspections without being accompanied by
the owner or the owner's authorized agent.
(36) A carbon monoxide detector 110 volts AC with battery back-up
detector, must be properly installed in each residential unit/
regulated residential unit/regulated dwelling unit.
2. Definition of code Enforcement Officer's Determinations of Inspections:
A. Denial. The violations found at the time of the inspection would
render the property unsafe.
B. Formal Warning. Formal written notification of at least one
violation of this Part. Upon satisfactory subsequent reinspection,
compliance with this Part and any condition imposed by the Code
§ 210 HOME RULE CHARTER § 210
Ch:287
Enforcement Officer, the formal warning shall be removed at the
time that the owner applies for the initial certificate of occupancy
or any renewal thereof or at an earlier time as ordered by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
C. Nonrenewal. The denial of the right to apply for certificate of
occupancy renewal after expiration of the term of a subsisting and
current certificate of occupancy. The Township of Kingston will
permit the owner to maintain occupants in a premises until the end
of the term of the certificate of occupancy, unless the premises,
structures or property are unfit for habitation. The Code
Enforcement Officer will not accept applications for renewal of the
certificate of occupancy until the premises, structure or property
passes a reinspection by the Code Enforcement Officer.
D. Suspension. The immediate loss of the right to rent residential
units or regulated residential units/regulated dwelling units for a
period of time established by the Code Enforcement Officer. The
owner, after expiration of the suspension period, may apply for
renewal of the certificate of occupancy, following a reinspection of
the property, premises, or structure, which determines that the
premises are in full compliance with the provisions of this Part.
Upon suspension, the owner shall take immediate steps to evict and
remove all of the rental occupants from the premises, property, or
structure.
E. Revocation. The immediate loss of the right to rent residential units
and regulated residential units/regulated dwelling units for a
period of time established by the Code Enforcement Officer and
which may result in the loss of the right of the owner to apply for
renewal of a certificate of occupancy at any time. Upon revocation,
the owner shall take immediate steps to evict and remove all of the
rental occupants from the premises, property, or structure.
3. Standards for Determination of Existence of Violations. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall consider one or more following matters when
determining the existence of violations for noncompliance with the
terms and provisions of this Part and the Township of Kingston property
maintenance Code(s):
A. The impact of the violation on the health, life, safety, and welfare of
the occupant(s) of the residential unit or regulated residential unit/
regulated dwelling unit and other residents of the structure,
property, or premises.
B. The impact of the violation upon the immediate neighborhood of
the premises, structure or property.
C. Whether the owner has prior violations of this Part or other real
property ordinances of the Township of Kingston or has received
notices of such violations, as provided for in this Part.
§ 210 KINGSTON CODE § 210
Ch:288
D. Whether the owner has been subject to disciplinary proceedings
under this Part.
E. The effect of disciplinary action of violations upon the occupants.
F. The action taken by the owner to remedy identified violation(s) and
to prevent future violations, including any written plan of
remediation required to be submitted by the owner to the Code
Enforcement Officer.
G. The policies, provisions, and terms of the lease agreement
employed by the owner to manage the property or premises or
structure to enable the owner to comply with the provisions of this
Part.
H. In addition to applying those specific violations as set forth above,
the Code Enforcement Officer may impose upon the existing or
subsequent certificates of occupancy conditions relating to
fulfilling strictly the terms, provisions and legislative purpose of
this Part.
4. Grounds for Imposing Violations. Any of the following matters may
subject an owner to violations hereunder:
A. Failure to abate a violation(s) of this Part applicable to the property,
structure, or premises within the time directed by the Code
Enforcement Officers;
B. Refusal to allow an inspection of the property, structure, or
premises by the Code Enforcement Officer, as provided for in this
Part;
C. Failure, deliberately or negligently, by occupants of the residential
units or regulated residential units/regulated dwelling units to
prevent violations of this Part; or
D. Violations of this Part or other ordinances of the Township of
Kingston that apply to residential real property, structure, or
premises within the term of existence of a certificate of occupancy.
For purposes of this Part, there need be no criminal conviction
before a violation(s) can be found to exist.
5. Procedure for Denial, Nonrenewal, Suspension or Revocation of
Certificate of Occupancy. Following a determination by the Code
Enforcement Officer for the grounds of denial, nonrenewal, suspension
or revocation of a certificate of occupancy exist, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall notify the owner of the action to be taken and the reason(s)
therefor. Such notification shall be in writing, addressed to the owner
and/or the authorized agent of the owner and sent by certified mail,
return receipt requested, and by regular United States Postal Service
mail, and it shall contain the following information:
§ 210 HOME RULE CHARTER § 210
Ch:289
§ 211. Appeals. [Adoptedx Ord. 2007-2, 12/12/2007, § 11]
A. The address of the property, structure, or premises in question and
the specific identification of the particular residential unit or
regulated residential unit/regulated dwelling unit affected;
B. The description of the violation(s) of this Part which has/have been
found to exist;
C. A statement that the certificate of occupancy for said residential
unit or regulated residential unit/regulated dwelling unit shall be
either suspended or revoked, or it will not be renewed for a
subsequent term following the term for which an existing
certificate of occupancy has been issued or that the owner will
receive a formal warning. In the case of a suspension or revocation,
the notice shall state the date upon which such suspension or
revocation will commence, and in the case of the suspension, it
shall state the duration of said suspension;
D. A statement that, due to the denial, nonrenewal, suspension or
revocation, as the case may be, the owner or any person authorized
to act on behalf of the owner is prohibited from renting, letting or
permitting occupancy of the residential unit or regulated
residential unit/regulated dwelling unit, subject to said
enforcement action, from and during the period said suspension or
revocation action is in effect; and
E. A statement informing the owner that said owner has the right to
appeal the decision denying, suspending, revoking or declining to
maintain or renew the certificate of occupancy to the Kingston
Township Board of Appeals established by Kingston Township
Ordinance No. 2004-3, enacted on June 7, 2004, and to become,
upon the effective date hereof, Chapter 5, Part 10, § 1001, et seq.,
of the Code of Ordinances of the Township of Kingston.
1. Any person aggrieved by any notice, which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provision of this Part, or any
rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the Board of Appeals of the
Township of Kingston, as created and existing pursuant to Kingston
Township Ordinance No. 2004-3, etc., above. Such person must file in
the office of the Secretary of the Board of Appeals a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds therefor, the reason(s) alleged as to why the determination of
the Code Enforcement Officer is incorrect or should be overturned. The
appeal must be filed within 10 days after the notice of the Code
Enforcement Officer has been served upon the person by written notice.
It must be served upon the Secretary of the Board of Appeals by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and regular USPS mail. There
is imposed hereby a fee of $25 for filing such appeals or such appeal fee
as may, from time to time, be imposed by the ordinances of the
§ 210 KINGSTON CODE § 211
Ch:290
Township of Kingston. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be revised,
modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be held no later than 20
days after the date upon which the petition was filed. Upon application
of the petitioner, the Board of Appeals may postpone the date of the
hearing for a reasonable time beyond such twenty-day period, if good
and sufficient reason for such temporary postponement is warranted;
all in the sole discretion of the Board of Appeals.
2. The hearing shall be held in accordance with the procedures
appertaining to the Board of Appeals as ordinarily, reasonably, and
customarily are applied by the Board of Appeals.
3. After such hearing, the Board shall sustain, modify or withdraw the
notice, depending upon its findings as to whether the provisions of this
Part and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have
been complied with. If the Board of Appeals sustains or modifies such
notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served pursuant
hereto shall automatically become an order in the event that a written
petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the Secretary of the
Board of Appeals within 10 days after such notice of the Code
Enforcement Officer is served. After hearing in the case of any notice of
suspension of any certificate of occupancy required by this statute or by
any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, on the date such
notice of suspension has been sustained by the Board of Appeals, the
certificate of occupancy shall be deemed to have been suspended. Any
certificate of occupancy, which has been suspended by a notice, shall be
deemed to be automatically suspended if a petition for hearing is not
filed in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Appeals within 10
days after such notice of the Code Enforcement Officer is served. The
proceedings of such hearing, including the findings and decision of the
Board of Appeals, shall be set forth, reduced to writing, and entered as
a matter of public record in the office of Secretary of the Board of
Appeals. Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order
issued in connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by any
decision of the Board of Appeals may seek relief therefrom in any court
of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
4. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer finds that an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to protect the public health, safety,
life, and welfare, the Code Enforcement Officer may, without notice of
hearing, issue an order stating the existence of such an emergency and
requiring that such action be taken, as may be deemed necessary, in
order to meet the particular needs of the emergency. Notwithstanding
any other article contained herein, such order shall become effective
immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply
therewith immediately, but, upon the filing of a petition to the Board of
Appeals, as provided in § 211.1 hereof, within 48 hours of notice of the
emergency action, such person shall be afforded a hearing as soon as
§ 211 HOME RULE CHARTER § 211
Ch:291
§ 212. Board of Appeals. [Adoptedx Ord. 2007-2, 12/12/2007, § 12]
§ 213. Penalties. [Adoptedx Ord. 2007-2, 12/12/2007, § 13]
An owner of a residential unit or regulated rental units/regulated dwelling
units, who has been determined to have violated or has permitted the
violation of this Part shall be deemed to have committed a summary offense
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $600 and
all costs of prosecution. In the event that the fine and costs of prosecution
are not paid, the Township of Kingston is hereby authorized to collect the
fine and costs of prosecution in the manner prescribed by the laws of the
Commonwealth in respect of actions commenced by a municipality before
a District Magistrate. Each violation of this Part, and each day the same is
continued, shall be deemed as a separate offense.
§ 214. Fee Schedule. [Adoptedx Ord. 2007-2, 12/12/2007, § 14]
The fee schedule for issuance of certificates of occupancy shall be as
follows, upon the effective date hereof, subject to subsequent amendment
by the ordinance(s) of the Township of Kingston:
possible. After such hearing, depending upon its findings as to whether
the provisions of this article of this Part, and the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the Board of
Appeals will continue such order in effect or modify it or revoke it.
1. The Board of Appeals created by Kingston Township Ordinance 2004-3,
enacted on June 7, 2004, Chapter 5, Part 10, of the Code of Ordinances
of the Township of Kingston, shall have exclusive jurisdiction to act as
the adjudicator of all appeals arising out of the enforcement of this Part,
in addition to such other powers, duties, and jurisdiction vested in it
now or hereafter by the Township of Kingston. It shall have sole and
exclusive jurisdiction to hear, try, adjudicate and determine all appeals
arising out of the operation, enforcement, and implementation of this
Part.
2. The appeal and variance procedure contained in any ordinance of the
Township of Kingston relating to zoning shall not be available as a legal
remedy to the owner, the authorized agent of the owner, the occupant,
or any other person(s), by reason of ownership or occupancy of a
residential unit or regulated residential unit/regulated dwelling unit, as
defined herein.
A. Issuance of any initial certificate of occupancy: $45 per unit.
B. Inspection of premises, structures, or property subsequent to the
inspection for an initial certificate of occupancy or any reinspection for
any subsequent certificate of occupancy at any time: $25 per unit.
§ 211 KINGSTON CODE § 214
Ch:292
Chapter 12
LIBRARIES
Chapter 13
LICENSES, PERMITS AND GENERAL BUSINESS
REGULATIONS
§ 214 HOME RULE CHARTER § 214
Ch:293

Part 1
PUBLIC EXHIBITIONS AND AMUSEMENTS
§ 101. Repealer. [Ord. 2011-4, 11/9/2011]
The Township of Kingston Ordinance No. 1977-47, as amended, Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 13, Part 1 (Public Exhibitions and Amusements), is
hereby repealed in its entirety.
§ 102. Definitions. [Ord. 2011-4, 11/9/2011]
As used in this Part 1, unless the context requires otherwise, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PERSON IN CHARGE OF PROPERTY — A principal and his agent, occupant,
lessee, contract purchaser, or person other than the owner, having
possession or control of property in the Township.
PUBLIC GATHERING — All assemblies of people gathered for any purpose
reasonably anticipated to number more than 350 people for a continuous
period of two hours or more, more than 10% of whom will assemble,
participate in any way, or occupy structures specially constructed, erected,
or assembled for the gathering, whether or not an admission fee is charged.
SPONSOR — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm,
corporation, joint venture, or any other legal entity whatsoever, who or
which initiates, organizes, promotes, permits, conducts or causes to be
advertised in any way a public gathering.
§ 103. Permit Required. [Ord. 2011-4, 11/9/2011]
It shall be unlawful for any sponsor, owner of property, or person in charge
of property to initiate, organize, promote, permit, conduct, or cause to be
advertised a public gathering for any purpose unless a permit has been
obtained pursuant to this Part 1. A separate permit shall be required for
each public gathering for the period of time designated by the permit.
§ 104. Permit Requirements. [Ord. 2011-4, 11/9/2011]
No public gathering may be held within the jurisdiction of Kingston
Township, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania, unless the sponsor, the owner of
property, and the person in charge of property upon which the gathering
will be conducted jointly apply for and obtain a permit as herein provided.
A. No permit shall be granted for a public gathering of more than 48
hours' duration unless the application specifically requests and the
permit specifically allows an extension of that period.
B. No applicant shall be under 21 years of age.
C. No permit shall be transferred or assigned.
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 105
Ch:295
§ 105. Application; Fees. [Ord. 2011-4, 11/9/2011]
Written application for each public gathering shall be made to the Board
of Supervisors or its duly appointed agent of Kingston Township within 180
days prior to the date of the event.
§ 106. Public Safety. [Ord. 2011-4, 11/9/2011]
A. Applications shall be made on forms provided by the Board of
Supervisors of Kingston Township and shall contain the following
information:
(1) The full legal names, addresses and telephone numbers of all
applicants.
(2) The full legal name and address of the owner and person in charge
of the property to be utilized for the public gathering.
(3) The location and address of the property to be utilized for the
public gathering.
(4) A narrative statement as to the purpose for which the public
gathering is to be conducted.
(5) A statement of the number of persons expected to attend, view,
etc., such event and the duration of such event and the activities
conducted thereat.
(6) Applicants' statement that it or they shall abide by the terms and
provisions of this Part 1, and all laws, rules and regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, County of Luzerne and Township
of Kingston relating to public gatherings as herein defined.
B. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee to cover the cost of
issuance and administration of the permit in the amount of $150 as set
by the Kingston Township Fee Schedule. No part of the application fee
is refundable.
C. A deposit in the amount of $1,500 shall be made by the applicant before
the issuance of a permit to assure the payment of all actual costs
incidental to § 106.
D. The Board of Supervisors shall either grant or deny the application
within 45 days of the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of
Supervisors after receipt of the application.
1. Should the public gathering necessitate that the Township deploy or
employ additional personnel as a direct result of the public gathering,
such added expense shall be recoverable pursuant to Chapter 10, Part
5, of the Kingston Township Municipal Code and § 105C.
§ 105 KINGSTON CODE § 106
Ch:296
§ 107. Conduct of Public Assembly. [Ord. 2011-4, 11/9/2011]
§ 108. Penalties. [Ord. 2011-4, 11/9/2011]
Any person in charge of property, firm or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this Part 1 or any person who initiates, organizes, promotes,
permits, conducts or causes to be advertised a public gathering without
obtaining the permit provided in this Part, or who knowingly conducts,
permits or allows a public gathering with a permit but in violation of the
terms and provisions of this Part 1 and of the permit granted, or who shall
counsel, aid or abet such violation or failure to comply, upon conviction
thereof in an action brought before a District Justice in the manner provided
for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules
of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this Part
continues or each section of this Part which shall be found to have been
violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 109. Conformance with Other Provisions. [Ord. 2011-4, 11/9/
2011]
This Part 1 shall in no way be a substitute for, nor eliminate the necessity
of, complying with any and all state laws, rules and regulations, and county
and Township ordinances which are now, or may be in the future, in effect
which pertain to the conduct of public gatherings.
2. Should the public gathering necessitate that the Township incur
additional miscellaneous expenses, such expenses shall be recoverable
according to § 105C.
1. No permittee, or persons having control of the public gathering, shall
permit the condition of any illegal conduct on the premises, including
but not limited to disorderly conduct or illegal possession, sale, or use
of intoxicating beverages or illegal drugs.
2. The burden of preserving order during the public gathering is upon the
permittees of the public gathering. Any violations of the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or its rules and regulations, or other
ordinances of Luzerne County or of Kingston Township, or of the
conditions of the permit granted hereunder may be cause for immediate
revocation of the permit by the Board of Supervisors of Kingston
Township upon notification to the person in charge that a violation
exists and the failure of the person in charge to take immediate action
to correct the violation. Upon revocation of any permit, the permittees
of the public gathering shall immediately terminate the assembly and
provide for the orderly dispersal of those in attendance.
3. Entertainment, either live or recorded, utilizing sound amplification
equipment shall be operated in accordance with all of the Kingston
Township Code of Ordinances.
§ 106 HOME RULE CHARTER § 110
Ch:297
§ 110. Severability. [Ord. 2011-4, 11/9/2011]
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Board of Supervisors of
the Township of Kingston that, should the provisions, parts, sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses or other phrases of this Part 1 be declared
unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid by the judgment or decree of
a court of competence jurisdiction, that invalidity shall not affect any of
the remaining provisions, parts, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or
phrases of this codification.
§ 111. Savings Clause. [Ord. 2011-4, 11/9/2011]
The provisions of this Part 1 are declared to be severable. If any provision
of this Part 1 is declared to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall have no effect on the
remaining provisions of this Part 1 or any other ordinance of the Township
of Kingston.
§ 112. When Effective. [Ord. 2011-4, 11/9/2011]
This Part 1 shall become effective in accordance with law.
§ 110 KINGSTON CODE § 112
Ch:298
Part 2
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS LICENSE
§ 201. Definitions. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as amended by Ord.
1996-3, 8/14/1996, § 1]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
LEGAL HOLIDAY — New Year's Day, Mother's Day, Good Friday, Easter
Sunday, Memorial Day, Father's Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, corporation, or
other legal entity.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — Tents, membrane structures or any other
structures erected for less than 30 days.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS —
§ 202. License Required; Conditions of Issuance; Fee. [Ord. 1985-1,
2/13/1985]
No person shall engage in any transient retail business within the Township
without first having obtained from the Township Manager a license, for
which a fee, which shall be for the use of the Township, shall be charged as
provided from time to time by resolution.
§ 203. Exceptions. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as amended by Ord.
1989-4, 6/13/1989, § 1; and by Ord. 1996-3, 8/14/1996, § 2]
No license fee shall be charged:
Engaging in peddling, soliciting, or taking orders, either by sample or
otherwise, for any goods, wares, or merchandise upon any street, alley,
sidewalk, or public ground, or from house to house, within Kingston
Township; or
1.
Selling, soliciting, or taking orders for any goods, wares, or
merchandise, from a fixed location within Kingston Township, on a
temporary basis, which shall include, but not be limited to, such
activities conducted at the time of special occasions or celebrations, for
seasonal purposes, or for or in advance of specific yearly holidays.
The singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include the
singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
2.
1. To farmers selling their own produce;
2. For the sale of goods, wares, and merchandise, donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose;
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 203
Ch:299
§ 204. License Application. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Every person desiring a license under this ordinance shall first make
application to the Township Manager for such license. He shall, when
making such application, exhibit a valid license from any state or county
officer, if such license is also required. The applicant shall state:
3. To any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products, or milk and milk products;
4. To children under the age of 18 years who take orders for and deliver
newspapers, greeting cards, candy, bakery products, and the like, or
who represent the Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts or similar organizations;
5. To any honorable discharged member of any of the armed services who
complies with the Act of 1867, April 8, P.L. 50, 60 P.S. § 61 (1982),
hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the
General Assembly of Pennsylvania, and who procures from the
Prothonotary a certificate in pursuance of the Act of 1867;
6. To the seeking or taking of orders by insurance agents or brokers
licensed under the insurance laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania;
7. To any person who has complied with the provisions of the Solicitation
of Charitable Funds Act, August 9, 1963, P.L. 628, 10 P.S. §§ 160-1 et
seq. (1982), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania; or
8. For taking orders for merchandise, by sample, from dealers or
merchants for individuals or companies who pay a license or business
privilege tax at their chief place of business.
But all persons exempted hereby from the payment of the license fee
shall be required to register with the Township Manager and obtain
a license without fee; provided, any person dealing in one or more
of the above mentioned exempted categories, and dealing with other
goods, wares, or merchandise not so exempted, shall be subject to
the payment of the license fee fixed by this section for his activities
in connection with the sale of goods, wares, and merchandise not in
such exempted categories. Provided further, the Township Manager
may similarly exempt from payment of the license fee, but not from
registering with him, persons working without compensation and
selling goods, wares, or merchandise for the sole benefit of any
nonprofit corporation. Provided further: every license issued under the
provisions of this ordinance shall be issued on an individual basis to
any person or persons engaging in such business; every individual
shall obtain a separate license, issued to him in his name, and the
license fee hereby imposed shall be applicable to every such individual
license, except that a representative of a charitable organization may
obtain licenses for the applicants therein.
§ 203 KINGSTON CODE § 204
Ch:300
§ 205. Issuance of License; Custody, Display and Exhibit. [Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Upon receipt of such application and the prescribed fee, the Township
Manager, if he shall find such application in order, shall issue the license
required under this ordinance. Such license shall contain the information
required to be given on the application therefor. Every license holder shall
carry such license upon his person if engaged in transient retail business
from house to house or upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public
grounds, or shall display such license at the location where he shall engage
in such business if doing so at a fixed location. He shall exhibit such
license, upon request, to all police officers, municipal officials, and citizens
or residents of the Township.
§ 206. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as amended by
Ord. 1989-4, 6/13/1989, § 2; and by Ord. 1996-3, 9/14/1996, § 3]
No person in any transient retail business shall:
1. His criminal record, if any;
2. Name and address of the person by whom he is employed;
3. Type of goods, wares, and merchandise he wishes to deal with in such
transient retail business;
4. Length of time for which license is to be issued; and
5. Type and license number of the vehicle to be used, if any,
1. Sell any product or type of product not mentioned in his license;
2. Hawk or cry his wares upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or
public grounds in the Township;
3. When operating from a vehicle, stop or park such vehicle upon any of
the streets or alleys in the Township for longer than necessary in order
to sell therefrom to persons residing or working in the immediate
vicinity;
4. Park any vehicle upon any of the streets or alleys in the Township for
the purpose of sorting, rearranging, or cleaning any of his goods,
wares, or merchandise or of disposing of any carton, wrapping material,
or stock, wares or foodstuffs which have become unsaleable through
handling, age or otherwise;
5. Engage in any activity constituting transient retail business, as defined
in § 201, hereof, except by prior appointment, at any time on a Sunday
or legal holiday or at any time before 9:00 a.m., or after 6:00 p.m., on
any day of the week other than a Sunday or legal holiday.
6. Engage in any business from a fixed location or within a temporary
building or structure along or abutting any State highway or road
§ 204 HOME RULE CHARTER § 206
Ch:301
§ 207. Supervision; Records and Reports. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The Township Manager shall supervise the activities of all persons holding
licenses under this ordinance. He shall keep a record of all licenses issued
hereunder and shall make a report thereof each month to the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 208. Suspension and Revocation of License; Appeal. [Ord. 1985-1,
2/13/1985]
The Township Manager is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke any
license issued under this ordinance when he deems such suspension or
revocation to be beneficial to the public health, safety, or morals, for
violation of any provision of this ordinance, or for giving false information
upon any application for a license hereunder. Appeals from any suspension
or revocation may be made to the Board of Supervisors at any time within
10 days after such suspension or revocation. No part of a license fee shall
be refunded to any person whose license shall have been suspended or
revoked.
§ 209. Penalties. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as amended by Ord.
1996-3, 8/14/1996, § 4; and by Ord. 97-3, 11/12/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
without first obtaining all necessary highway occupancy permits and
all other necessary permits from the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation and delivering evidence of the same to the Township
Manager at the time of application for a transient business license.
7. Engage in any business activity from a fixed location or within a
temporary building or structure without first securing from the
Township Zoning Officer a temporary use occupancy permit certifying
that any such fixed location or temporary structure or building
conforms with all zoning regulations relating to the business use in the
zone in which the temporary structure or building is located in specific
request to setback lines, yard area requirements, sufficient of off-street
parking and permitted use with the zoning district.
8. Engage in any business activity from any temporary structure or
building, unless such temporary structure or building is connected to a
private or public sewage disposal system that has been approved by the
Sewage Enforcement Officer of the Township of Kingston and evidence
of such approval is delivered to the Township Manager at the time of
application for a transient business license.
9. Engage in any business activity from a fixed location or within a
temporary building or structure for a period in excess of 30 days within
a calendar year.
§ 206 KINGSTON CODE § 209
Ch:302
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 209 HOME RULE CHARTER § 209
Ch:303

Part 3
JUNK YARDS
§ 301. Definitions. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
FARM MACHINERY — All types of machinery and equipment which were
originally manufactured for farm use, which are retained on farm
properties, either as operable equipment or for the purpose of salvaging
repair parts.
JUNK — Any discarded or salvageable article or material including, but not
limited to, scrap metal, paper, rags, glass, containers, scrap wood, motor
vehicles, trailers, machinery and equipment, with the exceptions of farm
machinery and mobile homes or house trailers which are occupied or are
properly placed and planned for occupancy.
JUNK DEALER — Any person who buys, sells, salvages, stores, or in any
way deals in junk; or owns, leases, operates or maintains a junkyard within
the municipality.
JUNKYARD — Any place where junk as herein defined is stored or
accumulated. Any premises as herein defined having two or more
unlicensed motor vehicles and/or unlicensed trailers thereon shall be
deemed to be a junkyard, except that the foregoing shall not apply to duly
licensed automobile dealers having operable vehicles on their premises for
resale. Such exception shall not apply to inoperable vehicles being stored
primarily for salvage purposes.
MOTOR VEHICLE — All types of automobiles, trucks and tractors, including
self-propelled machinery of all kinds with the exception of farm machinery.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, company, corporation or
other legal entity.
PREMISES — Any parcel of land situated in the Township, having a separate
tax map parcel number for county assessment purposes.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to, municipal,
residual or hazardous wastes including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material.
TRAILER — Any wheeled vehicles not self-propelled, drawn by a motor
vehicle.
In this Part, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include
the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 302. License Required; Fees. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
No person may be a junk dealer as herein defined within the municipality
without first obtaining a license to operate as herein described.
§ 301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 302
Ch:305
1. Any person desiring to be a licensed junk dealer in the Township shall
first make written application to the Board of Supervisors. Such
application shall be in the form established by the Board of Supervisors
and shall set forth the applicant's name and address, include an
accurate description of the premises on which the junkyard is to be
located including the Luzerne County tax map parcel number(s), and a
statement that the applicant will comply with this ordinance and any
regulations adopted pursuant to this ordinance, and such other
information as the Board of Supervisors may require.
2. An application for license under this ordinance shall be examined by the
Board of Supervisors or duly authorized agent thereof and license
issued or refused within 60 days of submission to the Board of
Supervisors. Examination of the application shall include consideration
of the suitability of the property proposed to be used for the purpose of
the license, the character of nearby properties, and the effect of the
proposed use upon the Township. When the application is found in
compliance with the provisions herein given, the Board of Supervisors
or its agent shall issue a license to the junk dealer applicant for
operation of the junkyard as described in the application.
3. The license fee shall consist of two parts: the application fee shall be
$100 and it is not returnable in case of refusal of license; the annual
license fee shall be $100 per year. All fees are due, payable to and for
the use of the Township, at time of application. The Board of
Supervisors or its agent may waive the application fee when issuing
renewed licenses. The period of any license issued under this ordinance
shall be for one calendar year or portion thereof, and shall terminate on
December 31st of the year in which issued.
4. Licenses issued under this ordinance are required to be renewed on or
before January 1 of the year in which it is desired to continue
operations. Such application for renewal must be in writing, in such
form as may be required by the Board of Supervisors and accompanied
by the license fee. Renewal applications are subject to complete
reexamination and consideration by the Board of Supervisors or its
agents for continued compliance with the terms of this Part.
5. No person licensed under this Part shall, by virtue of one license,
operate more than one business or junkyard within the municipality. No
person shall engage in business or operate a junkyard at any place
other than the place designated by his license. Licenses are
nontransferable, both as to junk dealer and junkyard premises. The
permitted size of a junkyard shall be fixed at the time of license
issuance, with due regard for the existing and proposed uses of the
surrounding area and properties and shall not be in excess of 10 acres,
excluding setback areas.
§ 302 KINGSTON CODE § 303
Ch:306
§ 303. Posting of Junkyard Licenses; Operating Procedures. [Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The license under which the junkyard is operated shall at all times be
conspicuously posted on the licensed premises, and the operating
requirements as herein provided shall be complied with.
§ 304. Manner of Storage of Junk in Junkyards. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/
1985]
All junk in junkyards licensed under this Part shall be stored as herein
provided:
§ 305. Time Limit for Allowing Certain Materials to Remain on
Premises. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Paper, rags, plastic and similar materials for salvage shall not be
accumulated or remain on the junkyard premises for more than 60 days.
1. Permanent records of all junk received in or removed from any junkyard
shall be kept by the junk dealer on the premises, containing the name
and address from whom received or to whom delivered, the date
thereof, and a description of the junk. Such records shall be open to
inspection at all reasonable times by the Board of Supervisors or its
agent, and by any law enforcement officer.
2. Junkyards and businesses licensed under this ordinance may not
operate on Sunday, nor between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
except to remove any wrecked automobile from any public highway.
1. All junk shall be set back at least 40 feet from any adjoining premises
and at least 60 feet from the nearest right-of-way of any public street,
road or highway.
2. All junk shall be stored and arranged so as to permit access by firefighting
equipment. Junked motor vehicles shall be spaced in rows with
at least 20 feet between double rows; other junk shall be stored in piles
or tiers which shall be separated by aisles or cleared areas of no less
than 20 feet.
3. Junk shall be arranged so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant
water, and shall be stacked to a height of not more than 10 feet from the
ground.
4. All gasoline and oil shall be drained from junked motor vehicles within
24 hours of arrival on premises. Such gasoline and oil shall be stored at
only one location on the premises and not more than 50 gallons in the
aggregate, in proper containers, may be stored aboveground.
5. Paper, rags, plastics and similar materials for salvage shall be stored
indoors.
§ 303 HOME RULE CHARTER § 305
Ch:307
Materials separated as solid waste shall not be accumulated for more than
30 days.
§ 306. Certain Materials not to be Received or Stored in Junkyard.
[Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Garbage, organic waste, or plain solid waste shall not be received or stored
in any junkyard. Materials designated as solid waste may be received only
as mixed with salvageable materials and shall be promptly disposed of as
herein provided.
§ 307. Fencing and Screening; Maintenance. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/
1985]
Every junk dealer licensed under this Part shall enclose and maintain his
junkyard as herein provided:
§ 308. Right of Entry for Inspection; Additional Regulations
Authorized. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Every junk dealer and junkyard licensed under this Part is subject to
inspection and regulation as herein provided:
1. Every junkyard premises shall be completely enclosed by a fence. Such
fences shall be set back in accordance with the provisions of § 304,
subsection 1, of this Part, shall be six to eight feet in height, and shall be
of wood or wire with maximum lineal openings of three inches.
Entrance gates shall be of similar material, well constructed, and shall
be kept securely locked except during business hours. Fencing shall be
maintained in good condition throughout its length at all times.
2. Junkyard premises which have open-wire fence enclosures visible from
an abutting public thoroughfare or from an abutting residential
property within 500 feet of the fence shall have a landscaped screen of
trees and/or shrubs, of varieties capable of attaining a continuous
height of six feet within two years, planted along such fence or section
of fence. All required open areas between fence and lot lines of the
premises shall be maintained continuously in good order, free of weeds
and scrub growth.
3. The area inside the fence and lot lines of any junkyard premises shall
have weeds mowed regularly and not permitted to go to seed.
4. All junkyard premises shall be maintained in such manner so as not to
cause a public or private nuisance. Nor shall they cause any menace to
the health or safety of persons of the premises. Nor shall they cause any
excessive or offensive or noxious odors or sounds. Nor shall they cause
the breeding, harboring or infesting of rats, rodents or vermin. Nor
shall they be in violation of any health or sanitation law or ordinance or
regulation of any governmental body.
§ 305 KINGSTON CODE § 308
Ch:308
§ 309. Exceptions for Existing Junkyards. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The Board of Supervisors may waive the setback requirements as
established by § 304(1), and the planting requirements as established by
§ 307(2), for those junkyards in existence at the time of the enactment
of this ordinance, if such junkyard is in compliance with the other
requirements as provided by this ordinance, and if, in the Board of
Supervisors' discretion, compliance with said setback and planting
requirements would cause undue hardship to such existing junkyard.
§ 310. Time Limit for Existing Establishments to Comply and Obtain
License. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Junk dealers and junkyards operating and existing in the Township on the
effective date of this Part shall be required to comply with the provisions
of and obtain a license under this Part within six months from the effective
date.
However, an extension of the time allotted in complying with the terms
of this ordinance may be granted at the discretion of the Board of
Supervisors. Such extension shall be for good reason, and shall not exceed
six months.
§ 311. Penalties. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as amended by Ord. 97-3,
11/12/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 312. Enforcement Remedies. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The Board of Supervisors may take any appropriate action at law or equity,
civil or criminal, to enforce the provisions of this ordinance, and this
ordinance shall in no way restrict any remedies otherwise provided by law.
1. Any member of the Board of Supervisors or the agent of the Board may
at any reasonable time enter upon the premises currently licensed or
for which a license application is pending.
2. The Board of Supervisors may from time to time pursuant to resolution
adopt regulations to carry out the provisions of this Part, upon giving
notice to licensees affected by such regulations.
§ 308 HOME RULE CHARTER § 312
Ch:309

Part 4
FIRE/BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 401. Permit Required Prior to Installation. [Ord. 1985-5, 11/13/
1986, § 1; as amended by Ord. 1992-14, 2/10/1993, § 1; and by Ord.
2012-2, 4/11/2012, § 1]
Any individual, establishment, partnership, corporation, entity or concern
installing a fire and/or burglar alarm system shall first be required to obtain
a permit from the Township Zoning Officer prior to the installation of such
burglar and/or fire alarm system. The cost of the installation permit shall be
as provided in the Schedule of Fees, Chapter 1, Part 13, Subpart A, of the
Kingston Township Code of Ordinances ("Administrative Code").
§ 402. (Reserved)27
§ 403. System Vendors to Make Information Available to Township.
[Ord. 1985-5, 11/13/1985, § 3; as amended by Ord. 1992-14, 2/10/
1993, § 2]
Each and every individual, establishment, partnership, corporation, entity
or concern engaged in the sale and/or installation of fire and/or burglar
systems within the Township of Kingston shall, upon the request of any
Township official, and each quarter of the calendar year, furnish a list of the
names of the owners and/or occupiers of premises and the location thereof
within the Township of Kingston, upon or within which such a system or
systems shall be installed, including any such system or systems installed
prior to the effective date of this Part; and, no such system shall be installed
within the Township of Kingston unless and until a permit, as required by
§ 401, hereof, shall first have been obtained by the owner or occupier of any
premises upon which such a system is to be installed.
§ 403.1. Emergency Contact. [Ord. 1992-14, 2/10/1993, § 3]
Each and every individual, establishment, partnership, corporation, entity
or concern utilizing a fire/burglar alarm system shall provide for emergency
access, or individual(s) who have emergency access (keyholder), to
properties, when and if the primary occupant is not available to provide said
access to emergency fire and/or police personnel. The names, addresses,
and telephone numbers of the individual(s) having access for emergency
purposes shall be provided at the time the permit is issued for the fire/
burglar alarm in question, and the individual(s) shall respond within 15
minutes of the time that they are first contacted by emergency personnel.
27.Editor's Note: Former § 402, Annual License Fee for Direct Connection to Police, adopted
by Ord. 1985-5, 11/13/1985, § 2, was repealed by Ord. 2012-2, 4/11/2012, § 2.
§ 401 HOME RULE CHARTER § 404
Ch:311
§ 404. Service Charge for Multiple False Alarms. [Ord. 1985-5, 11/
13/1985, § 4; as amended by Ord. 1992-14, 2/10/1993, § 4; and by
Ord. 2012-2, 4/11/2012, § 3]
Should any burglar and/or fire alarm system hereinbefore described cause
more than two false alarms, whether by reason of malfunction of said
system or other reason, to occur during any twelve-month period, then
a service charge shall be levied against the owner or occupier of the
premises in or upon which such system is installed for each and every false
alarm occurring more than two times during such twelve-month period. The
service charge(s) hereby imposed shall be as provided in the Schedule of
Fees, Chapter 1, Part 13, Subpart A, of the Kingston Township Code of
Ordinances ("Administrative Code").
§ 405. Owners to Pay Charges. [Ord. 1985-5, 11/13/1985, § 5]
That any fees or charges due or payable by reason of any of the provisions of
this Part, shall be the responsibility of and payable by the owner or occupier
of the premises upon which such alarm system is installed, whether
individual, establishment, partnership, corporation, entity or concern,
within 30 days from the receipt of billing therefore by the Township
Secretary, and shall thereafter be collected by appropriate legal action as
permitted by law.
§ 406. Permit Fee for Installation Only. [Ord. 1985-5, 11/13/1985,
§ 6]
The installation permit fee imposed by § 401 hereof shall be non-recurring,
and shall be paid at or prior to the installation of the burglar and/or fire
alarm systems hereinbefore described.
§ 407. Right to Inspect. [Ord. 1985-5, 11/13/1985, § 7]
That the Township shall, if it deems necessary, have the right and privilege,
upon prior notification to the owner or occupier of any premises upon which
any such burglar and/or fire alarm system shall have been installed, to
inspect the connection, operation and maintenance of the system in order to
ensure the safe and proper operation thereof in order to avoid or minimize
the malfunction of any such system.
§ 408. Battery Operated, Self-Contained Alarms. [Ord. 1985-5, 11/
13/1985, § 8]
That the provisions of this Part shall not apply to any self-contained batteryoperated,
fire or smoke alarm detector or burglar-alarm detector installed
by the owner or occupier of any premises located within the Township of
Kingston, which is not attached to or an integral part of a fire and/or burglar
alarm system.
§ 404 KINGSTON CODE § 409
Ch:312
§ 409. Penalties. [Ord. 1992-14, 2/10/1993, § 5; as amended by Ord.
97-3, 11/12/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 410. Severability. [Ord. 1985-5, 11/13/1985, § 9]
That the provisions of this Part are severable. If any part of this Part
is declared to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, the validity of the
remaining provisions shall be unaffected thereby. It is the intention of the
Township of Kingston that this Ordinance would have been adopted had
such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid part not been included herein.
§ 411. Repealer. [Ord. 1985-5, 11/13/1985, § 10]
That all Ordinances of parts of Ordinances conflicting with the provisions of
this Part be and the same are hereby repealed.
§ 409 HOME RULE CHARTER § 411
Ch:313

Part 5
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ 501. Agreement. [Ord. 2013-2, 7/10/2013]
The nonexclusive cable franchise agreement negotiated with Comcast, a
copy of which is attached to and incorporated into this Part 5B and marked
as "Schedule A,"28 including all of the terms and conditions set forth therein,
is hereby accepted and ratified by the Township of Kingston; and, further,
the Chairman and Board Secretary of the Board of Supervisors are
authorized to execute the agreement on behalf of the Township of Kingston.
§ 502. Repealer. [Ord. 2013-2, 7/10/2013]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
Part 5B are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 503. Severability. [Ord. 2013-2, 7/10/2013]
The provisions of this Part 5B are declared to be severable. If any provision
of this Part 5B is declared to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall have no effect on the
remaining provisions of this Part 5B or any other ordinance of the Township
of Kingston.
§ 504. When Effective. [Ord. 2013-2, 7/10/2013]
This Part 5B shall become effective in accordance with law.
28.Editor's Note: The agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 501 HOME RULE CHARTER § 504
Ch:315

Part 6
BOTTLE CLUBS
§ 601. Purpose. [Ord. 10-2006, 10/11/2006, § 1]
The Board of Supervisors hereby declares that the purpose of this Part is to
regulate the hours of and operation of bottle clubs, also known as "B.Y.O.B.
Clubs," in order to preserve the health and general welfare of its citizens
and to protect the right of citizens to the quiet enjoyment of their property.
§ 602. Definitions. [Ord. 10-2006, 10/11/2006, § 2]
The following words or phrases, as the same are used herein or as the
same appear in the context hereof, unless otherwise indicated, shall have
the following meaning(s) ascribed to them in this Part:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any and all beverages, including malt
beverages, which contain alcohol, liquor or such other intoxicating
substances as are further defined in the Pennsylvania Liquor Code, 47 P.S.
§ 1-101 et seq.
BOTTLE CLUBS — Referred to herein as "B.Y.O.B. Club(s)" and the same
means any business facility such as a dance hall, club, structure open to
the public, or association existing on the date of enactment of this Part or
coming into existence thereafter, and which is licensed by the Pennsylvania
Liquor Control Board, wherein patrons, 21 years of age and older may,
after payment-of an entry fee, cover charge or membership fee, consume
alcoholic beverages which said patrons have carried onto the premises from
elsewhere and off the premises; also commonly referred to as "Bring Your
Bottle Clubs"; provided that a facility which is rented for a limited period
of time, not to exceed 12 hours, by individual or an organization for the
purpose of a private party in which all beverages are carried onto the
premises shall not be considered a "B.Y.O.B. Club" under the terms of this
Part.
§ 603. Operation hours; permits. [Ord. 10-2006, 10/11/2006, § 3]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons who own, operate, lease,
manage or control a "B.Y.O.B. Club" to:
§ 604. Liability. [Ord. 10-2006, 10/11/2006, § 4]
In the event any one of the unlawful activities specified herein is conducted
by or in the name of a corporation partnership, joint venture, firm or
association, or, any other entity, the officers, agents or principals are
A. Remain open and/or to transact business between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m., prevailing time, of each day and at any whatever
time on Sundays.
B. Conduct activities to which this Part applies without possessing a valid
club permit.
§ 601 HOME RULE CHARTER § 604
Ch:317
partners of said corporation, partnership, joint venture, firm or association,
shall be deemed in violation of this Part, as well as the person or persons
engaged in the unlawful activity.
§ 605. Separate Offenses. [Ord. 10-2006, 10/11/2006, § 5]
The unlawful activities specified herein shall constitute separate and
distinct offenses each and every day in which said activities are conducted.
§ 606. Requirements. [Ord. 10-2006, 10/11/2006, § 6]
Any and all "B.Y.O.B. Club(s)" to which this Part applies shall comply with
the following requirements:
§ 607. Application for Permit. [Ord. 10-2006, 10/11/2006, § 7]
A. Obtain broad form general liability coverage, $1,000,000 limit per
occurrence; proof of which shall be filed with the Township Manager;
and
B. Possess a valid certificate of occupancy issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry and the Township of Kingston Code
Enforcement Officer/Zoning Officer, and share prominently display said
certificate(s) as required; and
C. Obtain an annual fire inspection of the premises by the Kingston
Township Code Enforcement Officer; and
D. Obtain a valid "B.Y.O.B. Club" permit pursuant to § 607 and prominently
display said permit as required; and
E. Conspicuously post the hours of operation at the business premises
such that patrons are sufficiently made aware of the same.
A. Any person or persons desiring to operate or continue to operate a
"B.Y.O.B. Club" shall file with the Township Manager an application for
a "B.Y.O.B. Club" permit, which application shall include the following
information: the name and address of the "B.Y.O.B. Club," a statement
of the business address of the owner and lessor of the business
premises, and the nature of the ownership of the B.Y.O.B. Club (i.e.,
corporation, partnership, venture, association), the names and
addresses of any and all persons who possess an equity and/or financial
interest in the "B.Y.O.B. Club," and a notarized statement that the
"B.Y.O.B. Club" has complied with all of the requirements of the
provisions herein set forth.
B. The Township Manager shall determine whether the "B.Y.O.B. Club"
fully and completely complies with the provisions and requirements of
this Part within 10 days following the date on which the application is
received. If the Township Manager determines that the applicant fully
and completely complies with the provisions hereof, he shall issue a
"B.Y.O.B. Club" permit. If the Township Manager determines that the
§ 604 KINGSTON CODE § 607
Ch:318
§ 608. Penalty. [Ord. 10-2006, 10/11/2006, § 8]
Any person, persons or entity violating provisions of this Part shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a civil fine not exceeding $500 for each
offense hereunder.
application does not fully and completely comply with the provisions
herein, he shall deny the issuance of "B.Y.O.B. Club" permit and shall
provide written evidence of the same to the applicant together with the
reason(s) for the denial.
C. The "B.Y.O.B. Club" shall pay an administrative fee of $250 for a
B.Y.O.B. Club permit and $100 for each renewal thereof. Said "B.Y.O.B.
Club" permit shall be effective for a period of one year following the
date issuance, provided that in the event "B.Y.O.B. Club" fails to fully
and completely comply with the provisions hereof during the "B.Y.O.B.
Club" permit so issued, the Township Manager has the authority to
revoke the "B.Y.O.B. Club" permit for such failure to comply.
§ 607 HOME RULE CHARTER § 608
Ch:319
Chapter 14
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
§ 608 KINGSTON CODE § 608
Ch:320
Part 1
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME COURTS
§ 101. Definitions. [Adoptedx Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
As used in this Part 1, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly contained in one unit,
or in two units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of
again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete
and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erections thereon of a single mobile home, which is leased by the
park owner to the occupants of the mobile home erected on the lot.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership which
has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for
nontransient use, consisting of two or more mobile homes lots.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, corporation, company,
association, or other legal entity which rents or leases spaces in a mobile
home park.
PERMIT — The written approval as issued by the Township Manager,
authorizing a person to operate and maintain a mobile home or a mobile
home park under the provisions of this Part 1.
SERVICE BUILDING — A structure which contains operational, office,
recreational, sanitary, maintenance, or other facilities built for the use of
the mobile home park residents or owner.
SEWER CONNECTION — All pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the
drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser
pipe.
SEWER RISER PIPE — That portion of the sewer lateral which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home
space.
WATER CONNECTION — All pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the
water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within the
mobile home.
WATER RISER PIPE — That portion of the water service pipe which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point on
each mobile home lot.
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 101
Ch:321
WATER SERVICE PIPE — All pipes, fittings, valves and appurtenances from
the water main of the park distribution system to the water outlet of the
distribution system within the mobile home.
§ 102. Permits; Sale of Mobile Home Space. [Adoptedx Ord. 86-5, 1/
14/1987]
1. Permits Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain,
construct, alter or extend any mobile home park within the limits of the
Township unless he holds a permit issued by the Zoning Officer in the
name of such person for the specific maintenance, construction,
alteration, or extension proposed. The municipal permit shall be
conspicuously posted in the office or on the premises of the mobile
home park at all times.
2. Application to Township. The applicant shall also submit an application
to the Zoning Officer using a form furnished by the Zoning Officer for a
permit to operate a mobile home park in the Township.
3. Renewal Permits. Renewal permits shall be issued by the Zoning Officer
upon furnishing proof by the applicant that his park continues to meet
standards prescribed by this Part 1.
4. Inspection of Mobile Home Parks. A representative of the Zoning
Officer may inspect a mobile home park at reasonable intervals, and at
reasonable times, to determine compliance with this Part 1.
5. Compliance of Existing Mobile Home Parks.
A. Mobile home parks in existence at the date of adoption of this Part
1 may be continued so long as they otherwise remain lawful.
B. Any subsequent new construction, alteration or extension of an
existing mobile home park shall comply with the provisions of the
Township subdivision and zoning ordinances.
C. Any existing mobile home park which in the opinion of the Zoning
Officer creates a safety hazard shall be required to comply with this
Part 1 within a reasonable period of time as determined by the
Zoning Officer.
6. Individual Mobile Homes. Individual mobile homes permitted in areas
as set forth in the zoning ordinance and not located in a mobile home
park shall not be required to obtain a mobile home park permit;
however, they shall be required to obtain zoning and building permits
as prescribed by the Township ordinances.
Individual mobile homes shall comply with all other applicable
municipal ordinances and regulations governing single-family homes.
7. Inspection; Revocation of License. Whenever, upon inspection of any
mobile home park, it is determined that conditions or practices exist
which are in violation of any provision of this Part 1, or of any
§ 101 KINGSTON CODE § 102
Ch:322
§ 103. Fees. [Adoptedx Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
All fees shall be set by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to resolution.
§ 104. Application for Permit. [Adoptedx Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
Application for the mobile home park permit shall be filed in triplicate with
the Zoning Officer. The application shall be in writing, signed by the owner
and shall include the following:
§ 105. Water Supply. [Adoptedx Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Zoning Officer shall give
notice in writing in accordance with the provisions of this Part 1 to the
person to whom the permit was issued, advising him that unless such
conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time
specified in the notice, the license to operate in the Township shall be
suspended. At the end of such period, such mobile home park shall be
inspected and, if such conditions or practices have not been corrected,
the Zoning Officer shall suspend the license and give notice in writing
of such suspension to the person to whom the permit is issued.
A. Name and address of the owner;
B. Location and legal description of the mobile home park;
C. Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements and facilities
constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park; and
D. Such further information as may be requested by the various municipal
agencies to enable them to determine if the proposed park will comply
with legal requirements.
1. General Requirements. An adequate supply of water shall be provided
for mobile homes, service buildings, and other accessory facilities as
required by this Part 1. Where a public water supply system of
satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is available, connection shall
be made thereto and its supply shall be used exclusively. Where a
satisfactory public water supply system is not available, the
development of a private water supply system shall be approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources or other
authorities having jurisdiction over water supply systems.
2. Fire Hydrants. Where a public supply of water is provided, fire hydrants
shall be installed as agreed upon by the Board of Supervisors and the
agency responsible for supplying water.
3. Individual Water-Riser Pipes and Connections.
A. Individual water-riser pipes shall be located within the confined
area of the mobile home stand at a point where the water
connection will approximate a vertical position, thereby insuring
§ 102 HOME RULE CHARTER § 105
Ch:323
§ 106. Sewage Disposal. [Adoptedx Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
§ 107. Electrical Distribution System. [Adoptedx Ord. 86-5, 1/14/
1987]
the shortest water connection possible and decreasing
susceptibility to water pipe freezing.
B. The water-riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter of 3/4
inches and terminate at least four inches above the ground surface.
The water outlet shall be provided with a cap when a mobile home
does not occupy the lot.
C. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service
lines, valves and riser pipe and to protect risers from heaving and
shoving actions of ground during freezing weather. Surface
drainage shall be diverted from the location of the riser pipe.
D. A shut-off water valve below the frost line shall be provided near
the water-riser pipe in each mobile home lot. Underground stopand-
waste valves are prohibited unless their types of manufacture
and their method of installation are approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
1. General Requirements. An adequate and safe sewerage system shall be
provided in all parks for conveying and disposing of sewage from
mobile homes, service buildings and other accessory facilities.
2. Individual Sewer Connections.
A. Each mobile home stand shall be provided with at least a four-inch
diameter sewer riser pipe. This sewer riser pipe shall be imbedded
in poured concrete, minimum twelve-inch diameter and minimum
eighteen-inch depth. The rim of the riser pipe shall extend at least
1/2 inch above ground elevation. The sewer riser pipe shall be so
located on each stand that the sewer connection to the mobile
home drain outlet will approximate a vertical position.
B. The sewer connection (see section 1 for definition) shall have a
nominal inside diameter of not less than three inches, and the slope
of any portion thereof shall be at least 1/4 inch per foot. All joints
shall be watertight.
C. All materials used for a sewer connection shall be semirigid,
corrosive resistant, nonabsorbent and durable. The inner surface
shall be smooth.
D. Provisions shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a
mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be
diverted away from the riser.
§ 105 KINGSTON CODE § 107
Ch:324
§ 108. Service Buildings and Other Community Service Facilities.
[Adoptedx Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
§ 109. Refuse Disposal. [Adoptedx Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park shall
be so managed as to not create health hazards, rodent harborages, insectbreeding
areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution, and shall be in
accordance with the Township ordinances.
§ 110. Fire Protection. [Adoptedx Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
Fire protection provisions shall be in accordance with the Township
ordinances.
§ 111. Fuel. [Adoptedx Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile homes shall
be copper or other acceptable metallic tubing and shall be permanently
installed and securely fastened in place. All fuel storage tanks or cylinders
shall be securely fastened in place and shall not be located inside or beneath
the mobile home or less than five feet from and mobile home exit.
§ 112. Supervision; Responsibilities of the Park Management.
[Adoptedx Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
1. General Requirements. Every park shall contain an electrical wiring
system consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances
which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the
Township ordinances regulating such systems.
2. Power Distribution Lines. Main power lines not located underground
shall be suspended at least 18 feet above the ground, and shall have a
minimum vertical clearance of eight feet above any mobile home,
service building or other structure.
1. The requirements of this section shall apply to service buildings,
recreation buildings and other community service facilities when
constructed such as: management offices, repair shops, and storage
areas; laundry facilities; indoor recreation areas.
2. All structural requirements shall be in accordance with the Township
ordinances regulating same.
1. The person to whom a permit for a mobile home park is issued shall
operate the park in compliance with this Part 1 and shall provide
adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment
in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
2. The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile
home on its mobile home stand which includes securing its stability and
installing all utility connections.
§ 107 HOME RULE CHARTER § 112
Ch:325
§ 113. Revocation of Permit. [Adoptedx Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, it is determined that
conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this
Part 1, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Zoning Officer
shall give notice in writing to the person to whom the permit was issued,
advising them that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within
the period of time specified in the notice, the permit to operate shall be
suspended. At the end of such period, such mobile home park shall be
reinspected and, if such conditions or practices have not been corrected,
the Zoning Officer shall suspend the permit and give notice in writing of
such suspension to the person to whom the permit is issued. An aggrieved
party may file an appeal to the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the
Local Agency Law.
§ 114. Penalties. [Adoptedx Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; as amended by
Ord. 97-3, 11/12/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
3. The park management shall give the Zoning Officer or his
representative free access to all mobile home lots, service buildings and
other community service facilities for the purpose of inspection.
4. The management shall maintain a register containing the names and
addresses of all park occupants. Such register shall be available to any
authorized person inspecting the park.
5. The management shall notify the local Pennsylvania Department of
Health immediately of any suspected communicable or contagious
disease within the park.
§ 112 KINGSTON CODE § 114
Ch:326
Chapter 15
MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 114 HOME RULE CHARTER § 114
Ch:327

Part 1
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 101. Definitions and Interpretation. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
§ 102. Manner of Adopting Permanent Traffic and Parking
Regulations. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action.
§ 103. Provisions to be Continuation of Existing Regulations. [Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted, under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
§ 104. Temporary and Emergency Regulations. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/
1985]
1. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections on
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code (the Act of June 17,
1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except that, in this chapter, the
word "street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway"
and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in
the Vehicle Code.
2. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
3. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
1. The Township Manager shall have the following powers to regulate
traffic and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
A. In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
B. In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 104
Ch:329
§ 105. Experimental Regulations. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time by resolution, designate
places upon and along the highways in the Township where, for a period
of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate
such locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective as if they had been specified in this
chapter. No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of
any such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by
authority of this section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth
in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and
in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law
or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25 together with
costs of prosecution, provided that the purpose of this section is to allow for
the test and experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of
permanent changes in the ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and
parking.
§ 106. Traffic on Streets Closed or Restricted for Construction,
Maintenance or Special Events. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
2. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any
such regulations, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this Chapter 15 for a violation of such
nature, and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$25 together with costs of prosecution.
1. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or
station police officers at each end of the closed portion while
construction or maintenance work is underway or a special event is
being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
2. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is
underway and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such
restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign
§ 104 KINGSTON CODE § 106
Ch:330
§ 107. Use of Streets by Processions and Assemblages. [Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985]
directing that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
3. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. For the purpose of this section, the words "assemblage" and
"procession" shall have the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles, which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street.
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral caravan or
military convoy.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit from the Township Manager, which shall be issued
without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least one week
in advance of the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held;
but in any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to be
used, application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall state the place where and the date
when the assemblage is to be held, the hour when the assemblage may
convene and the hour by which it shall have been completely dispersed.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any
assemblage unless the permit has been granted or at any time or place
other than that authorized by the permit.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit from the Township Manager, which shall be issued
without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least two weeks
in advance of the day when the procession is proposed to be held; but in
any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to be used,
application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall specify the date on which the
procession is to be held, the route to be followed by the procession, the
hour when and place where participants may commence to assemble
and form before the procession is underway, the time when the
procession may commence to move along its route, and the time by
which the end of the procession shall have reached the end of the route
of the procession and the procession shall have been disbanded. It shall
be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any procession
unless the permit shall have been granted or under any conditions as to
time or route or otherwise than those stated in the permit.
§ 106 HOME RULE CHARTER § 107
Ch:331
§ 108. Authorization For Use of Speed-Timing Devices. [Ord.
1985-1, 2/3/1985; as amended by Ord. 1985-4, 11/13/1985, §§ 1 & 2;
Ord. 87-4, 8/12/1987, § 2]
4. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The Kingston Township Police Department is hereby authorized to use
all speed-timing devices for the determination of speed of a motor
vehicle as are approved by the Department of Transportation of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance with Title 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 3368.
2. This section authorizes the use of said device upon all highways within
the municipality of Kingston Township, be they township, county, or
state highways, and further, it authorizes the exercise of all powers
granted to "local authorities" under the Vehicle Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6101 et seq. (977), as
hereafter amended, supplemented, modified, or reenacted by the
General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 107 KINGSTON CODE § 108
Ch:332
Part 2
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
§ 201. Maximum Speed Limits Established on Certain Streets. [Ord.
2014-2, 5/14/2014]
1. Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets,
as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle, on
any part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies, at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
Street Between Maximum Speed Limit
Alfred Road Entire length 25 mph
Armstrong Street Entire length 25 mph
Atherholt Drive Entire length 25 mph
Avalon Court Entire length 25 mph
Bedford Street Entire length 25 mph
Beech Street Goeringer Avenue to
E. Franklin Street
25 mph
Beech Street Township line to E.
Franklin Street
25 mph
Beverly Drive Entire length 25 mph
Bodle Road W. 8th Street to
Township line
25 mph
Bramblewood Drive Entire length 25 mph
Breeze Way Entire length 25 mph
Brook Street Entire length 25 mph
Bunker Hill Road Carverton Road to
Dug Road
35 mph
Bunker Hill Road Dug Road to
Township line
35 mph
Butternut Road Entire length 25 mph
Carverton Road Route 309 to Sunrise
Estates
35 mph
Carverton Road Sunrise Estates to W.
8th Street
50 mph
Cedar Avenue Entire length 25 mph
E. Center Street Entire length 25 mph
E. Center Street Route 309 and Harris
Hill Road
25 mph
W. Center Street Route 309 to Pioneer
Avenue
25 mph
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 201
Ch:333
Street Between Maximum Speed Limit
Chestnut Street Entire length 25 mph
Church Road Township line to Mt.
Olivet Road
35 mph
W. Church Street Route 309 to Hillside
Road
35 mph
Circle Drive Sickler Road 25 mph
Clearview Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Cliffside Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Cloverleaf Lane Entire length 25 mph
Collins Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Coon Road Church Road to
Township line
25 mph
Country Road Entire length 25 mph
Crane Road Entire length 25 mph
Davis Street Entire length 25 mph
Division Street Entire length 25 mph
Dolores Road Entire length 25 mph
Druid Hills Pioneer Avenue to
Township line
25 mph
Dug Road Carverton Road to
Bunker Hill Road
35 mph
W. 8th Street S. Township line to N.
Township line
40 mph
Eileen Road Entire length 25 mph
Elinore Street Entire length 25 mph
Elm Terrace Entire length 25 mph
Evergreen Street Entire length 25 mph
Ferguson Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Field Ridge Road Entire length 25 mph
Fire Cut Road Entire length 25 mph
Frangorma Street Entire length 25 mph
E. Franklin Street Entire length 25 mph
Genoa Lane Entire length 25 mph
Glenview Street Entire length 25 mph
Goeringer Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Grandview Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Green Pond Road Entire length 25 mph
§ 201 KINGSTON CODE § 201
Ch:334
Street Between Maximum Speed Limit
Green Road Entire length 25 mph
Greystone Drive Entire length 25 mph
Grove Street Entire length 25 mph
Harford Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Harris Hill Road Route 309 to Manor
Drive
25 mph
Hazeltine Street Entire length 25 mph
Hellers Grove Entire length 25 mph
Heights Drive Entire length 25 mph
Hickory Street Entire length 25 mph
Highland Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Hillcrest Street Entire length 25 mph
Hill Street Entire length 25 mph
Hillside Road Route 309 to Church
Road
35 mph
E. Hillside Street Carverton Road to
end
25 mph
W. Hillside Street Carverton Road to
end
25 mph
Hilltop Drive Entire length 25 mph
Holcomb Road Route 309 to Pioneer
Avenue
25 mph
Holly Street Entire length 25 mph
Howell Road Entire length 25 mph
Inman Street Entire length 25 mph
Ivy Drive Maple Leaf Road to
Maple Leaf Road
25 mph
James Street Entire length 25 mph
Johnson Street Entire length 25 mph
Kenilworth Road Entire length 25 mph
Kimberly Lane Entire length 25 mph
Knob Hill Road Route 309 to Church
Road
25 mph
Krispin Road Mt. Olivet Road to
Township line
35 mph
Lakeview Drive Entire length 25 mph
Lantern Hill Road Entire length 25 mph
Lawn Street Entire length 25 mph
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 201
Ch:335
Street Between Maximum Speed Limit
Layou Street Entire length 25 mph
N. Lehigh Street Entire length 25 mph
S. Lehigh Street Entire length 25 mph
Lewis Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Limewood Road Entire length 25 mph
Lincoln Drive Entire length 25 mph
Longdale Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Louise Road Entire length 25 mph
N. Main Street Route 309 to Route
309
25 mph
N. Main Street Township line to E.
Center Street
25 mph
S. Main Street Route 309 to Route
309
25 mph
Manor Drive Carverton Road to
Mt. Olivet Road
35 mph
Maple Leaf Road Manor Drive to the
cul-de-sac
25 mph
Maple Street Entire length 25 mph
Mary Street Entire length 25 mph
Mathers Drive Church Road to end 25 mph
Meadowcrest Drive Entire length 25 mph
Moorgan Ridge
Circle
Entire length 25 mph
E. Mt. Airy Road Perrin Avenue to
Pioneer Avenue
25 mph
W. Mt. Airy Road Pioneer Avenue to
end
25 mph
Mt. Olivet Road E. Township line to W.
Township line
35 mph
Mt. Zion Road W. 8th Street to
Township line
35 mph
Oak Drive Entire length 25 mph
Oak Street Carverton Road to
Harris Hill Road
25 mph
Old Carverton Road Entire length 25 mph
Orchard Street Entire length 25 mph
Perrin Avenue Entire length 25 mph
§ 201 KINGSTON CODE § 201
Ch:336
Street Between Maximum Speed Limit
Pine Drive Entire length 25 mph
Pine Drive Ext. Entire length 25 mph
Pioneer Avenue Route 309 to
Township line
35 mph
Post Road Entire length 25 mph
Rice Street Entire length 25 mph
Ridge Street Entire length 25 mph
Roushey Street Entire length 25 mph
Route 309 Center Street to
Township line
35 mph
Route 309 Hillside Road to
Center Street
45 mph
Route 309 Township line to
Hillside Road
35 mph
School Street Entire length 25 mph
Shadetree Road Entire length 25 mph
Shagbark Drive Entire length 25 mph
Shaver Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Sickler Road Mt. Olivet Road to
Township line
35 mph
Skyline Drive Entire length 25 mph
Somerfields Drive Entire length 25 mph
Spring Street Entire length 25 mph
Spring Garden Street Entire length 25 mph
Stafford Street Entire length 25 mph
Stang Street Entire length 25 mph
Staub Road Entire length 25 mph
Summit Street Entire length 25 mph
Sunset Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Sutton Road Pioneer Avenue to
Township line
35 mph
Taminini Drive Entire length 25 mph
Taminini Drive Ext. Entire length 25 mph
Terrace Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Tiller Road Entire length 25 mph
Timber Grove Road Entire length 25 mph
Timothy Lane Entire length 25 mph
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 201
Ch:337
§ 202. Maximum Speed Limits Established on Certain Bridges and
Elevated Structures. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Street Between Maximum Speed Limit
Timothy Road Entire length 25 mph
Valley View Drive Entire length 25 mph
Village Drive Entire length 25 mph
Vine Street Entire length 25 mph
Vonderheid Street Entire length 25 mph
Wakefield Road Entire length 25 mph
Warden Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Wellington Road Entire length 25 mph
Williams Street Entire length 25 mph
Windy Drive Entire length 25 mph
Wood Street Entire length 25 mph
Woodbine Road Entire length 25 mph
Woodtip Drive Entire length 25 mph
Youngblood Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Zinn Street Entire length 25 mph
2. Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this section of the
Code of Ordinances of the Township of Kingston, upon conviction
thereof in an action brought before a district justice in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $35 or, in the event that the person is in violation
thereof by exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five miles
per hour, shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in
excess of five miles per hour over the maximum speed limit, as herein
provided, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs,
shall be subject to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
3. Conformance with other law. This section shall in no way be a substitute
for, or eliminate the necessity of, complying with any and all state laws,
rules and regulations and county and Township ordinances which are
now, or may in the future be, in effect which pertain to the operation of
motor vehicles on the public streets referred to herein.
1. Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain bridges
and elevated structures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle on any such bridge or elevated structure, at a higher speed
than the maximum prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure:
§ 201 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:338
§ 203. Maximum Speed Limits Established for Certain Vehicles on
Hazardous Grades. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
§ 204. Maximum Speed Limits Established in Parks. [Ord. 1985-1,
2/13/1985]
Bridge or Elevated
Structure Location
Maximum Speed
Limit
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
1. The following are declared to be hazardous grades, and, upon any such
hazardous grade, no person shall drive a vehicle, having a gross weight
in excess of that referred to for that grade, in the direction stated for
that grade, at a speed in excess of that established in this section for
that grade, and, if so stated for a particular grade, the driver of every
such vehicle shall stop the vehicle before proceeding downhill:
Street Between
Direction
of Travel
Maximum
Gross
Weight
Maximum
Speed
Limit
Required to
Stop Before
Proceeding
Downhill
Carverton
Road
Spring
Garden
Street and
Route 309
West 2,000
pounds
20 mph No
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over
the maximum speed limit.
1. A speed limit of 35 miles per hour is established on all streets and
roadways in the public parks maintained and operated by the Township,
except in the following locations, where the lower maximums, as
specified, shall apply:
Park Street Location
Maximum Speed
Limit
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 204
Ch:339
§ 205. Traffic Signals at Certain Locations. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985;
as amended by Ord. 1993-3, 9/8/1993, § 2; Ord. 97-2, 11/12/1997,
§ 6]
§ 206. Intersections Where Turn Prohibited on Red Signal. [Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985]
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
1. At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those
locations shall be directed by those signals:
Location Type of Signal Special Conditions
Route 309 and Carverton
Road
Traffic control Pursuant to PennDOT
Permit
Route 309 and Harris Hill
Road/ Pioneer Avenue
Traffic control Pursuant to PennDOT
Permit
Route 309 and Pendragon
Center
Traffic control Pursuant to PennDOT
Permit
Route 309 and East/West
Center Street/Roushey
Street
Traffic control Pursuant to PennDOT
Permit
Route 309 and East/West
Franklin Street
Traffic control Pursuant to PennDOT
Permit
2. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another
one-way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection Vehicles Traveling on Facing
Carverton Road Route 309 South
E. Center Street Route 309 North
W. Center Street Route 309 South
Route 309, S. Center Street East
Route 309, S. Church Road East
Route 309, S. Roushey Street East
2. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 204 KINGSTON CODE § 207
Ch:340
§ 207. Two-Way Streets Established. [Added by Ord. 2017-11, 11/8/
201729]
The following streets are established as two-way streets, and it shall be
lawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle on such two-way streets in
either direction of travel:
Street From To
South Main Street The intersection of
South Main Street and
Division Street
The northerly junction
of State Route No. 309
and South Main Street
§ 208. Rotary Traffic Islands Established. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
§ 209. Turning at Certain Intersections Prohibited or Restricted.
[Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as amended by Ord. 2017-11, 11/8/2017]
1. The following are designated as rotary traffic islands, and every vehicle
passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of
the island:
(Reserved)
2. Any person who drives a vehicle otherwise than to the right of any
rotary traffic island shall be guilty of a violation of this section and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle, traveling upon
the first-named street at any of the following intersections, in the
direction or directions indicated in each case, to make a left turn and/or
a right turn into the second-named street, as indicated, at any time
when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
29.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former § 207, One-Way
Streets Established, as amended.
§ 207 HOME RULE CHARTER § 209
Ch:341
§ 210. Right Turns Only Permitted at Certain Intersections. [Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985; as amended by Ord. 90-3, 4/11/1990, § 1]
§ 211. U-Turns Prohibited at Certain Locations. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/
1985]
Vehicles
Traveling
on
Direction
of Travel
Not to
Make Into When
Type of
Vehicle
Applicable
to
South Main
Street South
Left or right
turn
S.R. No.
309
At any
time
All motor
vehicles,
except
emergency
responder
vehicles
S.R. No.
309
North or
South
Left or right
turn
South
Main
Street
At any
time
All motor
vehicles,
except
emergency
responder
vehicles
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a right turn, at
any time stated, both left turns and straight-across traffic being
prohibited:
Vehicles Traveling
on
Direction of
Travel Times
Not to make left
turn into or travel
straight across
Bunker Hill Road Southwest All Until after stop
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon any of
the following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated
for that street, to make a U-turn:
Street Portion Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 209 KINGSTON CODE § 212
Ch:342
§ 212. No-Passing Zones Established. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
§ 213. Through Highways Established. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
1. The following are established as no-passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another
vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no-passing
zone:
Street
Direction of
Travel Between
Carverton Road East and
westbound
Route 309 to W. 8th
Street
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching
every intersection with the through highway except for those
intersections with traffic signals, or with exceptions or modifications as
indicated below. Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield
sign authorized by this section shall stop the vehicle or yield right-ofway
as required by Section 3323(b) or 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code, as
the case may be, and shall not proceed into or across the through
highway until he has followed all applicable requirements of that
section of the law:
Highway Between
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
3. Prohibition of Certain Use of Knob Hill Road. [Added by Ord. 2014-7,
11/25/2014]
A. Knob Hill Road is not a through highway road or street of Kingston
Township, and it shall not provide any public or private motor
vehicular use as an ingress, egress, or regress leading in a
northerly direction to Pennsylvania Route No. 309 or in a
southwesterly direction from Pennsylvania Route No. 309 to any
other portion of Knob Hill Road; except, however, the use of such
roadway as a through street by fire, police and/or related
ambulance motor vehicles responding to an emergency situation is
permitted.
B. Repeals. Any and all reference to Knob Hill Road as leading to
Pennsylvania Route No. 309 stated in Chapter 15 of the Code of
Ordinances (Motor Vehicles), Part 2 (Traffic Regulations), § 214
§ 212 HOME RULE CHARTER § 213
Ch:343
§ 214. Stop Intersections Established. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as
amended by Ord. 86-4, 7/9/1986; Ord. 1987-8, 1/13/1988; Ord. 90-3,
4/11/1990, § 2; Ord. 91-1, 2/13/1991, § 2; Ord. 91-7, 10/9/1991, §§ 1
& 2; Ord. 1992-10, 10/14/1992, § 1; Ord. 1993-3, 9/8/1993, § 4; Ord.
97-2, 11/12/1997, § 4; Ord. 1998-2, 3/11/1998, § 1; Ord. 99-15, 12/8/
1999, §§ 2; Ord. 2000-4, 4/12/2000, § 1; Ord. 2002-1, 2/28/2002, § 1;
Res. 2013-5, 8/14/2013; Res. 2013-7, 6/12/2013; Ord. 2014-7, 11/25/
2014]
(Stop Intersections Established), Subsections 1 and 2, is hereby
repealed.
C. Interpretation. This subsection shall not be interpreted to
constitute a legal vacation of any part of Knob Hill Road, but rather,
it is the imposition on Knob Hill Road of traffic control standards to
provide for the public health, safety and welfare of motorists to
prohibit motor vehicles from entering into or exiting from Knob Hill
Road from or onto Pennsylvania Route No. 309.
D. Enforcement. The Board of Supervisors is hereby empowered to
enforce this subsection, in addition to all other legal means, by
erecting, from time to time, barriers, fencing, or other like
obstructions to prevent motor vehicles from using Knob Hill Road
as an ingress, egress, or regress from or onto Pennsylvania Route
No. 309.
E. Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this Part 2 of
Chapter 15 of the Code of Ordinances of the Township of Kingston,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a District
Justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50.
F. Conformance With Other Laws. This Part of the Code of Ordinances
of the Township of Kingston shall in no way be a substitute for, nor
eliminate the necessity of, complying with any and all State laws,
rules and regulations, County and Township ordinances which are
now, or may be in the future, in effect which pertain to the
operation of motor vehicles on Knob Hill Road.
1. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 213) are established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the intersecting of through street) on the firstnamed
street (the stop street) in the direction or directions indicated
for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the
intersection on the first named or stop street, in the direction indicated
in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by Section 3323(b) of the
Vehicle Code, and shall not proceed into or across the second-named or
§ 213 KINGSTON CODE § 214
Ch:344
intersecting or through street until he has followed all applicable
requirements of that section of the law.
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Alfred Road Timothy Road South
Armstrong Avenue Village Street South
Armstrong Drive Mary Street West
Atherholt Drive Bunker Hill Road South
Atherholt Drive Dug Road West
Bedford Street N. Lehigh Street West
Beech Street E. Franklin Street North and south
Beech Street Goeringer Avenue East
Beech Street Longdale Avenue North and south
Beverly Drive Eleanor Drive East and west
Bodle Road W. 8th Street West
Bramblewood Drive S.R. 1029 Manor Drive Northwest
Breeze Way Genoa Lane North
Breeze Way Tiller Road South
Brook Street W. Center Street South
Brook Street Spring Street North
Bunker Hill Road Carverton Road North
Bunker Hill Road Dug Road West
Butternut Road Green Pond Road South
Butternut Road Woodbine Road East
Carverton Road W. 8th Street East
Cedar Street Goeringer Avenue East and west
Cedar Street Wood Street East
E. Center Street N. Main Street (4-way) East and west
W. Center Street Pioneer Avenue West
Chestnut Street E. Franklin Street South
Chestnut Street Glenview Avenue North
Church Road Hillside Road South
Church Road Mt. Olivet Road North and south
Circle Drive (2) Sickler Road West
Clearview Avenue E. Hillside Street East and west
Clearview Avenue Spring Garden Street West
Cliffside Avenue Holly Street East
§ 214 HOME RULE CHARTER § 214
Ch:345
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Clover Lane Timothy Road East
Cloverleaf Lane Timothy Lane East
Collins Avenue W. Mt. Airy Road South
Collins Street Armstrong Street North
Coon Road Church Road West
Country Road Crane Road North
Davis Street Pioneer Avenue East
Division Street Shaver Avenue West
Division Street Lehigh Street East and west
Division Street
[Added by Ord.
2017-11, 11/8/
2017]
South Main Street North and south
Dolores Road Taminini Road West
Doran Drive Orchard Street South
Druid Hills Pioneer Avenue West
Dug Road Carverton Road North
Echo Valley Trailer
Park
Harris Hill Road South
Eileen Road Alfred Road East
Eileen Road Tamanini Drive West
Eileen Road Tamanini Drive Ext. West
Eileen Road Alfred Road East
Eleanor Drive Carverton Road North
Eleanor Street E. Franklin Street South
Eleanor Street Glenview Avenue North
Elizabeth Street Davis Street North
Elm Terrace Staub Road North
Evergreen Street W. Center Street East
Evergreen Street Pioneer Avenue West
Ferguson Avenue W. Center Street South
Ferguson Avenue Route 309 East
Field Ridge Drive Country Road South
Fire Cut Road Bunker Hill Road North
Francis Slocum
Park
Mt. Olivet Road North
§ 214 KINGSTON CODE § 214
Ch:346
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Frangorma Street
(2)
W. Hillside Street West
E. Franklin Street N. Main Street East and west
E. Franklin Street Route 309 West
Genoa Lane Tiller Road South
Glenview Avenue Beach Street West
Goeringer Avenue E. Center Street South
Goeringer Avenue E. Franklin Street North and south
Goeringer Avenue Glenview Avenue North
Grandview Avenue W. Mt. Airy Road South
Green Road Manor Drive East and west
Green Road Mt. Olivet Road North
Green Pond Road Harris Hill Road South
Green Pond Road Manor Drive East
Grove Street Oak Street West
Harford Street Lawn Street West
Harris Hill Road E. Center Street West
Harris Hill Road S. Lehigh Street West
Harris Hill Road Manor Drive East
Harris Hill Road Oak Street East
Hazeltine Street N. Lehigh Street West
Heights Drive Church Road East
Heights Drive Mt. Olivet Road South
Hellers Grove (2) Harris Hill Road North
Hickory Street Elm Terrace West
Highland Avenue Dug Road East
Highland Avenue E. Hillside Street East and west
Highland Avenue Spring Garden Street East and west
Highland Avenue Kimberly Lane East and west
Hill Street Carverton Road North
Hillcrest Street Beech Street West
Hillcrest Street Goeringer Avenue East and west
Hillcrest Street Wood Street East
Hillside Road Route 309 South
§ 214 HOME RULE CHARTER § 214
Ch:347
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
E. and W. Hillside
Street
Carverton Road North and south
Hilltop Road Manor Drive West
Holcomb Road Pioneer Avenue West
Holcomb Road Route 309 East
Holly Street Carverton Road North
Howell Road Manor Drive East
Inman Avenue E. Center Street South
Ivy Drive Maple Leaf Road (2
locations)
North
James Street E. Center Street North
Johnson Street Pioneer Avenue East
Keller Lane Orchard Street South
Kenworth Road Wellington Road East
Kimberly Lane Staub Road North
Knob Hill Church Road North
Krispin Road Mt. Olivet Road South
Lantern Hill Road Sutton Road South
Laurel Lane Carverton Road South
Lawn Street E. Franklin Street North and south
Layaou Street E. Center Street South
N. Lehigh Street E. Center Street North and south
N. Lehigh Street Division Street East and west
S. Lehigh Street Division Street East
Lewis Avenue (2) Harris Hill Road North
Limewood Road Butternut Road South
Limewood Road Howell Road North
Loman Street Harris Hill Road South
Longdale Street Beech Street East
Louise Road Taminini Road West
Louise Road Alfred Road East and west
N. Main Street E. Center Street (4-way) North and south
N. Main Street E. Franklin Street North and south
N. Main Street Route 309 (no left turn
onto Route 309)
North
N. Main Street Route 309 South
§ 214 KINGSTON CODE § 214
Ch:348
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
N. Main Street Shaver Avenue South
Manor Drive Carverton Road South
Manor Drive Mt. Olivet Road East
Maple Street Carverton Road North
Mapleleaf Road S.R. 1029 to Manor Drive West
Mary Street W. Mt. Airy Road South
Mathers Drive Church Road North
Mathers Drive Knob Hill North
Meadowcrest Drive Dug Road East
Melrose Street W. Mt. Airy Road North
Mooregan Ridge
Circle
Timber Grove Road South
E. Mt. Airy Road Perrin Avenue East
E. Mt. Airy Road Pioneer Avenue West
W. Mt. Airy Road Pioneer Avenue East
W. Mt. Airy Road Collins Avenue East and west
W. Mt. Airy Road Mary Street East and west
Mt. Zion Road W. 8th Street West
Oak Drive Mt. Olivet Road South
Oak Drive Pine Drive Ext. North
Oak Street Carverton Road South
Oak Street Harris Hill Road North
Old Carverton Road
(2)
Carverton Road South
Ondish Road E. Center Street East and south
Orchard Street Harris Hill Road East
Orchard Street S. Lehigh Street East and west
Perrin Avenue Roushey Street North
Pine Drive Heights Drive West
Pine Drive Mt. Olivette Road South
Pine Drive Ext. Pine Drive East
Pine Drive Ext. Heights Drive West
Pioneer Avenue Route 309 South
Pioneer Avenue Davis Street North and south
Pioneer Avenue E. Mount Airy Road North and south
§ 214 HOME RULE CHARTER § 214
Ch:349
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Pioneer Avenue W. Mount Airy Road North and south
Pioneer Avenue W. Center Street North and south
Post Road Cliffside Avenue Northeast
Rice Avenue Orchard Street South
Ridge Street E. Center Street North
Roushey Street Pioneer Avenue West
School Street W. Center Street North and south
School Street Roushey Street North and south
Shade Tree Road Green Pond Road South
Shade Tree Road Manor Drive East
Shade Tree Road Woodbine Road East and west
Shagbark Drive E. Center Street North
Shaver Avenue N. Main Street South
Shaver Avenue Vine Street North and south
Sickler Road Mt. Olivet Road South
Skyline Drive E. Hillside Street East and west
Somerfields Drive Somerfields Lane North and south
South Lehigh Street Harris Hill Road South
Spring Street Ferguson Avenue East
Spring Garden
Street
Carverton Road North
Stafford Street Davis Street North
Staub Road Carverton Road North
Staub Road Maple Street West
Staub Road Hill Street East and west
Stang Street N. Lehigh Street West
Summit Street E. Center Street North
Sutton Road Pioneer Avenue East
Taminini Road Carverton Road South
Taminini Road Timothy Road South
Terrace Avenue Dug Road East
Terrace Avenue E. Hillside Street East and west
Terrace Avenue Spring Garden Street East and west
Tiller Road Manor Drive West
Timber Grove Road Lantern Hill Road South
§ 214 KINGSTON CODE § 214
Ch:350
§ 215. Yield Intersections Established. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as
amended by Ord. 94-10, 7/13/1994, § 1]
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Timothy Lane Crane Road South
Timothy Lane Harris Hill Road North
Timothy Road Taminini Road West
Timothy Road Crane Road South
Timothy Road Alfred Road East
Timothy Road Tamanini Drive West
Valley View Drive
(2)
Mt. Olivet Road North
Valley Drive Armstrong Drive South
W. Village Drive Collins Avenue West
Village Street Collins Street East and west
Vine Street N. Lehigh Street East
Vine Street Shaver Avenue West
Vonderheid Street Pioneer Avenue East
Vonderheid Street Stafford Street West
Warden Avenue (2) Pioneer Avenue East
Wellington Road Pioneer Avenue East
Williams Street W. Mt. Airy Road South
Wood Street E. Center Street South
Woodbine Road Green Pond Road South
Woodbine Road Howell Road North
Woodbine Road Shade Tree Road North and south
Woodtip Street (2) W. Hillside Street East
Youngblood Avenue E. Center Street East
Youngblood Avenue Goeringer Avenue West
Zinn Street Pioneer Avenue East
Zinn Street Stafford Street West
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 213) are established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the through street) on the first-named street (the
§ 214 HOME RULE CHARTER § 215
Ch:351
§ 216. Play Highways Established and Authorized. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/
13/1985]
§ 217. Snowmobile Roads Designated. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
yield street) in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on
the first-named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by Section 3323(c) of
the Vehicle Code, and then yield the right-of-way as required by that
subsection of the Vehicle Code.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following areas upon the streets in the Township are established as
play highways:
Street Between Days Hours
(Reserved)
2. The Township Manager is authorized to designate as play highways,
whenever he deems that action advisable, and for whatever period of
time directed by him, any part of any street in the Township, where
sledding and coasting shall be permitted. That play highway shall be set
apart for the purpose under the direction of the Township Manager.
3. No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon any play highway at any
time when that street shall be designated as a play highway, except in
case of emergency, with special permission of the Manager or of the
police officer in charge, who shall first clear that play highway of all
persons using it for the purpose for which it was set aside. Any person
who violates any provision of this subsection shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following roads and streets within the Township are designated as
special snowmobile roads:
Street or Road Between
Used by
Snowmobiles Only
When Closed to
Vehicular Traffic?
Shared with
Vehicular
Traffic?
(Reserved)
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile on any
highway, street or road in the Township other than as provided above,
provided that nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from
operating a snowmobile on any other street in the Township:
§ 215 KINGSTON CODE § 217
Ch:352
§ 218. Restrictions on Use of Pushcarts. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
A. As authorized by Section 7721 of the Vehicle Code for emergency
and bridge crossings and for direct crossing of streets or two-lane
highways; or
B. For special snowmobile events where authorized in advance and
the street is blocked off as provided in Section 7723 of the Vehicle
Code. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
subject to the penalties prescribed in Section 7752(a) of the Vehicle
Code.
1. The word "pushcart," as used in this section, shall mean a vehicle, other
than a pedalcycle, propelled solely by human power, and used or
intended for use for the display, transport, exhibit or sale of goods,
wares or merchandise.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any
sidewalk in any business district except as necessary to move the
pushcart to a location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded or from
which goods, wares or merchandise are to be sold or dispensed under
permit from the Township Manager as provided in Subsection 3 of this
section.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a pushcart upon any sidewalk
except for the purpose of selling or dispensing from that pushcart
goods, wares or merchandise to passersby under permit from the
Township Manager. Every such permit shall be issued to the person
making application for the permit, upon payment of a fee, which shall
be for the use of the Township, of $100 for any calendar year, $50 for
any six-month period, or $25 for any three-month period. The permit
shall be granted to the applicant, upon payment of the fee, and upon his
signing an agreement with the Township Manager that he shall be
bound by the conditions imposed by the Township Manager and made a
part of the permit, dealing with the following matters:
A. Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or more
stated locations upon the sidewalk and to stated days and hours at
each location;
B. Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the
disposal of garbage and refuse resulting from the operations
carried on;
C. Requiring that there be no violation of any law, ordinance or
regulation pertaining to health, sanitation and the handling of food
or drink.
4. Any person who violates any provision of this section, or any condition
of any permit granted under this section, shall be guilty of a summary
offense and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and
costs.
§ 217 HOME RULE CHARTER § 219
Ch:353
§ 219. Skates, Coasters, Sleds and Other Toy Vehicles. [Ord. 1985-1,
2/13/1985]
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on a sled upon any sidewalk in
the Township, or upon any roadway unless that roadway is on a portion
of a street blocked off for sledding by authority of § 105 of Part 1 or
§ 216 of Part 2 of this chapter, provided that nothing in this subsection
shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a sled, with or without a rider,
upon a sidewalk.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in rollerskating or to ride
upon or propel any coaster or other toy vehicle upon:
A. Any street except in order to cross the roadway; or
B. Any sidewalk located in a business district, except that nothing in
this subsection shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a coaster or
other toy vehicle, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
3. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
§ 219 KINGSTON CODE § 219
Ch:354
Part 3
RESTRICTIONS ON SIZE, WEIGHT AND TYPE OF VEHICLE AND
LOAD
§ 301. Vehicle Weight Limits Established on Certain Streets and
Bridges. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
§ 302. Restrictions on Size of Vehicles on Certain Streets and
Bridges. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
§ 303. Restrictions as to Weight and Size of Vehicles on Certain
Streets and Bridges. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
1. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by Section 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for
any person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination having a
gross weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that bridge
or street or part of street, as the case may be:
Street or Bridge Between
Maximum Gross
Weight
Church Road Route 309 and Hillside
Road
5 tons (10,000 lbs.)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Sections 4902(a) and 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle Code
and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 plus $150
for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the
maximum allowable weight, and costs.
1. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by Section 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for
any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the size
restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street:
Street or Bridge Between Restriction
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Sections 4902(a) and 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle Code
and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $75 and costs.
1. By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by
authority granted by Section 4902(b) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation
of the restriction prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of
street.
Street or Bridge Between Restriction
§ 301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 303
Ch:355
§ 304. Truck Traffic Restricted on Certain Streets. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/
13/1985; as amended by Ord. 1988-15, 12/14/1988, §§ 1, 3]
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Section 4902(b) and 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle Code
and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$25 and not more than $100 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a
passenger car on any of the following streets or parts of streets,
provided that nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from
driving an emergency vehicle on any of those streets or parts of streets,
or from driving on any of those streets or parts of streets a truck or
other commercial vehicle making local deliveries to or pickups from
premises located along that street or part of a street:
Street Between
Main Street Extending in a southeasterly direction from the
Dallas Township-Kingston Township boundary
line to the intersection of Main Street and Route
309
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to
pay a fine of $50 and costs.
§ 303 KINGSTON CODE § 304
Ch:356
Part 4
GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS
§ 401. Vehicles to be Parked Within Marked Spaces. [Ord. 1985-1,
2/13/1985]
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 402. Angle Parking Required on Portions of Certain Streets. [Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of streets:
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
On all streets where angle parking is required, every vehicle parked at the
angle shall be parked with its front nearest the curb.
§ 403. Parking Prohibited at All Times in Certain Locations. [Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985; as amended by Ord. 1985-6, 1/8/1986, § 1; Ord.
87-5, 9/16/1987; Ord. 91-1, 2/13/1991, §§ 3 & 4; Ord. 94-10, 7/13/
1994, § 2; Ord. 97-2, 11/12/1997, §§ 1, 5, 7; Ord. 2001-7, 12/12/2001,
§ 1; Ord. 2002-8, 1/8/2003, § 2]
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
Carverton Road Both Route 309 to Old Carverton Road
E. Center Street Both Ondish Road to Route 309
E. Center Street South Route 309 and Main Street
W. Center Street North Brook Street to Pioneer Avenue
Church Road
(Carverton)
Both Mt. Olivet Road to State Park and Mt.
Olivet Road 100 feet north
Church Road
(Trucksville)
North Route 309 and Knob Hill Road
Cliffside Road East Holly Street to Fairview Avenue
(private road)
Davis Street North Pioneer Avenue to Stafford Street
Davis Street South Pioneer Avenue and 30 feet west of
intersection
Division Street Both South Main Street to N. Lehigh Street
Elm Terrace West Hickory Street 100 feet south
§ 401 HOME RULE CHARTER § 403
Ch:357
Street Side Between
E. Franklin Street Both Main Street to Wood Street
E. Franklin Street North Route 309 to Main Street
Hillside, East South Terrace Avenue and 150 feet west of
the intersection
Hillside, East North Carverton Road and 130 feet east of
the intersection
Hillside, West Both Carverton Road and 30 feet west of
the intersection
Holly Street South Carverton Road to Staub Road
Lantern Hill Road Both Sutton Road to cul-de-sac
N. and S. Lehigh
Street
Both E. Center Street to Harris Hill Road
Main Street Both E. Franklin Street north and south 100
feet; and E. Center Street and Shaver
Avenue
Main Street Both Shaver Avenue and U.S. Route 309*
N. Main Street West 150 feet north from intersection with
E. Center Street
Morgan Ridge Circle Both Timber Grove Road to cul-de-sac
Mt. Olivet Road Both 300 feet north and south of Church
Road
Oak Street West Harris Hill Road and Grove Street
Perrin Avenue Both Roushey Street to dead end
Pioneer Avenue Both Route 309 and N. Township line
Post Road South Dead end to Cliffside Avenue
Route 309 Both Center Street to Franklin Street
Rice Street East Orchard Street and dead end
Shaver Avenue Both Entire length
Spring Street Both Ferguson Avenue and Brook Street
Stafford Street Both Entire length
Stafford Street West Entire length
Staub Road Both Maple Street to Holly Street
Terrace Avenue Northwest In front of lot known as No. 188
Terrace Avenue.
Timber Grove Road Both Lantern Hill Road to Township line
* Established by Ord. 85-6, which also incorrectly established a penalty
which conflicted with Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
§ 403 KINGSTON CODE § 404
Ch:358
§ 404. Parking Prohibited in Certain Locations Certain Days and
Hours. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as amended by Ord. 91-1, 2/13/
1991, § 5; Ord. 91-7, 10/9/1991, § 2; Ord. 94-7, 4/13/1994 § 1; Ord.
97-2, 11/12/1997, § 2]
§ 405. Parking Prohibited During Snow and Ice Storms. [Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985; as added by Ord. 94-7, 4/13/1994, § 2]
Parking of all motor vehicles shall be prohibited in the following locations
during snow and ice storms and extending for a period of eight hours
following the termination of the storm in order to facilitate snow and ice
removal:
Street Side Between Days Hours
All streets Both Commencement of a
storm and for 8 hours
following the
termination of a storm
All 24 hours
§ 406. Parking of Trucks, Buses and Certain Other Vehicles
Prohibited in Certain Locations. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or to allow to remain parked,
on any of the following streets or parts of streets, any vehicle other than a
passenger car (which shall not include any bus, motor home or passenger
car attached to a trailer of any kind):
Street Between
All streets in residential districts More than 3 hours
§ 407. Parking Time Limited in Certain Locations Certain Days and
Hours. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer than
the time indicated, in any of the following locations, at any time on the days
and between the hours indicated:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking
Time
Limit
(Reserved)
1. Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the
days and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
Street Side Between Days Hours
All streets Both Nov. 1 – Mar. 31
every year
All days 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m.
§ 404 HOME RULE CHARTER § 408
Ch:359
§ 408. Special Purpose Parking Zones Established; Parking
Otherwise Prohibited. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked,
in any such zone, except as specifically provided for that zone:
Street Side Location
Authorized Purpose
or Vehicle
(Reserved)
§ 409. Standing or Parking on Roadway for Loading or Unloading.
[Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other
than a pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of any street, except that standing or parking for the
purpose of loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted
Monday through Saturday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m.
and between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., and for no longer than
necessary for the loading or unloading.
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 410. Parking on Private Property, Public Property, or Quasi-Public
Property. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as added by Ord. 99-9, 9/8/1999,
§ 1]
No person shall park or leave unattended any vehicle, truck, tractor, or
semitrailer on private property, public property or quasi-public property
without the proper consent of the owner or other person in control or
possession of the property, or in any of the following locations on such
property:
A. Within any fire lane, where posted by official signs.
B. Within any traffic way. A "traffic way" is the entire width between
property lines or other boundary lines of every way or place of which
any part is open to the public for the purpose of vehicular travel as a
matter of right or custom.
C. In a designated handicapped parking zone, unless the vehicle bears
registration plates or an official placard issued to handicapped persons
or disabled persons and is being operated by or for the transportation of
the handicapped person or disabled veteran.
D. At any place where official signs and/or markings prohibit stopping,
standing or parking.
§ 408 KINGSTON CODE § 411
Ch:360
§ 411. Penalties. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as amended by Ord.
1987-5, 9/14/1987; Ord. 1998-2, 3/11/1998, § 2]
Any person violating this Part, and the owner of any vehicle parked in
violation of this Part, shall be subject to a fine and penalty of not less than
$10, if paid within five business days of the date of the violation, and not
exceeding $300 in any instance for the violation, which fine and penalty may
be collected by suit or summary proceedings brought in the name of the
Township of Kingston before any Magistrate.
§ 411 HOME RULE CHARTER § 411
Ch:361

Part 5
REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES
§ 501. Applicability and Scope. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
This Part is enacted under authority of Section 6109(a-22) of the Vehicle
Code30 and gives authority to the Township to remove and impound those
vehicles which have been abandoned or are not legally entitled to operate
or park on the streets and highways of the commonwealth under authority
of the Vehicle Code.
§ 502. "Abandoned Vehicle" Defined. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
§ 503. Removal of Vehicle by or at Direction of Police. [Ord. 1985-1,
2/13/1985]
1. A vehicle (other than a pedalcycle) shall be presumed to be abandoned
under any of the following circumstances, but the presumption is
rebuttable by a preponderance of the evidence:
A. The vehicle is physically inoperable and is left unattended on a
highway or other public property for more than 48 hours;
B. The vehicle has remained illegally on a highway or other public
property for a period of more than 48 hours;
C. The vehicle is left unattended on or along a highway or other public
property for more than 48 hours and does not bear all of the
following:
(1) A valid registration plate.
(2) A certificate of inspection.
(3) An ascertainable vehicle identification number.
D. The vehicle has remained on private property without the consent
of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 48
hours.
2. Vehicles and equipment used or to be used in construction or in the
operation or maintenance of highways or public utility facilities, which
are left in a manner which does not interfere with the normal movement
of traffic, shall not be considered to be abandoned.
1. Outside Business and Residence Districts. Whenever any police officer
finds a vehicle in violation of any of the provisions of Section 3351 of the
Vehicle Code (relating to stopping, standing and parking outside
business and residence districts), the officer may move the vehicle, or
cause the vehicle to be moved, or require the driver or other person in
30.Editor's Note: 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 101 et seq., as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified
or reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 501 HOME RULE CHARTER § 503
Ch:363
charge of the vehicle to move the vehicle, to a position off the roadway
where the vehicle will not interfere unduly with the normal movement
of traffic or constitute a safety hazard.
2. Unattended Vehicle Obstructing Traffic. Any police officer may remove
or cause to be removed to a place of safety any unattended vehicle
illegally left standing upon any highway, bridge, causeway or in any
tunnel, in such position or under such circumstances as to interfere
unduly with the normal movement of traffic or constitute a safety
hazard.
3. Removal to Garage or Place of Safety. Any police officer may remove or
cause to be removed to the place of business of the operator of a
wrecker or to a nearby garage or other place of safety any vehicle found
upon a highway under any of the following circumstances:
A. Report has been made that the vehicle has been stolen or taken
without the consent of its owner.
B. The person or persons in charge of the vehicle are physically
unable to provide for the custody or removal of the vehicle.
C. The person driving or in control of the vehicle is arrested for an
alleged offense for which the officer is required by law to take the
person arrested before an issuing authority without unnecessary
delay.
D. The vehicle is in violation of Section 3353 of the Vehicle Code
(relating to prohibitions in specified places), except for overtime
parking.
E. The vehicle has been abandoned as defined herein. The officer shall
comply with the provisions of Subsection 4 and Chapter 75
(relating to abandoned vehicles and cargos) of the Vehicle Code.
4. Notice to Owner Prior to Removal.
A. Prior to removal of an abandoned vehicle bearing a registration
plate, certificate of inspection or vehicle identification number
plate by which the last registered owner of the vehicle can be
determined, the Police Department shall send a notice by certified
mail to the last registered owner of the vehicle informing the owner
that unless the vehicle is moved to a suitable location within seven
days of the date notice is mailed, the vehicle will be removed under
this section and held at a suitable facility where it may be
reclaimed by the owner in accordance with the provisions of
Section 7306 (relating to payment of costs upon reclaiming
vehicle). If the abandoned motor vehicle does not bear an
identifiable registration plate, certificate of inspection or vehicle
identification number plate, the notice may be secured to the
vehicle.
§ 503 KINGSTON CODE § 503
Ch:364
§ 504. Designation of Approved Storage Garages; Bonding; Towing
and Storage. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Any police officer may remove or removal and impounding of vehicles
under this chapter shall be done only by approved storage garages that
shall be designated from time to time by the Board of Supervisors. Every
such garage shall submit evidence to the Board of Supervisors that it is
bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to
the Board of Supervisors as sufficient to indemnify owners of impounded
vehicles against loss or damage to those vehicles while in the custody of the
garagekeeper for the purpose of towing or storage. The approved storage
garage shall submit to the Board of Supervisors its schedule of charges for
towing and storage of vehicles under this chapter, and, when the schedule
is approved by the Board of Supervisors, those charges shall be adhered
to by the approved storage garage; no different schedule of charges shall
be demanded of or collected from any person whose vehicle is removed or
impounded under this chapter by any approved storage garage. The Board
of Supervisors shall delete from its list of approved storage garages any
garage that makes any unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle
removed or impounded under this chapter.
§ 505. Effect of Payment of Towing and Storage Charges. [Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this chapter
shall, unless payment is made under protest, be final and conclusive and
B. If, within the seven-day period, the owner so requests, the owner
shall be given an opportunity to explain to the police officer or
department why the owner believes the vehicle should not be
removed. If the police officer or department determines that the
vehicle shall, nonetheless, be removed, the owner shall be given an
additional 48 hours to remove the vehicle, have it removed or
demand a hearing, which shall conform to the requirements of 2
Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 5, Subchapter B (relating to practice and
procedure of local agencies). The police officer or department shall
inform the owner of the right to a hearing by delivering to the
owner a notice warning the owner that, unless the vehicle is
removed or a hearing is demanded, the owner shall be subject to
the provisions of Section 7306. If, as a result of the hearing, it is
determined that the vehicle will be removed, the owner shall be
given an additional 48 hours to remove the vehicle or have it
removed. The hearing shall be before a civilian officer or employee
of the municipality in which the vehicle is located.
C. The provision for notice set forth in this subsection is applicable
only if the vehicle is abandoned upon a highway and is not in
violation of Section 3351(a) or 3353(a) and (b). Notice under this
subsection is in addition to any other notice requirements provided
in the Vehicle Code.
§ 503 HOME RULE CHARTER § 505
Ch:365
shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid. If
payment of any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a District Justice. Payment
of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver of any
vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the provision
of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 506. Reclamation Costs. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage
costs, plus a $25 fee, of which $10 shall be transferred to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation by the garage to which the vehicle was taken.
§ 507. Records of Vehicles Removed and Impounded. [Ord. 1985-1,
2/13/1985]
The Township shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded
under this Part and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the
owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to
the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 508. Restrictions upon Removal of Vehicles. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/
1985]
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this Part or the Vehicle
Code if, at the time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the
time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness
and intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 509. Penalty. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 together with all costs of
disposing of the vehicle under provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 P.S. § 7301
et seq. (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted
by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 505 KINGSTON CODE § 509
Ch:366
Part 6
SNOW AND ICE EMERGENCY
§ 601. Declaration of Snow and Ice Emergency. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/
1985]
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named in § 603 of this
Part, the Township Manager, in his discretion, may declare a snow and ice
emergency (designated in this Part as a "snow emergency"). Information
on the existence of a snow emergency may be given by the Township
through radio, newspaper or other available media, and information on the
termination of the emergency may be given by use of the same media.
§ 602. Parking Prohibited, Driving Motor Vehicles Restricted, on
Snow Emergency Routes During Emergency. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/
1985]
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
§ 603. Snow Emergency Routes Designated. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/
1985; as amended by Ord. 1993-3, 9/8/1993, § 5; Ord. 94-10, 7/13/
1994, § 3]
The following are designated as snow emergency routes:
Street Between
Bunker Hill Road S.R. 1036 Carverton Road and Dug Road
Carverton Road S.R. 309 and S.R. 1021 West Eighth Street
E. Center Street S.R. 309 and Harris Hill Road
W. Center Street S.R. 309 and Pioneer Avenue
Church Road (Trucksville) S.R. 309 and Hillside Road
Church Road (Carverton) S.R. 104 Mt. Olivet Road and Dallas Township
line
Davis Street Pioneer Avenue and the end thereof
Dug Road S.R. 1036 Carverton Road and the Township
line
E. Franklin Street S.R. 309 and Wood Street
Harris Hill Road S.R. 309 and S.R. 1029 Manor Drive
1. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated in § 603 of this
Part; or
2. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route, unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
§ 601 HOME RULE CHARTER § 603
Ch:367
Street Between
Highland Avenue S.R. 1029 Dug Road and dead end
Lantern Hill Road Sutton Road and dead end
N. Lehigh Street Division Street to E. Center Street
S. Lehigh Street Division Street and Harris Hill Road
Manor Drive S.R. 1036 Carverton Road and S.R. 1044 Mt.
Olivet Road
Mount Airy Road S.R. 1043 Pioneer Avenue and dead end
Mount Olivet Road Franklin Township line and Dallas Township
line
§ 604. Penalty for Violation. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
1. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under § 601
of this Part, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a motor vehicle
to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency route, that person
shall be guilty of a violation of this Part and, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs.
2. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under § 601
of this Part, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow
emergency route, without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires
or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this Part and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 603 KINGSTON CODE § 604
Ch:368
Part 7
REGULATION OF PEDALCYCLES
§ 701. Riding and Parking of Pedalcycles on Sidewalks Along
Certain Streets Prohibited. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or to park a pedalcycle on the
sidewalk along the following portions of the streets in the Township:
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 702. Penalty for Violation. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
1. Any person who violates any provision of § 701 of this Part shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $10 and costs.
§ 701 HOME RULE CHARTER § 702
Ch:369

Part 8
PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS
§ 801. Pedestrians to Obey Traffic-Control Signs. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/
1985]
At all locations in the Township where official traffic-control signals are
installed, pedestrians, except where directed otherwise by pedestriancontrol
signals installed under § 802 of this Part, shall obey the directions of
those traffic-control signals, as follows:
§ 802. Pedestrian-Control Signal Locations Established. [Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985]
At the following locations, official pedestrian-control signals shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected):
Route 309 at Carverton Road and Church Road
Route 309 at Center Street and Roushey
Route 309 at Harris Hill Road and Pioneer Avenue
Every pedestrian facing a steady or flashing "Don't Walk" signal shall obey
the directions of that signal, as follows:
1. When facing a steady "Don't Walk" signal, a pedestrian shall not start
to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any pedestrian
who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk" signal should
proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "Don't Walk" signal is
showing.
2. When facing a flashing "Don't Walk" signal a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the indication, but
any pedestrian who has partly completed crossing during the "Walk"
indication should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone.
Any pedestrian who fails to obey the directions of a "Don't Walk"
signal, as indicated above, shall be guilty of a summary offense and a
violation of this Part.
1. When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the
roadway within a crosswalk;
2. When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to cross
the roadway;
3. When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the
roadway.
§ 801 HOME RULE CHARTER § 803
Ch:371
§ 803. Locations Where Pedestrian Crossing in Unmarked
Crosswalks Restricted. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Except when authorized by a police officer or other appropriately attired
person authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic, it shall be unlawful
for any pedestrian to cross the roadway at any of the following streets, at
the intersection with that street indicated.
Street Intersection Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
§ 804. Locations Where Pedestrians May Cross Only in Crosswalk.
[Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian:
§ 805. Penalty for Violation. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Any pedestrian who violates any provision of this Part shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
$5 and costs.
1. To cross any roadway in a business district within the Township except
in a crosswalk;
2. To cross the roadway, in any of the following portions of streets in the
Township, except in a crosswalk:
Street Between
(Reserved)
Provided that nothing in this section shall permit any pedestrian to
cross in a crosswalk at any location where that crossing is prohibited
by § 802 of this Part.
§ 803 KINGSTON CODE § 805
Ch:372
Part 9
TOWING SERVICES31
§ 901. Authority of Board of Supervisors. [Ord. 2017-10, 11/8/2017]
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Kingston is hereby authorized
to engage by contract a Pennsylvania qualified professional motor vehicle
towing service entity (hereinafter referred to as "tower") to provide motor
vehicle towing services located in the Township of Kingston.
§ 902. Additional Duties of Tower. [Ord. 2017-10, 11/8/2017]
In addition to general motor vehicle towing services, the tower shall remove
and clean up any and all debris, all motor vehicle objects or parts detached
from any disabled motor vehicle, and all liquids or fluids therefrom lying
upon or near to the public street, road or highway where an accident or the
disability of a motor vehicle has occurred. Further, it must remove, carry
away, and dispose of the foregoing materials as soon as possible in a proper
and acceptable manner.
§ 903. Legal Relationship. [Ord. 2017-10, 11/8/2017]
The tower shall act, in all respects, as an independent contractor hired by
the Township of Kingston. It shall be the exclusive provider of all motor
vehicle towing services in the Township of Kingston.
§ 904. General Legal Duties of Tower. [Ord. 2017-10, 11/8/2017]
1. Every contract for the engagement of a tower to be solicited and
awarded by the Township of Kingston pursuant to this Part shall comply
in every respect with the following:
A. The statutes and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
applicable to the retention by a municipality of the tower shall
comply with all aspects of municipal procurement or acquisition of
services contemplated by this Part.
B. All statutory requirements and procedures applicable to the
services provided for in this Part which require competitive public
bidding.
C. All federal, state and local laws, ordinances, administrative
procedures and regulations, which govern the performance of
towing services by the tower, its employees or agents, this Part and,
generally, motor vehicle towing activities in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, together with any orders and decrees which may
have been promulgated or enacted by any legal bodies or tribunals
31.Editor's Note: Former Part 9, Towing, Adopted 1/10/2007 By Ord. 2006-14, As Amended,
Was Repealed 10/30/2017 By Ord. 2017-12.
§ 901 HOME RULE CHARTER § 904
Ch:373
§ 905. Severability. [Ord. 2017-10, 11/8/2017]
The provisions of this Part are declared to be severable; and if any section,
subsection, sentence, clause or part thereof is, for any reason, held to
be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of any remaining sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses or part of this Part.
having authority or jurisdiction over the work, materials, and/or
employees of the tower.
D. All provisions of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code and any
other applicable statutes and regulation(s) of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania relating to the towing and salvaging of motor vehicles
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. All provisions and regulations related to the work performed by the
employees of the tower and all materials handled and equipment
used on behalf of the Township of Kingston shall comply with the
Federal Occupational Safety and Health Act ("OSHA") and any
other governing federal, state or local safety or environmental
codes.
F. All rules, regulations, and statutes of the United States and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania relating to discrimination against
any employees or applicants for employment because of race, color,
religion, sex, age, creed, national origin, or handicap. The tower
with which the Township of Kingston shall contract hereunder shall
comply with all state and federal regulations and statutes in
respect to nondiscriminatory employment practices.
G. All comprehensive general liability insurance policies and all
automobile liability insurance policies secured by the tower for
services rendered hereunder shall name the Township of Kingston,
its officers, agents and employees, as additional insureds. This
coverage shall be reflected on all of the certificates of insurance
issued in regard to motor vehicle towing services performed in the
Township of Kingston.
§ 904 KINGSTON CODE § 905
Ch:374
Chapter 16
PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 905 HOME RULE CHARTER § 905
Ch:375

Part 1
PARK REGULATIONS
§ 101. Definitions. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
As used in this Part 1, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
PARK or PARKS — Unless specifically limited, shall be deemed to include
all parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, tennis courts, beaches, recreation
structures and facilities, and also entrances and approaches thereto, and all
other land or property or structures now or hereafter owned or acquired by
the Township of Kingston for park or recreational purposes.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, organization of persons,
company, association or partnership.
RULES AND REGULATIONS — Any rules and regulations hereby or
hereafter promulgated by the Board of Supervisors under the authority
herein conferred.
§ 102. Park Hours. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
All parks shall be opened daily April 1 through November 30 of each year to
the public at such hours as the Board of Supervisors may from time to time
designate, but in no event shall any person be permitted to be in attendance
in any park between 9:00 p.m., current time, and sunrise, unless special
permission is granted by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 103. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as amended by
Ord. 90-6, 8/8/1990, § 1]
No person in attendance at a park shall:
1. Injure, deface, remove, cut or damage any of the trees, plants, shrubs,
turf, buildings, structures, signs or fixtures, or any other property of the
Township located within the park.
2. Litter any area of the park with garbage, paper, bottles, cans or other
waste material, nor dispose of the same in any way except in
receptacles designated for such purpose.
3. Kindle or maintain any fire in the park except in fireplaces or areas
specially designated for that purpose and located by authority of the
Board of Supervisors.
4. Remove any bench, seat, table or other appliance without permission of
the Board of Supervisors.
5. Injure, deface, destroy or remove any notice, rule or regulation posted
at any place within the park by authority of the Board of Supervisors;
nor shall any notice or placard be posted within the park other than by
authority of said Board of Supervisors.
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 103
Ch:377
6. Set up any booth, table or stand for the sale of any article or service
whatsoever within the limits of the park without permission of the
Board of Supervisors; distribute, sell, service or rent any services or
commodity or solicit for any purpose without permission of the Board of
Supervisors.
7. Operate, stop or park any vehicle, bicycle or other means of conveyance
except in areas where permitted or designated by proper authority of
the Township, or operate the same in a reckless or negligent manner or
in excess of any posted speed limit or in such a manner as to become a
nuisance to other area users.
8. Operate commercial vehicles, unless providing authorized services.
9. Bring onto the premises, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage or
illegal drugs of any kind; no person shall enter the park in an
intoxicated state or otherwise be under the influence of alcohol or
illegal drugs.
10. Carry or discharge any firearms, slingshots, firecrackers, fireworks or
other missile-propelling instruments or explosives or arrows, or other
dangerous weapons which have such properties as to cause annoyance
or injury to any person or property, unless permission has been granted
by the Board of Supervisors in designated areas; police officers in the
performance of their duties will be exempt from these provisions.
11. Play ball, swim, golf, pitch horseshoes, engage in archery, camp or
launch, dock or land any boat, engage in finding buried objects with
special detectors, or participate in any other form of recreation,
sporting endeavor or pastime, except in those areas which may be
designated from time to time for that purpose by the Board of
Supervisors.
12. Disrobe or change clothing, except in buildings or facilities made
available for that purpose.
13. Disturb the peace by any conduct so as to annoy any other person using
the park for recreational purposes.
14. Operate a snowmobile, minibike, motorcycle, or any vehicle
recreational or otherwise, except on designated roads, trails, or areas
set aside for their use.
15. Use threatening, abusive, insulting, profane or obscene language or
words.
16. Commit any disorderly or immoral acts.
17. Hold any public meeting or rally or engage in any marching or driving
as members of a military, political or other organization without
permission of the Board of Supervisors, which requires a statement of
information, including the name of the organization, its purpose, the
§ 103 KINGSTON CODE § 103
Ch:378
§ 104. Fishing. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
All laws pertaining to fishing in the commonwealth shall apply to fishing in
parks and recreation areas, and provisions thereof are hereby incorporated
by reference.
§ 105. Reservation for Specific Uses. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The use of all parks shall be on a first-come, first-served basis, unless
otherwise reserved:
number of persons expected to be invited, the expected duration and
the name(s) of person(s) in charge.
18. Disobey a proper order of a police officer or Board of Supervisors
member, or disobey or disregard or fail to comply with any rule or
regulation, warning, prohibition, instruction or direction given by an
authorized person and posted or displayed by sign, notice, bulletin,
card, poster, or when notified or informed as to its existence by the
Township police.
19. Hunt for, capture or kill, or attempt to capture or kill, or aid or assist in
the capturing or killing of, in any manner, any wild bird or wild animal
of any description, either game or otherwise; and to that end, it is
unlawful for any person to carry onto or possess in any park a shotgun
or rifle or pistol or firearm of any make or kind unless specific
permission is granted for a designated area by authority of the
Township.
20. Allow pets to run at large out of control.
21. Persons in attendance at a Township park must provide for the cleanup
of pet excrement.
22. Persons utilizing the Township tennis courts, basketball courts, and/or
baseball/soccer field shall yield said facility after one hour's use.
1. By annual permission granted by the Township Manager for the
scheduling of various league games, etc.; [Amended by Res.
R-2017-3, 3/8/2017; by Res. R-2018-3, 1/2/2018; by Res. No.
R-2019-3, 1/7/2019; and by Res. No. R-2020-3, 1/6/2020]
2. For school or college athletic games, practice, contests, or exhibitions;
3. For regularly scheduled school district or municipal recreation
programs; or
4. By permission granted by the Board of Supervisors for a specific
requested use.
§ 103 HOME RULE CHARTER § 106
Ch:379
§ 106. Authorization to Promulgate Additional Rules. [Ord. 1985-1,
2/13/1985]
The Board of Supervisors is authorized to establish additional rules and
regulations by resolution as deemed necessary.
§ 107. Authority to Close Areas. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Recreation facilities which become hazardous for public use due to weather,
water, fire or unforeseeable conditions may be closed only at the discretion
of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 108. Enforcement. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The police officers of the Township of Kingston are charged with
enforcement of the provisions of this Part 1 and of rules and regulations
promulgated by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 109. Penalties. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as amended by Ord. 97-3,
11/12/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
1, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a District Justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part 1 continues or each section of this Part 1 which shall
be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 110. Use of Center Street Park Comfort Facilities by
Organizations. [Res. 1987-5, 4/8/1987; as amended by Ord. 90-6, 8/
8/1990, § 2; and by Ord. 97-3, 11/12/1997]
1. Comfort facilities will be granted by the Township Manager consistent
with the above regulations and the placement of a deposit of $300 with
the Township to be held until the completion of the permitted activity
and a satisfactory inspection by Township officials to determine if
damage has occurred. [Amended by Res. R-2017-3, 3/8/2017; by
Res. R-2018-3, 1/2/2018; by Res. No. R-2019-3, 1/7/2019; and by
Res. No. R-2020-3, 1/6/2020]
2. Upon payment, the Township Secretary/Treasurer will furnish to a
designated representative of the organization a key for the comfort
facilities building. At this point the organization shall share with others
the responsibility for any damages incurred at the facility.
3. The Township Manager shall be responsible for making an accounting
of all deposits and shall be responsible for making periodic inspections
of the facilities to check for damages. [Amended by Res. R-2018-3, 1/
§ 106 KINGSTON CODE § 110
Ch:380
§ 111. Smoking at Center Street Park Prohibited. [Added by Ord.
2009-9, 12/9/2009]
2/2018; by Res. No. R-2019-3, 1/7/2019; and by Res. No.
R-2020-3, 1/6/2020]
4. The bond deposit of $300 shall be refundable in full to the depositor,
provided that no damages are incurred through the use of the comfort
facilities.
1. Smoking Prohibited. The carrying or use by any person in and upon the
premises of the Center Street Park of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or
other lighted smoking device designed for the burning of any tobacco
product, including but not limited to the interior of any rest room,
spectator area, concession area, walking area or athletic field and
generally in or upon grounds of said premises, is unlawful.
2. Signage. Appropriate signage shall be placed upon the aforesaid
premises to inform persons of the prohibition of smoking thereon.
3. Enforcement. This § 111 shall be enforced by the Kingston Township
Police Department.
4. Violations and Penalties.
A. A violation of any provision of this § 111 shall constitute a summary
offense and shall be enforced by the commencement of an action
before a District Justice by the Kingston Township Police
Department in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the applicable provisions of the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure and the Second Class
Township Code.
B. Any person, who shall be found to have violated any provision of
this § 111, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $150 and all costs of prosecution.
5. Saving Clause. The provisions of the Township of Kingston Code of
Ordinances, so far as they are the same as those ordinances and
regulations in force immediately prior to the adoption of this § 111, are
intended as a continuation of such ordinances and regulations and not
as a new enactment. The provisions of this § 111 shall not affect any suit
or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any of the prior
ordinances or regulations except as otherwise provided by law.
§ 110 HOME RULE CHARTER § 111
Ch:381
Chapter 17
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 111 KINGSTON CODE § 111
Ch:382
Part 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 101. Statement of Findings. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
The Board of Supervisors of the Township finds that:
§ 102. Purpose. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the Township by minimizing the damages described in § 101A of this
chapter through provisions designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the
cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines
floodplain management and flood control efforts in downstream
communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public health
and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, and
welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth, their
resources, and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim,
and restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this
commonwealth.
B. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
C. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source.
D. Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 102
Ch:383
§ 103. Statutory Authority. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
§ 104. Applicability. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
E. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface
water and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water
resources.
F. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all permanent SWM
BMPs that are implemented within the Township.
H. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
1. Primary Authority. The Township is empowered to regulate these
activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the Storm Water Management
Act, and the Code of the Township of Kingston.
2. Secondary Authority. The Township also is empowered to regulate land
use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31,
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.32
1. This chapter shall only apply to permanent stormwater management
facilities constructed as part of any of the regulated activities listed in
this section. Stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation
control during construction activities are specifically not regulated by
this chapter, but shall continue to be regulated under existing laws and
ordinances. This chapter contains only the stormwater management
performance standards and design criteria that are necessary or
desirable from a watershed-wide perspective. Local stormwater
management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection
system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.) shall continue
to be regulated by the applicable Township ordinances or at the
Township Engineer's discretion.
2. All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater
runoff, including land development and earth disturbance activity, are
subject to regulation by this chapter.
3. The following activities are defined as "regulated activities" and shall
be regulated by this chapter:
A. Land development.
B. Subdivision.
C. Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious
surfaces (driveways, parking lots, etc.).
32.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 102 KINGSTON CODE § 104
Ch:384
§ 105. Compatibility With Other Requirements. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/
2015]
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance.
§ 106. Repealer. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the Township inconsistent
with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency only.
§ 107. Severability. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or
provision of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
D. Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
E. Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
F. Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto.
G. Any earth disturbance activities or any activities that involve the
alteration or development of land in a manner that may affect
stormwater runoff.
H. Activity involving earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25
Pa. Code Chapters 92a and 102 or the Clean Streams Law.33
4. Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) roadway
projects will perform stormwater management consistent with
Publication 13M (Design Manual-2), Chapter 13.7, Antidegradation and
Post Construction Stormwater Management Policy.
33.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 104 HOME RULE CHARTER § 107
Ch:385

Part 2
DEFINITIONS
§ 201. Application and Interpretation. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
1. It is not intended that these definitions include only words used or
referred to in this chapter. The words are included in order to facilitate
the interpretation of this chapter for administrative purposes and in
carrying out of duties by appropriate officers and by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
2. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following shall, for the purposes
of this chapter, have the meaning herein indicated:
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the past and future
tense.
B. The word "person" shall include a profit or nonprofit firm,
association, organization, corporation, company, partnership, trust,
or individual or single proprietorship, or any other similar entity.
C. The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building
shall include the words "intended," "arranged" or "designed" to be
used, occupied or maintained.
D. The word "building" shall include "part thereof" and "structure."
E. The word "lot" shall include "plot," "parcel" or "tract."
F. The words "shall" and "must" are always mandatory; the words
"may" and "should" are permissive.
G. The singular number shall include the plural, and the plural
number shall include the singular.
H. Words of masculine gender shall include the feminine gender and
the neuter; words of feminine gender shall include the masculine
gender and the neuter.
I. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
3. If a word or term is not defined by this chapter, but is defined in Chapter
22, Subdivision and Land Development, then the Chapter 22 definition
shall apply. If a word or term is not defined by this chapter or Chapter
22, but is defined in Chapter 27, Zoning, then the Chapter 27 definition
shall apply. If a word or term is not defined by this chapter, but is
defined in Chapter 8, Flood Plains, then the Chapter 8 definition shall
apply. In each case, the most restrictive definition shall apply. If a word
or term is not defined by this chapter, Chapter 22, Chapter 27, or
Chapter 8, then the word or term shall have its plain and ordinary
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 201
Ch:387
§ 202. Definitions of Terms. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases
have the meanings indicated herein:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture, such as
agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy use areas.
This includes the work of producing crops, including tillage, land clearing,
plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops or pasturing and
raising of livestock and installation of conservation measures. Construction
of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural
activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also,
the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — Any landowner, person, partnership, association,
corporation or other for-profit or nonprofit entity, or any responsible person
therein or agent thereof, who has filed an application with the municipality
for approval to engage in any of the regulated activities of this chapter
within the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter, "nonstructural
BMPs or measures" refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas "structural BMPs or measures" are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands,
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian
or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and manufactured
devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent appurtenances to
project sites.
CAPTURE — The process of collecting runoff to be managed by a
stormwater BMP.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, and headward cutting of
small channels and waterways, due to erosion caused by moderate to large
floods.
meaning within the context of this section. A standard reference
dictionary should be consulted.
§ 201 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:388
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater
(typically up to 1,000 gallons).
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A conservation district, as defined in Section
3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3 P.S. § 851(c)] that has the authority
under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to administer and enforce
all or a portion of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code, Chapter
102; refers to the Luzerne Conservation District unless otherwise noted.
"Luzerne County Conservation District" and "Luzerne Conservation
District" shall have the same meaning.
CULVERT — A pipe, conduit, or similar enclosed structure or facility,
including appurtenant works, which carries stormwater surface runoff
collected by a swale, ditch or watercourse under or through an
embankment, roadway or other fill condition.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid
or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad or other
purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and its
relevant bureaus and successor agencies.
DESIGNEE — The agent of the Kingston Township Planning Commission
and/or agent of the governing body involved with the administration, review
or enforcement of any provisions of this chapter by contract or
memorandum of understanding.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return period."
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment facility, structure or basin,
together with its appurtenant works, designed to retard, retain and/or
otherwise manage stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and
releasing it at a predetermined rate. A detention basin can be designed to
drain completely after a storm event, or it can be designed to contain and
maintain a constant, permanent pool of water.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of this commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, person, partnership, association,
corporation or other for-profit or nonprofit entity, or any responsible person
therein or agent thereof, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision
of land or a land development or undertakes any of the other regulated
activities identified in this chapter. See also "applicant."
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:389
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific lot, tract or parcel of land for which a
regulated activity of this chapter is proposed.
DISCONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DIA) — An impervious or
impermeable surface that is disconnected from any stormwater drainage
or conveyance system and is redirected or directed to a pervious area,
which allows for infiltration, filtration, and increased time of concentration
as specified in Appendix C.1, Disconnected Impervious Area (DIA) and
Worksheet.34
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of the
lot, tract, or parcel of land being developed located such that all overland
or concentrated flow from the site would be directed towards it.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility
designed to transmit stormwater runoff, and shall include streams,
channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
See also the definition of "easement" in Chapter 22, Subdivision and Land
Development.
EARTH (LAND) DISTURBANCE — Any construction or other humaninduced
activity involving grading, tilling, digging, filling of ground,
stripping of vegetation or any other activity that exposes soils or otherwise
causes or results in an alteration to the natural condition of the ground
surface of the land, inducing changes in topography or woody vegetation,
except for the removal of a safety hazard, diseased trees or invasive
vegetation. Also includes excavations, embankments, road maintenance,
building construction and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock or earth materials. See also Chapter 22, Subdivision and Land
Development.
EROSION — The movement and/or removal of surface materials and/or soil
particles of the land by the action of natural elements such as water, wind
and ice, or by chemical action.
EROSION, ACCELERATED — The movement and/or removal of surface
materials and/or soil particles of the natural ground cover through the
combined action of man's activity and natural elements at a rate greater
than that which would occur as a result of natural elements and/or process
alone.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan
prepared in accordance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), Office of Water
34.Editor's Note: Appendix C.1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:390
Management, Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual,
as may be amended from time to time, indicating the necessary land
treatments and other methods of implementation designed to effectively
minimize accelerated soil erosion and sedimentation pollution and requiring
approval by the Luzerne Conservation District. "Erosion and sediment
control plan" shall have the same meaning.
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial dominant land cover condition of a
project site during the five-year period immediately preceding the proposed
construction or other regulated activity of this chapter. If the initial
condition of the site is undeveloped land, the land use shall be considered as
"meadow" unless the natural land cover is proven to generate lower curve
numbers or Rational "C" value, such as forested lands.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR — A flood which has a one-percent chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year
flood" or "one-percent annual chance flood"). The term "base flood" shall
have the same meaning.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD, REGULATORY — The flood which has been selected to serve as
the basis upon which the floodplain provisions of Township Ordinance No.
2012-5 (Chapter 8), as amended, have been prepared; for purposes of this
chapter, the one-hundred-year flood. Refer also to the term "base flood" in
Chapter 8, Flood Plains.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
FORESTRY-FOREST MANAGEMENT AND TIMBER OPERATIONS —
Planning and activities necessary for the management of forest land,
including timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans in
accordance with accepted silvicultural principles and treatment through
developing, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber
harvesting, transportation and selling trees for commercial purposes, site
preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design high
water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge. The space
is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GEOTEXTILE — A porous fabric manufactured from synthetic fiber that is
used to provide separation between different types of media (i.e., between
soil and stone).
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:391
GRADE — A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground specified
in percent and shown on plans as specified herein. To grade is to finish the
surface of a roadbed, top of embankment or bottom of excavation.
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad
and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to conduct
surface water.
GRAVEL (CRUSHED STONE) — Considered to be impervious when the
intended use of the stone is for transportation purposes, parking areas,
construction areas, trails, or if the gravel is compacted at any time during
or after its placement; landscaping stone is not considered as impervious
area.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HOTSPOT — Areas where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants that are higher than
those that are typically found in stormwater (e.g., vehicle salvage yards
and recycling facilities, vehicle fueling stations, fleet storage areas, vehicle
equipment and cleaning facilities, and vehicle service and maintenance
facilities).
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary widely
and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates.
Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their
minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged
wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the
soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the area
of the development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can
be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils
become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS). (NOTE: See
§ 1001, Subsections 3 and 4, of this chapter.)
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — Any surface material and/
or development that prevents, substantially prevents and/or reduces the
infiltration, percolation or penetration of stormwater runoff into previously
undeveloped land, which surfaces shall include, but may not necessarily
be limited to, buildings, roofs, surfaced, paved, graveled or compacted
parking areas, streets, sidewalks, driveways, stone patios, and other similar
vehicular and/or pedestrian access routes and travel ways. See also "gravel
(crushed stone)" for when gravel classifies as impervious.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
IMPROVEMENTS — Man-made physical additions, alterations and/or
changes which become part of, placed upon or affixed to real estate and
which may otherwise be necessary to produce usable and desirable lots.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, or percolated downward to recharge groundwater.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:392
INFILTRATION STRUCTURE — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the ground (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, dry wells and seepage
trenches).
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain; a structure at the diversion
end of a conduit; the upstream end of any structure through which water
may flow.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface,
underground drainage, and caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks, such
as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The improvement of one lot or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
LAND DEVELOPMENT, MAJOR — A land development which does not
qualify or classify as a minor land development.
LAND DEVELOPMENT, MINOR — A development of a parcel of land which
contains not more than four detached single-family residential structures,
whether developed initially or cumulatively.
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether
proposed initially or cumulatively.
A.
A single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure.
B.
Any nonresidential use of land, with or without structures, which
encompasses two or more acres of land, including, but not limited to,
grading or the backfilling of land, earthmoving activities and removal
of vegetative cover. Agricultural uses of land and related agricultural
activities shall be specifically excluded.
C.
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective
occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets, common areas,
leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.
D.
An addition to an existing nonresidential building or structure,
excluding agricultural buildings and structures, that equals or exceeds
500 square feet of gross floor area, whether proposed initially or
cumulatively.
E.
The development and/or expansion of a mobile home park or
campground.
F.
G. A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with § 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania (PA)
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), as may be amended from time to
time.35
H.
35.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:393
LAND (EARTH) DISTURBANCE — See "earth (land) disturbance."
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT — A land development and construction
approach that uses various land planning and design practices and
technologies to simultaneously conserve and protect natural resource
systems, while allowing for necessary infrastructure improvements
associated with land development.
MANAGEMENT DISTRICT — Those subareas in which a specified release
of stormwater runoff peak flow rate (release rate) is necessary to meet the
plan requirements and the goals of Act 167.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for calculation
of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per
second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of
flow and slope. "Open channels" may include closed conduits so long as the
flow is not under pressure.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — An individual professional engineer licensed as
such and registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or a professional
engineering firm or company incorporated in and by the laws and
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania having a staff which
includes one or more professional engineers licensed as such and registered
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for
the Township of Kingston, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL or MUNICIPALITY — Of, for or being the Township of Kingston,
Luzerne County, Pennsylvania.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a watery body
from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible,
confined, or discrete conveyances.
NRCS — United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Natural Resource
Conservation Service (previously SCS).
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an
open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural
and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes
flowing partly full.
OUTFALL — The point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater or
artificial drain.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of stormwater runoff at a
given point in time resulting from a specific storm event.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as "impervious."
PIPE — See "culvert."
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Kingston
Township, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:394
PMF (PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD) — The flood that may be expected
from the most severe combination of critical meteorologic and hydrologic
conditions that are reasonably possible in any area. The PMF is derived
from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP) as determined on the
basis of data obtained from the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA).
POST-DEVELOPMENT — The conditions at/on the site of the proposed
regulated activity upon completion of construction and final stabilization.
PREDEVELOPMENT — The conditions existing at/on the site of the
proposed regulated activity prior to any earth disturbance.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work
required by this chapter.
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak
flow rate.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any development that requires demolition or removal
of existing structures or impervious surfaces at a site and replacement
with new impervious surfaces. Maintenance activities such as top-layer
grinding and repaving are not considered to be redevelopment. Interior
remodeling projects and tenant improvements are also not considered to be
redevelopment.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions, including earth
disturbance activities or any other activity that will have an impact on
stormwater runoff and that are specified in § 104 of this chapter.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapters 92a and 102,
or the Clean Streams Law.36
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of predevelopment peak rate of runoff
from a site or subarea to which the post-development peak rate of runoff
must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment in which stormwater is stored and
not released during the storm event. Stored water may be released from the
basin at some time after the end of the storm.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff that
is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the
twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to recur on the
average once every 25 years; or stated in another way, the probability of a
36.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:395
twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent
chance).
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a stormwater
management facility that is used to control the discharge rate from the
stormwater management facility for a specified design storm.
RUNOFF — That portion of precipitation discharge or rate of discharge in
a given watershed resulting from a storm event, whether rain, snow or ice,
that does not permeate or infiltrate into the earth or soil, but runs off the
surface of the land.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a
product of erosion.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the moving wind, water or gravity. Once this
matter is deposited (or remains suspended in water) it is usually referred to
as "sediment."
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located
and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material transported
by water.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth occurring
from the failure to design, construct, implement or maintain control
measures and control facilities in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is directed
for infiltration into the ground.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff which flows over the ground surface as a thin, even
layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SOIL-COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called a/the "curve number" (CN).
SPILLWAY — An engineered and/or constructed depression in the
embankment of a stormwater management facility which is used to pass
peak discharge greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
stormwater management facility.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the
Pa. Code and the Clean Streams Law.37
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure based
on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the
change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and
depth.
37.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:396
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm event
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See "return
period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that conveys
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Is
abbreviated as BMPs or SWM BMPs throughout this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) FACILITY — Any structure, natural
or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys,
stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater
management facilities include, but are not limited to: detention and
retention basins; open channels; storm sewers; pipes; french drains;
underground on-lot seepage pits; and infiltration facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) PERMIT — A permit issued by the
Township Board of Supervisors after the SWM plan has been approved. Said
permit is issued prior to or with the Township's final plan approval.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) PLAN — The Luzerne County
Stormwater Management Plan for managing stormwater runoff adopted by
the County of Luzerne as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864
(Act 167), as amended, and known as the "Storm Water Management Act."38
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) SITE PLAN — The plan prepared
by the developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff
will be managed at the development site in accordance with this chapter.
"Stormwater management site plan" will be designated as "SWM site plan"
throughout this chapter.
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses a regulated
water of this commonwealth.
SUBAREA — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for which
stormwater management criteria have been established in the stormwater
management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwellings, shall be exempted.
38.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:397
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forestry-forest management and timber
operations."
TIME-OF-CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time for surface runoff to travel
from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point of
interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland
flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
VOID RATIO — The ratio of the volume of void space to the total volume of
the BMP material (void space plus solid material/media providing structural
support to create the storage area).
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook, creek,
channel or ditch for the collection and conveyance of stormwater runoff,
whether natural or man-made, having a defined channel bed in which runoff
flows in a definite direction or course; includes millrace, canal, conduit,
gully, ravine or wash and any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by
reason of overflow of floodwaters.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other
surface water of this commonwealth.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WETLANDS — Areas that are inundated and saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Any area meeting the official wetland
definition of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, as amended, shall be considered
a wetland for the purposes of this chapter. In the event the definition of
"wetland" accepted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers conflicts with
the definition of a "wetland" accepted by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, the more restrictive definition shall apply.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:398
Part 3
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
§ 301. General Requirements. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
1. For all regulated activities, submission of the stormwater management
permit application provided in Appendix B is required.39
2. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM site plan is
specifically exempted in § 302:
A. Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
B. No regulated activities shall commence until the Township issues
written approval of an SWM site plan which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
3. SWM site plans approved by the Township, in accordance with Part 4,
shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
4. The Township may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures for
meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in this
chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of, and do
not conflict with, state law, including, but not limited to, the Clean
Streams Law.40
5. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent with this
chapter.
6. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
notification of the adjacent property owner(s). Such stormwater flows
shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
7. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to any
applicable discharge criteria in the general direction of existing
discharge, whether proposed to be concentrated or maintained as
diffused drainage areas, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. If
diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the developer must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding or other harm will result from the concentrated
discharge.
39.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
40.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 301
Ch:399
8. Where a development site is traversed by watercourses, drainage
easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such
watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the
placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may adversely
affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the easement. Also,
maintenance, including mowing of vegetation within the easement,
shall be required, except as approved by the appropriate governing
authority.
9. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainageways
shall be subject to approval by DEP through the joint permit application
process, or, where deemed appropriate by DEP, through the general
permit process.
10. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
would be located in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth or
wetlands shall be subject to approval by DEP through the joint permit
application process, or, where deemed appropriate by DEP, the general
permit process. When there is a question whether wetlands may be
involved, it is the responsibility of the developer or his agent to show
that the land in question cannot be classified as wetlands; otherwise
approval to work in the area must be obtained from DEP.
11. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
would be located on state highway rights-of-way shall be subject to
approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT).
12. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., are encouraged, where soil
conditions permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need for detention
facilities.
13. Impervious areas:
A. The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development, even if
development is to take place in stages.
B. For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
C. For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, only the
proposed impervious area on the parcel must be considered and
summed to determine the plan preparation and approval
requirements of this chapter.
D. For redevelopment projects in which the existing site is disturbed,
the entire proposed site is subject to the plan preparation and
§ 301 KINGSTON CODE § 301
Ch:400
§ 302. Exemptions. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
approval requirements of this chapter. Existing conditions are
considered to be the existing site prior to disturbance, and 20%
of the existing impervious area must be considered as meadow in
good condition for all stormwater calculations. For redevelopment
projects in which the existing site is already controlled by a
stormwater management facility, the requirement to consider 20%
of existing impervious area as meadow is waived, provided the
existing facility meets the water quality, volume, and peak rate
standards and criteria of this chapter.
14. Roof drains must not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches in order to promote overland flow and infiltration/
percolation of stormwater.
15. All regulated activities shall include measures to:
A. Protect health, safety, and property.
B. Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures outlined in the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual) to:
(1) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded
areas.
(2) Maintain or extend riparian buffers.
(3) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(4) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
(5) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible.
C. To the maximum extent practicable, incorporate the techniques for
low-impact development practices described in the BMP Manual.
16. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law,41 and the
Stormwater Management Act.42
17. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP Manual.
1. Regulated activities that create impervious areas or earth disturbance
shall adhere to Table III-1 to meet the requirements of this chapter. The
larger of the two areas determines the applicable requirements of this
41.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
42.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 302
Ch:401
chapter (i.e., if only 500 square feet of impervious area is proposed, but
15,000 square feet of earth disturbance is proposed, the requirements
follow row 3 of Table III-1).
TABLE III-1
Stormwater Management Requirements and Exemptions
SWM Level
(Refer to
Appendix B)
Proposed
Impervious
Area
(sq. ft.)
Proposed
Total Earth
Disturbance
(sq. ft.) Exemptions
Stormwater
Management
Requirements
What is
required to
submit to
Township?*
Level 1 <1,000 <5,000 §§ 303 and 308,
and Part 4 of
this chapter
Ensure § 301
general
requirements are
met
N/A*
Level 2 1,000 to 5,000 5,000 to
10,000
§§ 303 and 308,
and Part 4 of
this chapter
Disconnected
impervious area
(DIA) as in
Appendix C.1
Appendix C.1
worksheet
and sketch (or
equivalent)
OR OR
Capture and
control first 1
inch of runoff
over proposed
impervious areas
as in Appendix E
Appendix E
worksheet
and sketch (or
equivalent)
Level 3 5,000 to
10,000
10,000 to
20,000
§§ 303 and 304,
and Part 4 of
this chapter
Capture and
permanently
remove the first
2 inches of runoff
over proposed
impervious areas
as in § 308B of
this chapter
Appendix D
worksheet
and sketch (or
equivalent)
Level 4 >10,000 >20,000 None All requirements
of this chapter
SWM site plan
NOTES:
* In addition to the stormwater management permit application provided in Appendix B.
2. Agricultural activity is exempt from the rate control and SWM site plan
preparation requirements of this chapter, provided the activities are
performed according to the requirements under 25 Pa. Code, Chapter
102.
3. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the rate
control and SWM site plan preparation requirements of this chapter,
§ 302 KINGSTON CODE § 302
Ch:402
§ 303. Stormwater Management Peak Rate Controls. [Ord. 2015-1,
6/10/2015]
§ 304. Stormwater Management District Implementation Provisions
(Performance Standards). [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
provided the activities are performed according to the requirements
under 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102.
4. Exemptions from any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in § 301, Subsections 1 through 17.
1. Areas not covered by a Stormwater Management District Map
contained in Appendix F.1 of this chapter:43 Post-development
discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment discharge rates
for the one- through one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storms. If it is
shown that the peak rates of discharge indicated by the postdevelopment
analysis are less than or equal to the peak rates of
discharge indicated by the predevelopment analysis for one- through
one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storms, then the requirements of
this section have been met. Otherwise, the applicant shall provide
additional controls as necessary to satisfy the peak rate of discharge
requirement.
2. Areas covered by a Stormwater Management District Map contained in
Appendix F.1 of the this chapter: For the one- through one-hundred-year
storms, the post-development peak discharge rates will follow the
applicable approved Stormwater Management District Maps. For any
areas not shown on the Stormwater Management District Maps, the
post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment
discharge rates.
1. General. Post-development rates of runoff from any regulated activity
shall not exceed the peak release rates of runoff prior to development
for the design storms specified on the Stormwater Management District
Map (Appendix F.144) and § 303 of this chapter.
2. District Boundaries. The boundaries of the stormwater management
districts are shown on an official map which is available for inspections
at the Township office. A copy of the official map at a reduced scale is
included in Appendix F.1. The exact location of the stormwater
management district boundaries as they apply to a given development
site shall be determined by mapping the boundaries using the two-foot
topographic contours (or most accurate data required) provided as part
of the SWM site plan.
3. Sites Located in More Than One District. For a proposed site located
within two or more stormwater management district category
43.Editor's Note: The Stormwater Management District Map is on file in the Township offices.
44.Editor's Note: The Stormwater Management District Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 302 HOME RULE CHARTER § 304
Ch:403
§ 305. Design Criteria for Stormwater Management Facilities. [Ord.
2015-1, 6/10/2015]
subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall be the
predevelopment peak discharge for that subarea as indicated in § 303
and on the Stormwater Management District Maps in Appendix F.1.
4. Off-Site Areas. Off-site areas which drain through a proposed
development site, although not detained, must be considered when
determining allowable peak runoff rates at the project site's discharge
point(s). On-site drainage facilities shall be designed to safely convey
off-site flows through the development site.
1. Any stormwater facility located on state highway rights-of-way shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT).
2. Any stormwater management facility (i.e., detention basin) designed to
store runoff and requiring a berm or earthen embankment required or
regulated by this chapter shall be designed to provide an emergency
spillway to handle flow up to and including the one-hundred-year postdevelopment
conditions. The height of embankment must be set as to
provide a minimum one foot of freeboard above the maximum pool
elevation computed when the facility functions for the one-hundredyear
post-development inflow. Should any stormwater management
facility require a dam safety permit under 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 105
(DEP Chapter 105), the facility shall be designed in accordance with
DEP Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of DEP Chapter 105
concerning dam safety which may be required to pass storms larger
than a one-hundred-year event.
3. Any facilities that constitute water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges,
outfalls, or stream enclosures), and any work involving wetlands as
directed in DEP Chapter 105 regulations (as amended or replaced from
time to time by DEP), shall be designed in accordance with DEP
Chapter 105 and will require a permit from DEP. Any other drainage
conveyance facility that does not fall under DEP Chapter 105
regulations must be able to convey, without damage to the drainage
structure or roadway, runoff from the twenty-five-year design storm
with a minimum one foot of freeboard measured below the lowest point
along the top of the roadway. Roadway crossings located within
designated floodplain areas must be able to convey runoff from a onehundred-
year design storm with a minimum one foot of freeboard
measured below the lowest point along the top of roadway. Any facility
that constitutes a dam as defined in DEP Chapter 105 regulations may
require a permit under dam safety regulations. Any facility located
within a PennDOT right-of-way must meet PennDOT minimum design
standards and permit submission requirements.
4. Any drainage conveyance facility and/or channel that does not fall
under DEP Chapter 105 regulations must be able to convey, without
§ 304 KINGSTON CODE § 305
Ch:404
§ 306. Calculation Methodology. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
damage to the drainage structure or roadway, runoff from the twentyfive-
year design storm. Conveyance facilities to or exiting from
stormwater management facilities (i.e., detention basins) shall be
designed to convey the design flow to or from that structure. Roadway
crossings located within designated floodplain areas must be able to
convey runoff from a one-hundred-year design storm. Any facility
located within a PennDOT right-of-way must meet PennDOT minimum
design standards and permit submission requirements.
5. Storm sewers must be able to convey post-development runoff from a
twenty-five-year design storm without surcharging inlets, where
appropriate.
6. Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels,
and at all points of discharge.
7. Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while
still meeting the other requirements of this chapter.
8. Storage facilities, to the greatest extent possible and at the discretion
of the Township Engineer, shall completely drain both the volume
control and rate control capacities over a period of time not less than 24
hours and not more than 72 hours from the end of the design storm.
9. Storage facilities shall incorporate features to maximize the length of
the flow path and increase the travel time through the facility.
10. The design of all stormwater management facilities shall incorporate
sound engineering principles and practices. The Township shall reserve
the right to disapprove any design that would result in the occupancy or
continuation of an adverse hydrologic or hydraulic condition within the
watershed.
1. Any stormwater runoff calculations involving drainage areas greater
than 200 acres, including on- and off-site areas, shall use generally
accepted calculation techniques that are based on the NRCS soil cover
complex method. Table III-2 summarizes acceptable computation
methods. It is assumed that all methods will be selected by the design
professional based on the individual limitations and suitability of each
method for a particular site. The Township may approve the use of the
Rational Method to estimate peak discharges from drainage areas that
contain less than 200 acres.
2. The design storm volumes to be used in the analysis of peak rates of
discharge should be obtained from the Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of
the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, U.S. Department of
Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA),
National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center,
§ 305 HOME RULE CHARTER § 306
Ch:405
Silver Spring, Maryland. NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at:
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
3. For the purposes of predevelopment flow rate determination,
undeveloped land, including disturbed areas, shall be considered as
"meadow" in good condition, unless the natural ground cover generates
a lower curve number or Rational C value (i.e., forest).
4. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning equation shall be used
for hydraulic computations, and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Outlet structures for stormwater
management facilities shall be designed to meet the performance
standards of this chapter using any generally accepted hydraulic
analysis technique or method.
5. The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the
performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by routing the
design storm hydrograph through these facilities using the Storage-
Indication Method. The design storm hydrograph shall be computed
using a calculation method that produces a full hydrograph. The
Township may approve the use of any generally accepted full
hydrograph approximation technique which shall use a total runoff
volume that is consistent with the volume from a method that produces
a full hydrograph.
6. The Township has the authority to require that computed existing
runoff rates be reconciled with field observations and conditions. If the
designer can substantiate through actual physical calibration that more
appropriate runoff and time-of-concentration values should be utilized
at a particular site, then appropriate variations may be made upon
review and recommendations of the Township Engineer. Calibration
shall require detailed gauge and rainfall data for the particular site in
question.
TABLE III-2
Acceptable Computation Methodologies For Stormwater
Management Plans
METHOD
METHOD
DEVELOPED
BY APPLICABILITY
TR-20 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of
full hydrology computer
model is desirable or
necessary
TR-55 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans within
limitations described in
TR-55
§ 306 KINGSTON CODE § 306
Ch:406
§ 307. Erosion and Sedimentation Requirements. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/
10/2015]
§ 308. Stormwater Management Volume Controls. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/
10/2015]
The low-impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual shall be
utilized for all regulated activities to the maximum extent practicable. Water
volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm Method
TABLE III-2
Acceptable Computation Methodologies For Stormwater
Management Plans
METHOD
METHOD
DEVELOPED
BY APPLICABILITY
Hydrologic Engineering
Center-Hydraulic
Modeling System (HECHMS)
U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers
Applicable where use of
full hydrologic computer
model is desirable or
necessary
Rational Method (or
commercial computer
package based on
Rational Method)
Emil Kuichling
(1889)
For sites less than 200
acres or as approved by
the Township and Township
Engineer
Other methods Varies Other computation
methodologies approved by
the Township and Township
Engineer
1. Whenever the vegetation and topography are to be disturbed, such
activity must be in conformance with 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102, Erosion
and Sediment Control rules and regulations; Part I, Department of
Environmental Protection, Subpart C, Protection of Natural Resources,
Article II, Water Resources; and in accordance with the Luzerne
Conservation District and the standards and specifications of the
Township of Kingston.
2. Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and
criteria that must be or are recommended to be applied where
infiltration BMPs are proposed shall include the following:
A. Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase, so as
to maintain their maximum infiltration capacity.
B. Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until
the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has
received final stabilization.
§ 306 HOME RULE CHARTER § 308
Ch:407
in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B below. For all
regulated activities that require submission of a formal SWM site plan, both
the Design Storm Method and the Simplified Method shall be calculated;
the larger control volume based on the two calculations shall be controlled.
Subsection C below provides requirements for mined, Karst, or other
geologically limiting areas where infiltration shall not occur.
A. The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable to
any size of regulated activity. This method requires detailed modeling
based on site conditions.
(1) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year, twenty-four-hour
duration precipitation.
(2) For modeling purposes:
(a) Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas must be
considered meadow or its equivalent.
(b) Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present,
shall be considered meadow in the model for existing
conditions.
B. When Design Storm Method CG-1 guidelines are not used, the
Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual) has been modified to
accommodate two inches of permanently removed runoff volume. This
method (provided below) is independent of site conditions and should
be used if the Design Storm Method is not followed. For new impervious
surfaces:
(1) The first two inches of runoff from new impervious surfaces shall be
permanently removed from the runoff flow (i.e., it shall not be
released into the surface waters of this commonwealth). Removal
options include reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration.
(2) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the 0.5 inch of the permanently
removed runoff should be infiltrated.
(3) Facilities, to the greatest extent possible and subject to the
Township Engineer's discretion, shall be designed to drain the
permanently removed runoff volume in a period no less than 24
hours and no greater than 72 hours.
(4) Runoff volume in excess of two inches shall be safely conveyed to
existing stormwater collection systems or streams, in the direction
of the existing drainage course.
(5) This method is exempt from the requirements of § 303, Stormwater
Management, Peak Rate Controls.
§ 308 KINGSTON CODE § 308
Ch:408
C. Before infiltration is proposed on a site, site conditions shall be
evaluated by a qualified design professional through subsurface
investigation and testing to determine if site conditions are suitable to
support proposed infiltration facilities to manage runoff. If it is
determined that infiltration is not feasible due to physical constraints of
the site, or will adversely impact the environment as demonstrated by
the presence of acid mine drainage, sinkhole formation, or other
serious environmental issues, then the above volume controls must be
achieved through surface BMP mitigation. Reference the BMP Manual
for alternative mitigation measures that do not require infiltration.
§ 308 HOME RULE CHARTER § 308
Ch:409

Part 4
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
§ 401. General Requirements. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter, the preliminary or final
approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of
any building or occupancy permit, or the commencement of any land
disturbance activity may not proceed until the property owner or developer
or his/her agent has received written approval of an SWM site plan from the
Township.
§ 402. SWM Site Plan Contents. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
The SWM site plan shall consist of all applicable calculations, maps, and
plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and
erosion and sedimentation control plan by title and date. The cover sheet of
the computations and erosion and sedimentation control plan shall refer to
the associated maps by title and date. All SWM site plan materials shall be
submitted to the Township in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat,
and well organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall be disapproved and
returned to the applicant. The following items shall be included in the SWM
site plan:
A. General.
(1) General description of project.
(2) General description of permanent stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications of the materials
to be used for stormwater management facilities; complete
hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all
stormwater management facilities.
B. Map(s) of the project area shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch by
thirty-six-inch or thirty-inch by forty-two-inch sheets and shall be
prepared in a form that meets the requirements for recording at the
offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Luzerne County. The contents of the
maps(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities or
other identifiable landmarks.
(2) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(3) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within the
project area.
(4) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, areas of natural
§ 401 HOME RULE CHARTER § 402
Ch:411
vegetation to be preserved, and the total extent of the upstream
area draining through the site.
(5) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers,
and water lines within 50 feet of property lines.
(6) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
(7) Proposed changes to the land surface and vegetative cover,
including the type and amount of impervious area that would be
added.
(8) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
(9) Final contours at intervals at two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(10) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
(11) The date of submission.
(12) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet; for tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale shall be one inch
equals no more than 100 feet.
(13) A North arrow.
(14) The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(15) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(16) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project.
(17) Horizontal and vertical profiles of all open channels, including
hydraulic capacity.
(18) Overland drainage paths.
(19) A fifteen-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater
management facilities that would provide ingress to and egress
from a public right-of-way.
(20) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would be
located off site. All off-site facilities shall meet the performance
standards and design criteria specified in this chapter.
(21) A construction detail of any improvements made to sinkholes and
the location of all notes to be posted, as specified in this chapter.
§ 402 KINGSTON CODE § 402
Ch:412
(22) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the
stormwater management system to be a permanent fixture that can
be altered or removed only after approval of a revised plan by the
Township.
(23) The following signature block for the Township Engineer:
"(Township Engineer), on this date (date of signature), has
reviewed and hereby certifies that the Drainage Plan meets all
design standards and criteria of the Kingston Township Act 167
Stormwater Management Ordinance (aka Chapter 17, Stormwater
Management)."
(24) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities.
C. Supplemental Information.
(1) A written description of the following information shall be
submitted:
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(b) Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this chapter.
(c) Stormwater management techniques to be applied both during
and after development.
(d) Expected project time schedule.
(2) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, where applicable,
including all reviews and approvals, as required by DEP.
(3) A geologic assessment of the effects of runoff on sinkholes as
specified in this chapter.
(4) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and peak flows)
on adjacent properties and on any existing Township stormwater
collection system that may receive runoff from the project site.
(5) A declaration of adequacy and highway occupancy permit from the
PennDOT District Office when utilization of a PennDOT storm
drainage system is proposed.
D. Stormwater Management Facilities.
(1) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail.
(2) When groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds or
trenches are used, the locations of existing and proposed septic
tank infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
(3) All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the
stormwater management facilities must be shown.
§ 402 HOME RULE CHARTER § 402
Ch:413
§ 403. Plan Submission. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
For all activities regulated by this chapter, the steps below shall be followed
for submission. For any activities that require a DEP joint permit application
and regulated under Pa. Code Title 25, Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and
Waterway Management) or Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management) of DEP's
rules and regulations, require a PennDOT highway occupancy permit, or
require any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations, the
proof of application for that permit(s) shall be part of the plan. The plan
shall be coordinated with the state and federal permit process.
§ 404. SWM Site Plan Review. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
E. In addition to the above-described SWM site plan content and
submission requirements, any and all other such plan and submission
requirements as described in Chapter 22, Subdivision and Land
Development, shall be provided when the SWM site plan is included and
made a part of any of the various plan submissions for the regulated
activities described therein.
A. The SWM site plan shall be submitted by the developer as part of the
preliminary plan or final plan submission, as applicable for the
regulated activity.
B. Four copies of the SWM site plan stormwater management report and
supporting data shall be submitted.
C. The number of copies of the SWM site plan drawings to be submitted
shall be in accordance with Chapter 22, § 304B(1)(b) and C(1)(f),
respectively, for preliminary and final plan submissions, as applicable,
four of which shall be distributed along with one copy each of the
stormwater management report and supporting data, as follows:
(1) One copy to the Township accompanied by the requisite Township
review fee, as specified in this chapter.
(2) One copy to the Township Engineers.
(3) One copy to the County Planning Commission.
(4) One copy to the County Engineers.
1. The Township Engineer shall review the SWM site plan for consistency
with the adopted Kingston Township Act 167 stormwater management
plan. The Township shall require receipt of a complete plan, as specified
in this chapter.
2. The Township Engineer shall review the SWM site plan for any
submission or land development against the Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance provisions not superseded by this
chapter.
§ 402 KINGSTON CODE § 404
Ch:414
3. For activities regulated by this chapter, the Township Engineer shall
notify the Township in writing, within 30 calendar days, as to whether
or not the SWM site plan is consistent with the stormwater
management plan. Should the SWM site plan be determined to be
consistent with the stormwater management plan, the Township
Engineer will forward a summary review comment letter to the
Township Planning Commission Administrator. The Township Planning
Commission Administrator will forward a copy of the Township
Engineer's review letter to the developer.
4. Should the SWM site plan be determined to be inconsistent with the
stormwater management plan, the Township Engineer will forward a
summary review comment letter to the Township Planning Commission
Administrator, citing the reason(s) for the determination of
inconsistency. The Township Planning Commission Administrator will
forward a copy of the Township Engineer's review letter to the
developer. Any SWM site plans determined to be inconsistent with the
stormwater management plan may be revised by the developer and
resubmitted consistent with this chapter.
5. For regulated activities specified in § 104, Subsections 3 and 4, of this
chapter, the Township Engineer shall notify the Township Planning
Commission Administrator in writing, within a time frame consistent
with the Township Building Code and/or Township Subdivision
Ordinance, as to whether or not the SWM site plan is consistent with
the stormwater management plan. The Township Planning Commission
Administrator will forward a copy of the Township Engineer's review
letter to the Building Permit Officer and the developer. Any SWM site
plan determined to be inconsistent with the stormwater management
plan may be revised by the developer and resubmitted consistent with
this chapter.
6. For regulated activities requiring a DEP joint permit application, the
Township Engineer shall notify the Township Planning Commission
Administrator in writing as to whether or not the SWM site plan is
consistent with the stormwater management plan. The Township
Planning Commission Administrator will forward a copy of the
Township Engineer's review letter to the DEP and the developer. DEP
may consider the Township Engineer's review comments in determining
whether to issue a permit.
7. The Township shall not approve any subdivision or land development
for regulated activities specified in § 104 of this chapter if the SWM site
plan has been found to be inconsistent with the stormwater
management plan, as determined by the Township Engineer. All
required permits from DEP must be obtained prior to approval of any
subdivision or land development.
8. The Township Building Permit Office shall not issue a building permit
for any regulated activity specified in § 104 of this chapter if the SWM
site plan has been found to be inconsistent with the stormwater
§ 404 HOME RULE CHARTER § 404
Ch:415
§ 405. Modification of Plans. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
§ 406. Resubmission of Disapproved SWM Site Plans. [Ord. 2015-1,
6/10/2015]
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the Township Engineer's concerns documented in writing
addressed, to the Township Planning Commission Administrator in
accordance with § 403 of this chapter and distributed accordingly and
be subject to review as specified in § 404 of this chapter. The applicable
management plan, as determined by the Township Engineer, or without
considering the comments of the Township Engineer. All required
permits from DEP must be obtained prior to issuance of a building
permit.
9. The developer shall be responsible for completing an as-built survey of
all stormwater management facilities included in the approved SWM
site plan. The as-built survey and an explanation of any discrepancies
with the design plans shall be submitted to the Township Engineer for
final review. In no case shall the Township approve the as-built survey
until the Township receives a copy of any required highway occupancy
permit from the PennDOT District Office, any applicable permits from
DEP, or any applicable permits as may be required by any other
regulating county, state or federal agency.
10. The Township's approval of an SWM site plan shall be valid for a period
not to exceed one year. This one-year time period shall commence on
the date that the Township signs the approved SWM site plan. If
stormwater management facilities included in the approved SWM site
plan have not been constructed, or if constructed, but an as-built survey
of these facilities has not been approved within this one-year time
period, then the Township may consider the SWM site plan disapproved
and may revoke any and all permits. SWM site plans that are
considered disapproved by the Township shall be resubmitted in
accordance with § 406 of this chapter.
1. A modification to a submitted SWM site plan for a development site that
involves a change in stormwater management facilities or techniques,
or that involves the relocation or redesign of stormwater management
facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as
stated on the SWM site plan as determined by the Township Engineer,
shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan consistent
with § 403 of this chapter and be subject to review as specified in § 404
of this chapter.
2. A modification to an already approved or disapproved SWM site plan
shall be submitted to the Township, accompanied by the applicable
review. A modification to an SWM site plan for which a formal action
has not been taken by the Township shall be submitted to the Township,
accompanied by the applicable Township review fee.
§ 404 KINGSTON CODE § 406
Ch:416
Township review fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved
SWM site plan.
§ 406 HOME RULE CHARTER § 406
Ch:417

Part 5
INSPECTIONS
§ 501. Schedule of Inspections. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
1. The Township Engineer or his municipal assignee shall inspect phases
of the installation of the permanent stormwater management facilities
as deemed appropriate by the Township Engineer.
2. During any stage of the work, if the Township Engineer determines that
the permanent stormwater management facilities are not being
installed in accordance with the approved SWM site plan, the Township
shall revoke any existing permits until a revised SWM site plan is
submitted and approved, as specified in this chapter.
§ 501 HOME RULE CHARTER § 501
Ch:419

Part 6
FEES AND EXPENSES
§ 601. General. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
The fee required by this chapter is the Township review fee. The Township
review fee shall be established by the Township to defray review costs
incurred by the Township and the Township Engineer. All fees shall be paid
by the applicant.
§ 602. Township SWM Site Plan Review Fee. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/
2015]
The Township shall establish a review fee schedule by resolution of the
Township Board of Supervisors based on the size of the regulated activity
and based on the Township's costs for reviewing SWM site plans. The
Township shall periodically update the review fee schedule to ensure that
review costs are adequately reimbursed. Refer also to Chapter 22, § 302
(SALDO).
§ 603. Expenses Covered by Fees. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
The fees required by this chapter shall at a minimum cover:
A. Administrative costs.
B. The review of the SWM site plan by the Township and the Township
Engineer.
C. The site inspections.
D. The inspection of stormwater management facilities and SWM
improvements during construction.
E. The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities and SWM improvements presented in the SWM site plan.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
§ 601 HOME RULE CHARTER § 603
Ch:421

Part 7
MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES
§ 701. Performance Guarantee. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
The applicant should provide a financial guarantee to the Township for the
timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management
controls as required by the approved SWM site plan and this chapter in an
amount based on the provisions of and in accordance with § 612 of Chapter
22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 702. Maintenance Responsibilities. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
§ 703. Maintenance Agreement for Privately Owned Stormwater
Facilities. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
1. The SWM site plan for the site of the regulated activity shall contain an
operation and maintenance plan prepared by the applicant, reviewed by
the Township Engineer and approved by the Township Planning
Commission. The operation and maintenance plan shall outline
required routine maintenance actions and schedules necessary to
ensure proper operation of the facility(ies).
2. The SWM site plan for the development site shall establish
responsibilities for the continuing operating and maintenance of all
proposed stormwater control facilities, consistent with the following
principals:
A. If a site consists of structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements
are to be dedicated to the Township, stormwater control facilities
may also be dedicated to and maintained by the Township.
B. If a site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if sewers and
other public improvements are to be privately owned and
maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of stormwater
control facilities shall be the responsibility of the owner or private
management entity.
3. The Township Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation of the
Township Engineer, shall make the final determination on the
continuing maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the
SWM site plan. The Township Board of Supervisors reserves the right to
accept the ownership and operating responsibility for any or all of the
stormwater management controls.
1. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan, the property owner shall
sign and record a maintenance agreement (see Appendix A45) covering
45.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 701 HOME RULE CHARTER § 703
Ch:423
§ 704. Township Stormwater Maintenance Fund. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/
2015]
all stormwater control facilities which are to be privately owned. The
agreement shall stipulate that:
A. The owner, successor and assigns shall maintain all facilities in
accordance with the approved maintenance schedule and shall
keep all facilities in a safe and attractive manner.
B. The owner shall convey to the Township easements and/or rightsof-
way to assure access for periodic inspections by the Township
and maintenance, if required.
C. The owner shall keep on file with the Township the name, address
and telephone number of the person or company responsible for
maintenance activities; in the event of a change, new information
will be submitted to the Township within 10 days of the change.
D. If the owner, successor or assigns fails to maintain the stormwater
control facilities following due notice by the Township to correct
the problem(s), the Township may perform the necessary
maintenance work or corrective work, and the owner shall
reimburse the Township for all costs.
2. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all facilities.
The maintenance agreement shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Township Solicitor and Township Board of Supervisors.
1. Persons installing stormwater storage facilities shall be required to pay
a specified amount to the Township Stormwater Maintenance Fund to
help defray costs of periodic inspections and maintenance expenses.
The amount of the deposit shall be determined as follows:
A. If the storage facility is to be privately owned and maintained, the
deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections performed by
the Township for a period of 10 years, as estimated by the Township
Engineer. After that period of time, inspections will be performed at
the expense of the Township.
B. If the storage facility is to be owned and maintained by the
Township, the deposit shall cover the estimated costs for
maintenance and inspections for 10 years. The Township Engineer
will establish the estimated costs utilizing information submitted by
the applicant.
C. The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to the
present worth of the annual series values. The Township Engineer
shall determine the present worth equivalents, which shall be
subject to the approval of the Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 703 KINGSTON CODE § 704
Ch:424
§ 705. Post-Construction Maintenance Inspections. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/
10/2015]
2. If a storage facility is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility
(e.g., ballfield, lake), the Township may reduce or waive the amount of
the maintenance fund deposit based upon the value of the land for
public recreation purposes.
3. If at some future time a storage facility (whether publicly or privately
owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers or other
storage facilities, the unused portion of the maintenance fund deposit
will be applied to the cost of abandoning the facility and connecting to
the storm sewer system or other facility. Any amount of the deposit
remaining after the costs of abandonment are paid will be returned to
the depositor.
1. SWM BMPs should be inspected by the Township, or the Township's
designee, according to the following list of minimum frequencies:
A. Annually for the first five years.
B. Once every two years thereafter.
C. Within 48 hours following the total release of water from the
facility resulting from every ten-year or greater storm, or as may
otherwise be directed by the Township.
D. At the conclusion of the 10th year.
2. The entity conducting the inspection should be required to submit a
report to the Township regarding the condition of the facility and
recommending necessary repairs, if needed.
§ 704 HOME RULE CHARTER § 705
Ch:425

Part 8
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
§ 801. Right of Entry. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of
the Township may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the
Township to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and facilities
in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 802. Notification. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued
hereunder, the Township shall provide written notification of the violation.
Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish
a time limit for correction of this violation(s). Failure to comply within the
time specified shall subject such person to the penalty provisions of this
chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and resort by the
Township from pursuing any and all remedies. It shall be the responsibility
of the owner of the real property on which any regulated activity is
proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred, to comply with the terms
and conditions of this chapter.
§ 803. Enforcement. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
The Township Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. All inspections regarding
compliance with the SWM site plan shall be the responsibility of the
Township Engineer or other qualified persons designated by the Township.
A. A set of design plans approved by the Township shall be on file at the
site throughout the duration of the construction activity. Periodic
inspections may be made by the Township or designee during
construction.
B. Adherence to Approved Plan. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to undertake any regulated activity under § 104 of this
chapter on any property except as provided for in the approved SWM
site plan and pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. It shall be
unlawful to alter or remove any control structure required by the SWM
site plan pursuant to this chapter or to allow the property to remain in a
condition which does not conform to the approved SWM site plan.
C. At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the release of
the performance guarantee, the owner or his representatives shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified person verifying that all permanent
facilities have been constructed according to the plans and
specifications and approved revisions thereto.
§ 801 HOME RULE CHARTER § 803
Ch:427
§ 804. Public Nuisance. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
(2) Provide a set of as-built (record) drawings.
D. After receipt of the certification by the Township, a final inspection shall
be conducted by the Township Board of Supervisors or its designee to
certify compliance with this chapter.
E. Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit, the Township Board of
Supervisors will schedule a hearing to discuss the noncompliance if
there is no immediate danger to life, public health or property.
F. Suspension and Revocation of Permits.
(1) Any permit issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked
by the Township Board of Supervisors for:
(a) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of
the permit.
(b) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other
applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the
project.
(c) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act
during construction or development which constitutes or
creates a hazard or nuisance, or pollution, or which endangers
the life or property of others.
(2) A suspended permit shall be reinstated by the Township Board of
Supervisors when:
(a) The Township Engineer or his designee has inspected and
approved the corrections to the stormwater management and
erosion and sediment pollution control measure(s), or the
elimination of the hazard or nuisance, and/or;
(b) The Township Board of Supervisors is satisfied that the
violation of this chapter, or any other applicable law,
ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the project has been
corrected.
(3) A permit which has been revoked by the Township Board of
Supervisors cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a
new permit under the procedures outlined in this chapter.
G. Occupancy Permit. An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the
certification of compliance pursuant to § 803D of this chapter has been
secured. The occupancy permit shall be required for each lot owner
and/or developer for all subdivisions and land development in the
Township.
§ 803 KINGSTON CODE § 804
Ch:428
§ 805. Penalties. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
§ 806. Appeals. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
1. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
2. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
1. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs, or imprisonment
of not more than 90 days, or both. Each day that the violation continues
shall be a separate offense.
2. In addition, the Township, through its Solicitor, may institute injunctive,
mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary
or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
1. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee may
appeal to Kingston Township Board of Supervisors within 30 days of
that action.
2. Any person aggrieved by any decision of Kingston Township may appeal
to the County Court of Common Pleas in the county where the activity
has taken place within 30 days of the Township decision.
§ 804 HOME RULE CHARTER § 806
Ch:429

Part 9
PROHIBITIONS
§ 901. Prohibited Discharges and Connections. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/
2015]
1. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter the waters of this commonwealth
is prohibited.
2. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into surface waters
of this commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater,
except 1) as provided in Subsection 3 below and 2) discharges allowed
under a state or federal permit.
3. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of this
commonwealth:
A. Discharges from firefighting activities.
B. Potable water sources, including water line flushing.
C. Irrigation drainage.
D. Air-conditioning condensate.
E. Springs.
F. Water from crawl space pumps.
G. Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
H. Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
I. Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
J. Lawn watering.
K. Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
L. Uncontaminated groundwater.
M. Water from individual residential car washing.
N. Routine external building wash down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
4. In the event that the Township or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in § 901, Subsection 3, of this chapter significantly
contributes to pollution of the waters of this commonwealth, the
§ 901 HOME RULE CHARTER § 901
Ch:431
§ 902. Roof Drains. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative
BMPs and to the maximum extent practicable satisfy the criteria for DIAs
consistent with Appendix C.1. of this chapter.46
§ 903. Alteration of SWM BMPs. [Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, or structures without the written approval of the Township.
Township or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the
discharge.
46.Editor's Note: Appendix C.1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 901 KINGSTON CODE § 903
Ch:432
Part 10
REFERENCES
§ 1001. List of References. [Ord 2015-1, 6/10/2015]
1. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and updated.
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
Harrisburg, PA.
2. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as amended and updated. Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
3. United States Department of Agriculture, National Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS). National Engineering Handbook, Part
630: Hydrology, 1969-2001. Originally published as the National
Engineering Handbook, § 4: Hydrology. Available from the NRCS online
at: http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/.
4. United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS). 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington, D.C.
5. United States Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center. 2004-2006. Precipitation-
Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0,
Silver Spring, Maryland. Internet address: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/
hdsc/pfds/.
§ 1001 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1001
Ch:433
Chapter 18
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 1001 KINGSTON CODE § 1001
Ch:434
Part 1
SEWER USE REGULATIONS
§ 101. Definitions. [Ord. 1970-6, 12/9/1970, § 1]
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings stated:
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Each structure for continuous or periodic human
occupancy from which sanitary sewage is or may be discharged, and
includes, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, dwellings, flats,
apartments, stores, shops, offices and business or industrial establishments.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, partnership
or corporation.
PROPERTY ACCESSIBLE TO A PUBLIC SEWER — Property which adjoins,
abuts on, or is adjacent to a public sewer or a street or highway in which
a public sewer is located, but shall not include any property on which the
principal occupied building is located more than 150 feet from a public
sewer.
PUBLIC SEWER — Facilities (including any part of, but not necessarily the
entirety of a system of, such facilities) operated by a sewer authority for
the collection of sanitary sewage within this Township. Such term includes
lateral lines from a street main to the curb or right-of-way line where such
lateral lines are constructed by a sewer authority.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal, water-carried household and toilet
wastes resulting from human occupancy.
SEWER AUTHORITY — Dallas Area Municipal Authority or any other
agency operating public sewers for or at the request of the governing body
of the Township.
§ 102. Owners to be Notified to Connect. [Ord. 1970-6, 12/9/1970,
§ 2]
Upon the completion of any public sewer, the sewer authority charged with
the operation thereof shall cause notice of that fact to be published once
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township, such notice to state
that owners of property accessible to such sewer and upon which there is
an occupied building are compelled to make connection therewith pursuant
to this Part. A copy of such notice, together with a copy of this Part and
any ordinance then in effect imposing sewer connection fees and sewer
rents shall be mailed to each person known to the sewer authority to own
property accessible to such sewer, but failure to mail such copies or defect
in the mailed copies or defect in the mailing thereof shall not affect the
validity of the notice.
§ 103. Connections Required. [Ord. 1970-6, 12/9/1970, § 3]
1. Any person owning property accessible to a public sewer on which
there is an occupied building shall, at his own expense, install sanitary
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 103
Ch:435
§ 104. Individual Sewage Systems Unlawful. [Ord. 1970-6, 12/9/
1970, § 4]
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying a property on which
there is a building required to be connected to a public sewer under the
provisions of $103 hereof to construct or use on such property any privy,
privy vault, cesspool, septic tank or other device for the disposal of sanitary
sewage. Any such privy, privy vault, cesspool, septic tank or other device
constructed or used in violation hereof is hereby declared to be a nuisance
which shall be abated as provided by law.
§ 105. Connection Fee. [Ord. 1970-6, 12/9/1970, § 5]
No connection shall be made to any public sewer except upon payment
of the prescribed connection fee and upon permit issued by the sewer
authority pursuant to rules and regulations regarding connections
promulgated by the sewer authority and approved by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township. No person shall make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the sewer authority.
§ 106. Township to Enforce Connection Requirement. [Ord. 1970-6,
12/9/1970, § 6]
If any person required to make a connection to a public sewer by § 103
hereof fails to do so after reasonable notice and opportunity, the sewer
authority shall report such failure to the Board of Supervisors of the
Township, who may proceed as permitted by law to enter upon the property,
make such connection and collect the cost thereof by municipal lien or
otherwise.
§ 107. Destruction of Part of System Unlawful. [Ord. 1970-6, 12/9/
1970, § 7]
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
facilities in such building and connect the same to the public sewer
within 60 days after publication of the notice of completion of the sewer
specified in § 102.
2. Any person owning property accessible to a public sewer on which an
occupied building is hereafter erected shall, at the time of erection and
at his expense, install sanitary facilities in such building and connect
the same to the public sewer.
3. Persons owning properties accessible to a public sewer on which there
are occupied buildings more than 150 feet from such sewer and persons
owning properties not accessible to a public sewer who are
nevertheless able to arrange for connections thereto through
intermediate properties shall be permitted to make such connection.
§ 103 KINGSTON CODE § 107
Ch:436
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
§ 108. Penalties. [Ord. 1970-6, 12/9/1970, § 8; as amended by Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985; and by Ord. 97-3, 11/12/1997]
1. Any person violating any provision of this Part shall be served by the
sewer authority with written notice stating the nature of the violation
and prescribing a reasonable time limit for the correction thereof.
2. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and,
in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment
not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this Part continues or
each Section of this Part which shall be found to have been violated
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 107 HOME RULE CHARTER § 108
Ch:437

Part 2
SEWAGE STANDARDS ENFORCEMENT FEES
§ 201. Fees Set. [Res. 1983-2, 7/13/1983; as amended by Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985]
The schedule of fees for the enforcement of Chapter 73, "Standards for
Sewage Disposal Facilities", Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources as amended, are as set by the
Board of Supervisors by resolution from time to time.
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 201
Ch:439

Part 3
WASTEWATER TREATMENT
ARTICLE A.
General Provisions.
§ 301. Purpose and Policy. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 1.1]
1. Kingston Township (hereinafter the "municipality") owns and operates a
wastewater collection system which is subject to a service agreement
with the Wyoming Valley Sanitary Authority for the collection and
treatment of wastes and sewage collected by such system and
contributed by residents of municipality.
2. This Part sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the wastewater collection system and enables the
municipality and the Authority to comply with all applicable state and
federal laws as required by the Federal Clean Water Act of 1977, the
General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403), the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Law, and the provisions of the service agreement.
3. The objectives of this Part are:
A. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
collection and treatment system which will interfere with the
operation of the system, contaminate the resulting sludge, be
difficult to treat by conventional means or otherwise be
incompatible with the system;
B. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
system which will pass-through the system, inadequately treated,
into receiving streams or the atmosphere, causing pollution;
C. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludges from the system; and
D. To provide for equitable distribution of costs occasioned by the
acceptance of industrial or other wastes of unusual characteristics.
4. This Part provides for the regulation of contributors to the municipal
wastewater system through the establishment of standards for
discharge of wastes; by authorizing the issuance of permits to certain
nondomestic users; by providing general requirements for all users; by
authorizing monitoring and enforcement activities; by requiring certain
reporting by users; and by providing for the setting of fees for the
equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established
herein.
5. This Part shall apply to all persons who discharge wastes, wastewater
or sewage into the sanitary sewer system of the municipality. Except as
otherwise provided herein, the Executive Director of the WVSA shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Part.
§ 301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 302
Ch:441
§ 302. Definitions. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 1.2]
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this Part, have the meanings hereinafter designated:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act of 1977, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The administrator of the EPA, Region III, or the
Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) if duly authorized by the
EPA to administer the pretreatment program.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE — The person authorized to sign
required reports, as defined at 40 CFR § 403.12(1).
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the provisions of this Part, including the prohibitions
listed in § 311 and other pretreatment standards and requirements. BMPs
also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices
to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal,
or drainage from raw materials storage. For purposes of determining
significant noncompliance under § 368 of this Part, BMPs are considered a
narrative pretreatment standard or requirement.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure, as specified, in five days at 20° C. expressed in terms of weight
and concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)].
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user that is subject to a
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) — The measure of the oxygenconsuming
capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water,
sewage, industrial wastewater, or other liquid as determined by standard
laboratory procedure, as specified, expressed as milligrams per liter (mg/l).
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The WVSA.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any system of
condensation, such as air conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration, and which
does not contain any pollutants or contaminants at levels which would
require regulation under this Part. Cooling water which contains pollutants
or contaminants which require regulation shall be considered industrial
wastewater.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — The normal waterborne sewage and other wastes
normally discharged by a household, including toilet wastes, laundry,
washwater and other gray water, and similar wastes.
DOMESTIC USER — A user who discharges only domestic sewage.
§ 302 KINGSTON CODE § 302
Ch:442
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the term may also
be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized
official of said agency.
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR — The person designated as such by the WVSA
to supervise the operation of WVSA facilities or his or her duly authorized
representative.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime
basis with no regard to flow and over a period of time not exceeding
15 minutes.
HOLDING TANK — A storage tank installed by the user to hold such
industrial wastewater which is prohibited from being discharged to the
sanitary sewer system and from which the contents must be hauled to a
disposal site. Such tank shall be approved by the municipality and shall not
be connected to the sanitary sewer system.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGE — The discharge or the
introduction of pollutants into the sanitary sewer system from any
nondomestic user.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any user that discharges industrial wastewater.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER — Liquid waste and waterborne liquid,
gaseous and solid substances (except domestic sewage which is separately
discharged) that is discharged from any industrial, manufacturing, trade or
commercial establishment, including nonprofit organizations, governmental
agencies or business activities. If domestic sewage is mixed with industrial
wastewater, the mixture is industrial wastewater.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit authorizing
the discharge of industrial wastewater into the sanitary sewer system.
INTERFERENCE — The inhibition or disruption of the WVSA treatment
process or operations such as to cause or threaten to cause or contribute to
a violation of any requirement of the WVSA's NPDES permit, including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of any violation. The term includes
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the WVSA in accordance
with Section 405 of the Act, or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (including the RCRA),
the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or any more stringent
state criteria for the use or disposal of sewage sludge.
LOCAL LIMITS — Indirect discharge limits, which may include best
management practices, established by the WVSA as required by 40 CFR
403.5(c) (which such limits shall be deemed pretreatment standards), and
any other limits developed by WVSA to implement the provisions of this Part
or the WVSA rules and regulations.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — EPApromulgated
indirect discharge standards for certain industrial process
categories under Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which are codified at 40
CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
§ 302 HOME RULE CHARTER § 302
Ch:443
NEW SOURCE — Any source, the construction of which is commenced after
publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the
Act which will be applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter
promulgated, as defined at 40 CFR Section 403.3(m)(1).
NONDOMESTIC USER — A user engaged, wholly or in part, in the
manufacturing, fabricating, processing, cleaning, laundering, bottling, or
assembling of a product, commodity or article or in any commerce or trade
and which discharges, or has the capacity to discharge, wastewater other
than domestic sewage.
NONSIGNIFICANT CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial
user subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards that is
determined by the control authority to be a nonsignificant industrial user
on a finding that it never discharges more than 100 gallons per day of
Industrial Waste subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
and that the following conditions are met:
OIL AND GREASE — The result of the Hexane Extractible Materials Test,
EPA Method 1664, or an equivalent method approved by EPA.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the WVSA treatment plant
into the receiving stream in quantities or concentrations which, alone or
in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, causes
or contributes, or threatens to cause or contribute, to a violation of any
requirement of the WVSA's NPDES permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.
The industrial user, prior to the control authority's determination, has
consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment
standards and requirements;
A.
The industrial user annually submits the following certification
statement together with any additional information necessary to
support the certification statement:
"Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with the Categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 CFR (insert applicable section), I certify that, to the best
of my knowledge and belief that during the period from __________ to
__________ [month, day, year]: (a) The facility described as __________
[facility name] met the definition of a non-significant categorical
industrial user as described in § 403.3(v)(2); (b) the facility complied
with all applicable Pretreatment Standards and requirements during
this reporting period; and (c) the facility never discharged more than
100 gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given day during
this reporting period. This compliance certification is based upon the
following information. __________";
B.
The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated
wastewater.
C.
§ 302 KINGSTON CODE § 302
Ch:444
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions.
POLLUTION — The alteration of the thermal, chemical, physical, biological,
or radiological integrity of, or the contamination of, any water to the extent
that the water is rendered harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans,
animal life, vegetation, or property, or to public health, safety, or welfare,
or that impairs the usefulness of the public enjoyment of that water. The
violation of any water quality standard or criterion established by the
PADEP through regulation, rule, permit or order shall be pollution.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction by physical, chemical,
or biological means of the amount or rate of pollutants, the elimination
of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to discharge, except by means
prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard,
which is imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards and national prohibited standards as stated at 40 CFR 403.5, and
local limits developed to implement the national prohibited standards.
PROHIBITED WASTE — Any waste which is totally restricted from
discharge into the sanitary sewer system by this Part.
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM or SEWER SYSTEM — All of the property
involved in the operation of a sanitary sewer collection and treatment
facility, including but not limited to land, wastewater lines, appurtenances,
pumping stations, metering chambers, and the wastewater treatment plant,
whether owned by the municipality, the WVSA, or any other person.
SHALL versus MAY — "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Any user, not classified as a
nonsignificant industrial user by the WVSA:
A. That is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards; or
That discharges an average flow of 25,000 gallons or more per day of
process wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler
blowdown wastewater); or
B.
That contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the WVSA's
treatment plant; or
C.
§ 302 HOME RULE CHARTER § 302
Ch:445
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — As defined in § 368 of this Part.
SLUG DISCHARGE — Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature,
including but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch
discharge which has reasonable potential to cause interference or passthrough
or in any other way violate the provisions of this Part, any industrial
wastewater discharge permit, or any provision of the WVSA rules and
regulations.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STORM WATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SURCHARGE — An additional service charge levied against any person
for discharging wastewater into the sanitary sewer system that requires
additional handling, treatment, disposal, or other costs.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of or is suspended in water and which is removable by filtration.
TOXIC POLLUTANT or PRIORITY POLLUTANT — Pollutants designated by
EPA under provision of Section 307(a) of the Act, as listed on Tables II and
III of Appendix D of 40 CFR Part 122.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the WVSA.
WASTE or WASTEWATER — Domestic sewage, industrial wastewater, and
any other wastes or waterborne matter discharged, deposited or released
by any person.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT — The
facilities owned and operated by the WVSA for the treatment and disposal
of wastewater.
WVSA FACILITIES — All facilities owned, maintained, or operated by the
WVSA, including the treatment plant, interceptor sewers, pumping stations,
and other such facilities.
WYOMING VALLEY SANITARY AUTHORITY or WVSA — A municipal
corporation organized and existing under the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, under the Municipal Authorities Act of 1945, as amended,
with which the municipality has a service agreement providing for the
collection and treatment of wastewater flowing from the sanitary sewer
system of the municipality. The principal place of business of the WVSA is
located at 1000 Wilkes-Barre Street, Wilkes-Barre, PA 18711.
That is designated as such by the WVSA on the basis that the user has
a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the WVSA's operation or
for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
D.
§ 302 KINGSTON CODE § 302
Ch:446
ARTICLE B.
Discharge Regulations.
§ 311. General Prohibitions. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 2.1]
1. No person shall discharge, release, place, or allow to be placed any
wastewater of any nature into any stream, storm sewer, waterway or
any other place within the municipality other than the sanitary sewers.
2. No user shall contribute, cause, or allow to be discharged, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the
operation or performance of the sewer system or the WVSA facilities.
These general prohibitions apply to all users of the sewer system
whether or not the user is subject to any pretreatment standards or
requirements or any other federal, state, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements. A user shall not contribute the following
substances to the sanitary sewer system or the WVSA's facilities:
A. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone by interaction with
any other substance to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any
other way to the WVSA or to the operation of the WVSA's treatment
plant. Discharges prohibited under this section shall include, but
not be limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less
than 140° F. or 60° C. using the test methods specified in 40 CFR
261.21. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion
hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or any
point in the system), be more than 5%, nor any single reading over
10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited
materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene,
naptha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones,
aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides,
hydrides and sulfides and any other substances which cause or
contribute to a fire hazard or a hazard to the sewer system in the
quantities or concentrations discharged.
B. Any wastewater having a pH value less than 6.0 or greater than
11.5 in any grab sample, or a wastewater having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and/or personnel.
C. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to,
garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension,
animal guts or issues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or
fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand,
spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings,
grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood,
plastic, gas, tar, asphalt residues, mud, or glass grinding or
polishing wastes.
§ 311 HOME RULE CHARTER § 311
Ch:447
D. Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user
knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the sewer
system. In no case shall a discharge have a flow rate or contain a
concentration of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer
than 15 minutes more than five times the average twenty-four-hour
low or concentration of pollutants during normal operation.
Notwithstanding the criteria above, any slug discharge shall be
prohibited.
E. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the WVSA treatment plant resulting in interference, but
in no case any wastewater with a temperature at the introduction
into the WVSA facilities which exceeds 40° C. (104° F.).
F. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with any wastewater treatment
process, which will cause pass-through or interference or exceed
the limitation set forth in a National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard or local limit.
G. Any discharge which may result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors, or fumes within the treatment system in a quantity that
may cause acute worker health and safety problems or is sufficient
to create a public nuisance or hazard.
H. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
I. Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the WVSA.
J. Any substance which may cause the WVSA treatment plant's
effluent or any other product of the WVSA, such as residues,
sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to
interfere with the reclamation or disposal process. In no case shall
a substance discharged to the WVSA's facilities cause the WVSA to
be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines
or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act, any criteria
guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to
the sludge management or disposal method being used.
K. Any substance which will cause or contribute to a violation of the
WVSA's NPDES permit or cause interference or pass-through, as
established by the local limits adopted by the WVSA.
L. Any wastewater with color not removed in the treatment process,
such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions such as would cause or contribute to pass-through or
interference.
§ 311 KINGSTON CODE § 311
Ch:448
§ 312. National Categorical Limits Override. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012,
§ 2.2]
Upon the promulgation of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
for a particular industrial category or subcategory, the national standards,
if more stringent than limitations imposed under this Part for sources
in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed
under this Part. The Executive Director shall notify all affected users of the
applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR, 403.12. However, failure
to notify a categorical user of the applicable regulations shall not act to
excuse any such user from its duty to comply with applicable law.
§ 313. Prohibition on Pass-Through and interference. [Ord. 2012-4,
8/8/2012, § 2.3]
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed any discharge which by
nature shall cause an upset in the performance of the WVSA's treatment
system or pass-through or interference such that the WVSA will violate
or will be in danger of violating any provision of its NPDES permit or
applicable state or federal regulations.
§ 314. Local Limits and Local Equivalent Categorical Limits. [Ord.
2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 2.4]
M. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes by
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by
the Executive Director in compliance with applicable state or
federal regulations.
N. Any substance which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance.
3. When a local limit has been developed to implement any of the above
prohibited waste standards, compliance with the local limit shall be
deemed compliance with the prohibited waste standard unless the user
has reason to know that the discharge, notwithstanding the local limit,
has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass-through.
1. The WVSA will develop local limits as set forth in 40 CFR Part 403.5 and
such other local limits as it deems advisable for the safe, efficient and
reliable operation of the sewer system and the WVSA facilities. Local
limits shall be applicable to such users as WVSA shall designate,
including but not limited to all industrial users.
2. WVSA may develop equivalent mass limits or equivalent concentration
limits to implement categorical pretreatment standards when
requested by a categorical industrial user, pursuant to the provisions at
40 CFR 403.6(c)(5) and (6).
§ 311 HOME RULE CHARTER § 315
Ch:449
§ 315. State Requirements. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 2.5]
State requirements and limitations on wastewater indirect discharge shall
apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal and/or local
requirements and limitations or those in this Part.
§ 316. Municipality's Right of Revision. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012,
§ 2.6]
The municipality reserves the right to establish more stringent limitations
or requirements on discharges to the sewer system if deemed necessary to
comply with the objectives presented in Subpart A of this Part.
§ 317. Excessive Dilution. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 2.7]
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or in any pollutant-specific
limitations developed by the WVSA or the commonwealth; provided,
however, that dilution may be an acceptable means of complying with
certain of the prohibitions set forth in § 311, e.g., the pH and temperature
prohibitions, if such dilution is authorized by an industrial wastewater
discharge permit.
§ 318. Prohibition on Discharge of Stormwater and Cooling Water.
[Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 2.8]
No user shall discharge any stormwater, including but not limited to
basement or foundation drainage, or any uncontaminated cooling water into
the sanitary sewer system, provided that such discharges are allowable into
those portions of the sewer system (if any) that are designated combined
sewers by the municipality. When, upon application to do so, the direct
discharge of uncontaminated cooling water has been prohibited by the
PADEP, the municipality and the WVSA may permit such a discharge into
the sanitary sewer system upon application by the user to do so.
§ 315 KINGSTON CODE § 318
Ch:450
ARTICLE C.
Fees.
§ 321. Purpose. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 3.1]
The purpose of this Subpart C is to provide for the recovery of costs
from users of the WVSA's facilities for the implementation of the discharge
control program established herein. In consideration of the service provided
by WVSA and as provided in the service agreement, WVSA is hereby
authorized to collect from users within the municipality all such charges or
fees as shall be set forth in the WVSA's Schedule of Charges and Fees.
§ 322. Charges and Fees. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 3.2]
§ 323. Surcharges. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 3.3]
1. The municipality and/or the WVSA may adopt charges and fees which
may include:
A. Fees for reimbursement of clerical, labor, and overhead costs of
administering and operating the WVSA's pretreatment program;
B. Fees for monitoring, inspections and sampling of industrial users,
including any extraordinary costs incurred for response costs or to
ensure compliance by a noncompliant user;
C. Fees for reviewing slug discharge control and spill prevention
procedures, pretreatment plans, and plans for grease and sediment
interceptors;
D. Fees for response to accidental or slug discharge;
E. Fees for permit applications;
F. Fees for consistent removal of pollutants otherwise subject to
federal pretreatment standards as provided by 40 CFR 403.7;
G. Fees and surcharges for removal of pollutants such as BOD, TSS, oil
and grease, phosphorus, or nitrogen discharged in amounts greater
than those found in domestic sewage;
H. Other fees as the municipality and/or the WVSA may deem
necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein.
2. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this Part and are
separate from all other fees chargeable by the municipality and the
WVSA.
1. The WVSA may require payment of a surcharge by any user who
discharges wastewater of higher than normal concentration or loading
of any substance which results in additional treatment costs to the
WVSA. Such surcharges shall be in addition to the regular sewer rent
set forth in the rules and regulations of the WVSA.
§ 321 HOME RULE CHARTER § 323
Ch:451
2. Surcharges shall be established by the WVSA in its duly adopted rules
and regulations.
§ 323 KINGSTON CODE § 323
Ch:452
ARTICLE D.
Pretreatment Requirements for Industrial Users.
§ 331. Pretreatment Requirement. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 4.1]
§ 332. WVSA Approval for Pretreatment. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012,
§ 4.2]
§ 333. Permit Requirement. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 4.3]
1. Any user generating wastewater of a character prohibited from
discharge into the sanitary sewer system under Subpart B of this Part
shall provide for pretreatment of the wastewater as necessary to attain
the standards established by this Part and the rules and regulations of
the WVSA. The municipality may, at its sole discretion and in
conformance with the provisions of Act 537, permit the installation of
holding tanks for wastes which are not amenable to pretreatment upon
application by a user. The installation, operation, and maintenance of
holding tanks shall be as prescribed by the municipality as a condition
of its approval.
2. Grease traps or sediment traps shall be provided for the proper
handling of waste containing grease, sand or sediment, in amounts
above the limits provided herein. All traps shall meet the standards
prescribed in § 339.
3. Storage, handling, disposal, and transportation of materials removed
from pretreatment facilities, grease traps or sediment traps shall be
accomplished according to all applicable federal, state, and local
regulations that pertain to the type and/or class of waste generated.
4. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to
the WVSA shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's
expense.
1. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and documentation
of operating procedures shall be submitted to the WVSA for review and
shall be acceptable to the WVSA before construction of the facility. The
review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve
the user from the responsibility of constructing, operating, or modifying
the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the WVSA
under the provisions of this Part. Any subsequent changes in the
pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and
be acceptable to the WVSA prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
2. In addition to approval of WVSA, a building permit may be required by
the municipality, and the provisions of this Part shall not supersede any
requirements of the Building Code applicable to the user's facilities.
§ 331 HOME RULE CHARTER § 333
Ch:453
§ 334. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Provisions. [Ord.
2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 4.4]
1. It shall be unlawful to discharge to the sanitary sewer system of the
municipality any wastewater of any kind except as authorized by this
Part or the rules and regulations of the WVSA, as amended.
2. All nondomestic users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the
sewer system shall notify the WVSA of such intent prior to connection
or prior to the commencement of discharge if the connection point
already exists.
3. Industrial users shall apply for and obtain an industrial wastewater
discharge permit from the WVSA before connecting to or discharging
industrial wastewater to the sewer system. Other nondomestic users
may be required to apply for and obtain a permit to discharge
wastewater other than domestic sewage by the WVSA as provided in its
rules and regulations.
4. WVSA may, at its discretion and in conformance with the provisions of
40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii)(A), develop and issue general permits for certain
classes of nondomestic user.
1. Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified
time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a
period less than five years or may be stated to expire on a specific date.
The user shall apply for a permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior
to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions
of the permit may be subject to modification by the WVSA during the
term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in
Subpart B are modified or just cause exists. The user shall be informed
of any proposed changes in the permit at least 30 days prior to the
effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit
itself shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance, as
determined by the WVSA.
2. Industrial wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user
for a specific operation and type of discharge. A permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the
WVSA. If approval is granted by the WVSA, any succeeding owner or
user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing
permit.
3. Permits shall contain such terms and conditions as the WVSA shall
determine as expressed in its rules and regulations. Permits may
include the following:
A. Effluent limits and best management practices based on National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards, local limits, or other
applicable discharge standards;
§ 333 KINGSTON CODE § 334
Ch:454
§ 335. Permit Application Process. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 4.5]
B. Specifications for monitoring programs which include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, types and standards for tests
(including the requirement that all sampling be representative of
the discharge) and reporting schedules;
C. Compliance schedules;
D. Requirements for submission at specified times to the WVSA of
technical reports, laboratory analysis reports, or discharge reports;
E. Requirements for maintaining and retaining records relating to
wastewater discharge as specified by the WVSA, and affording
WVSA access thereto at reasonable times for examination and
copying;
F. Requirements for notification of the WVSA of any new introduction
of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume
or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into
the wastewater treatment system;
G. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities;
H. Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per § 344;
I. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the WVSA to ensure
compliance with this Part and the WVSA rules and regulations;
J. Notice of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of
pretreatment standards and requirements or other provisions of
this Part, the permit, or the rules and regulations of WVSA; and
K. A schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be
discharged into the sanitary sewer system.
1. All industrial users shall submit to the WVSA an industrial wastewater
discharge questionnaire containing information as set forth in this Part
or required by the rules and regulations of the WVSA. Other
nondomestic users may be requested to submit information at the
discretion of WVSA upon review of the notice required by § 333.2 of this
Part.
2. Users required to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit
shall be so notified by the WVSA and shall timely complete and file with
the WVSA an application in the form prescribed by the WVSA, and
accompanied by the appropriate fee. In support of the application, the
user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the
following information, as required by WVSA:
A. Name, address, and location (if different from the address);
§ 334 HOME RULE CHARTER § 335
Ch:455
B. SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended;
C. Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not
limited to those mentioned in Subpart B of this Part as determined
by an accredited analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall
be performed in accordance with procedures contained in 40 CFR
Part 136, as amended;
D. Time and duration of discharge;
E. Average daily wastewater flow rates, short-term peaks or batch
discharge rates, and daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any;
F. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the
size, location and elevation;
G. Description of activities, facilities and plan processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged;
H. Material safety data sheets (MSDS) for all chemicals used on site;
I. Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the
discharge which are not limited by any local, state, or federal
pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not
the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis
and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M)
and/or additional pretreatment facilities are required for the user
to meet applicable pretreatment standards;
J. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user
will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in
this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The
following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
(1) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form
of "milestone" dates for the commencement and completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contract for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction, etc.).
(2) No increment referred to in Subsection 2J(1) shall exceed nine
months.
(3) Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress
report to the Executive Director, including, as a minimum,
§ 335 KINGSTON CODE § 335
Ch:456
§ 336. Modification of Permit. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 4.6]
Within three months of the promulgation of a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, the industrial wastewater discharge permit of users
subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such
standards within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a
user, subject to a newly promulgated National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard, had not previously submitted an application for an industrial
wastewater discharge permit as required by § 333, the user shall apply
for an industrial wastewater discharge permit within 180 days after the
promulgation of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard. In addition, the user with an existing industrial wastewater
discharge permit shall submit to the Executive Director, within 180 days
after the promulgation of an applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard, the information required by § 335.2I and J.
§ 337. Classifications of Dischargers. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 4.7]
whether or not it complied with the increment of progress
to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason
for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return
the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall
more than nine months elapse between such progress reports
to the Executive Director.
K. Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and
rate of production;
L. Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);
M. Number of employees per shift, hours of operation of plant and
proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system;
N. Any other information as may be deemed by the WVSA to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application.
3. The WVSA will evaluate the date furnished by the user and may require
additional information. After evaluation of the data furnished, the
WVSA may issue an industrial wastewater discharge permit subject to
terms and conditions provided herein.
1. Following review of a report submitted under § 333 of this Part, each
nondomestic user shall be placed into the appropriate classification of
discharger. Said classifications are defined as follows:
A. A significant industrial user shall be a Class I user.
B. A Class II user shall include nonsignificant categorical industrial
users and any nondomestic user that discharges any wastes other
than domestic sewage to the sanitary sewer system in amounts that
§ 335 HOME RULE CHARTER § 337
Ch:457
§ 338. Grease and Sediment Traps for Class II and IV users. [Ord.
2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 4.8]
Class II and IV users that discharge or have the potential to discharge
significant quantities of oil and grease or sediment, as determined by the
WVSA, shall install and properly operate and maintain a grease trap or
sediment trap (or both when necessary) satisfactory to the WVSA as
required by its rules and regulations. Proper operation and maintenance
of grease and sediment traps includes, but is not limited to, removal of
accumulated grease or sediment on a routine basis and maintenance of
documentation of such activity pursuant to § 344. Failure to timely install
or to properly operate or maintain a grease or sediment trap required by
this Part shall be a violation of this Part and may result in the rescission
or suspension of the right to discharge wastewater to the sewer system,
whether or not a permit has been issued by the WVSA.
§ 339. Standard Designs. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 4.9]
Users required or choosing to install grease traps or sediment traps shall
apply to the WVSA for a list of standard construction design criteria as
prepared by and available through the WVSA's Engineering Department
in accordance with current pretreatment design requirements. Users may
deviate from standard construction design criteria only with permission of
the Executive Director.
on a routine basis are determined by the WVSA not to have a
significant impact on the treatment system but may present a
potential to impact on the treatment system, such as, but not
limited to, users with oil and grease or settleable solids discharges
that may present a potential to cause sewer obstructions and those
that have the potential to have slug discharges or chemical spills.
C. A Class III user shall be any nondomestic user who discharges only
domestic sewage or has a dry process or is considered to have
insignificant impact on the treatment system.
D. A Class IV or commercial user shall be any nondomestic user who
discharges industrial wastewater of the nature produced by
facilities such as vehicle wash facilities, vehicle maintenance
shops, fluid change facilities, steam-cleaning facilities, restaurants,
lounges, etc.
2. For the purpose of the permit process, all Class I users shall be required
to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit from the WVSA.
Class II, Class III and Class IV users may be required to obtain a permit,
as determined by the WVSA.
3. Whether a user is required to obtain a permit or not, it may be required
to install such facilities as the WVSA or municipality deems necessary
to comply with the provisions of this Part.
§ 337 KINGSTON CODE § 340
Ch:458
§ 340. Inspection. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 4.10]
The municipality and the WVSA may inspect the facilities of any
nondomestic user to ascertain whether the purpose of this Part is being
met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants
of premises where wastewater other than domestic sewage is created or
discharged shall allow representatives of the municipality and the WVSA
ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and/or copying, or
in the performance of any of their duties. The municipality, the WVSA, the
PADEP and/or the EPA shall have the right to set up on the nondomestic
user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling,
inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a
user has security measures in force which would require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security personnel so that upon
presentation of suitable identification, representatives of the municipality,
the WVSA, the PADEP and/or the EPA will be permitted to enter, without
delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
§ 341. Operation and Maintenance of Pretreatment Facilities. [Ord.
2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 4.11]
1. It shall be the responsibility of the industrial user to maintain its
pretreatment facility in a working order to provide consistent
compliance with the limitations set forth in the industrial wastewater
discharge permit and/or the rules and regulations of the WVSA.
Operation of the pretreatment system shall be undertaken by the user
according to the prescribed methods of the manufacturer as approved
by the WVSA, to provide consistent compliance with the limitations set
forth in this Part, the industrial wastewater discharge permit and the
rules and regulations of the WVSA. The user shall be required to
maintain documentation reflecting operations and maintenance of all
pretreatment facilities.
2. If required by the WVSA, a user shall develop and implement a slug
control plan containing the elements itemized at 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vi).
The slug control plan shall be submitted to the WVSA for review and
approval before implementation.
3. Any user required to install and operate a grease trap or sediment trap
shall maintain the equipment in working order to provide consistent
compliance with the limitations set forth in any permit issued by the
WVSA and/or the rules and regulations of the WVSA. Operation of the
trap shall be undertaken by the user according to the prescribed
methods of the manufacturer as approved by the WVSA, to provide
consistent compliance with the limitations set forth in this Part, any
permit and the rules and regulations of the WVSA. The user shall be
required to maintain documentation reflecting operations and
maintenance of all grease and sediment traps for a period of three years
or for such period of time as may be required by any permit.
§ 340 HOME RULE CHARTER § 342
Ch:459
§ 342. Flow Measurement. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 4.12]
The volume of flow used in computing loadings or surcharges shall be based
on the total water consumption data as obtained from the permittee or the
records of the local water utility. If a user has a substantial portion of the
metered water that does not reach the sanitary sewer system, the user may,
at its own expense, and with approval from the Executive Director, install
a separate flow-metering device to measure the actual discharge into the
sanitary system. If the actual flow to the sanitary system is measured, the
equipment used for measurement of the flow must be maintained in proper
working order at all times. A separate written record of calibration and
maintenance must be kept for the flow-metering device and made readily
available for inspection by the WVSA.
§ 343. WVSA Monitoring. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 4.13]
The WVSA may conduct periodic monitoring of the following types:
§ 344. User Self-Monitoring. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 4.14]
A. Scheduled or unscheduled sampling and inspections of the user's
facilities and records shall be conducted at all Class I users at least
once each year.
B. Additional sampling or inspections may be conducted whenever the
WVSA determines a need to investigate the discharges of a user.
C. Demand sampling and inspections may be performed in response to a
complaint or an unusual or emergency situation, such as when the
WVSA determines a change in the normal discharge characteristics of
the user's wastewater flow, if a violation was detected during sampling
or self-monitoring under § 343, if problems that may be attributable to
the user's discharge occur in the sewer system or WVSA facilities, or if
a complaint or report of noncompliance is received by the municipality
or WVSA.
D. If the WVSA performs routine compliance sampling of a user in lieu of
the self-monitoring provisions of § 343, the WVSA shall be subject to the
repeat sampling requirement of § 343B in the case that a violation of
any pretreatment standard or requirement is detected.
E. All discharge sampling and analyses conducted by WVSA shall be in
accordance with the sampling and analysis requirements for user selfmonitoring
in § 344.
A. Sampling; resampling.
(1) Users subject to an industrial wastewater discharge permit may be
required, at the user's expense, to conduct sampling and analyses
of their wastewater on a periodic schedule as established by the
permit. Should the results of said analyses indicate a violation of
any provision of the user's permit, the user must:
§ 342 KINGSTON CODE § 344
Ch:460
§ 345. User Reporting and Recordkeeping. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012,
§ 4.15]
(a) Report the violation to the WVSA within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the violation; and
(b) Repeat the sampling and analysis within 30 days of becoming
aware of the violation and report the results to the WVSA.
(2) The resampling is not required if:
(a) The WVSA conducts monthly sampling; or
(b) The WVSA conducted compliance sampling between the time
when the initial sample was collected and when the laboratory
results were received.
B. All wastewater sampling shall be representative of the indirect
discharge. Unless otherwise specified in the wastewater discharge
permit (and documented in the WSVA files), all samples shall be
collected as flow-proportional composite samples over a twenty-fourhour
period, except for samples for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and
grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds, which shall be
obtained as grab samples. Grab samples for cyanide, total phenols and
sulfides may be obtained as multiple grab samples and composited in
the field or the laboratory before analysis; grab samples for oil and
grease and volatile organic compounds may be obtained as multiple
grab samples and composited in the laboratory before analysis. For
constituents required to be collected as grab samples, the permit shall
specify the number of grab samples required for each representative
analysis.
C. Unless otherwise specified in a permit, all sampling, sample
preservation, and laboratory analyses shall be according to the
requirements in 40 CFR Part 136.
1. All users subject to an industrial wastewater discharge permit shall be
required to submit such reports as required by 40 CFR 403.12 or the
industrial wastewater discharge permit. Said reports include:
A. Baseline monitoring reports for all categorical industrial users, as
provided by 40 CFR Section 403.12(b); sampling shall be as
provided at 40 CFR 403.12(g)(4) and shall include a minimum of
four grab samples for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease,
sulfide, and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which
historical sampling data do not exist and a number as established
by WVSA for facilities for which historical sampling data are
available;
B. Compliance schedule reports as required by 40 CFR 403.12(b)(7)
and (c);
§ 344 HOME RULE CHARTER § 345
Ch:461
§ 346. Reporting of Hazardous Waste Discharge. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/
2012, § 4.16]
C. Ninety-day compliance reports for categorical industrial users, as
provided by 40 CFR 403.12(d); sampling shall be provided at 40
CFR § 403.12(g)(4) and shall include a minimum of four grab
samples for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and
volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical
sampling data do not exist and a number as established by WVSA
for facilities for which historical sample data are available;
D. Periodic reports on continued compliance as scheduled in
accordance with the user's industrial wastewater discharge permit
and § 344 of this Part;
E. Immediate notice to the WVSA of any discharge that constitutes a
slug discharge;
F. Immediate notice to the WVSA of any change in the user's facility
that could affect the potential to have a slug discharge;
G. Notification of any planned changes or modifications to the volume
or character of the industrial wastewater discharge, including any
changes to listed or characteristic hazardous waste discharges
reported under § 346 of this Part;
H. Sampling results and resampling reports as required by § 344 of
this Part.
2. Every significant industrial user and any nondomestic user which is
required, by permit or by request of the WVSA, to institute any
monitoring, BMP, sampling, grease or sediment removal, or any other
activity which will produce a record (such as flow meter or pH recorder
charts, laboratory results, or hauled waste records) shall retain all such
records for a period of at least three years. All sampling records of
significant industrial users shall include the information as set forth at
40 CFR 403.12(o).
3. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be
made available to officials of the approval authority upon request. The
reports and other documents required to be submitted or maintained
under this section may be subject to the provisions of Section 309(c)(4)
of the Clean Water Act, as amended, and 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904, as
amended, governing false statements, representations, or
certifications.
1. All industrial users shall be required, in accordance with 40 CFR
403.12(p), to report the discharge into the sanitary sewer system of any
substance, which if otherwise disposed of would be a listed or
characteristic hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Said
notification shall be in writing to the WVSA, the EPA Regional Waste
Management Division Director, and the PADEP hazardous waste
§ 345 KINGSTON CODE § 346
Ch:462
§ 347. Signatory Responsibility. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 4.17]
authorities and shall include the name of the hazardous waste as set
forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the
type of discharge (batch, continuous, or other).
2. If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per
calendar month to the WVSA, the notification shall also contain the
following:
A. An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes;
B. An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in
the waste stream to be discharged in that calendar month;
C. An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in
the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following
12 months.
3. All notifications must take place within 180 days of the first discharge of
said hazardous waste. Any notification under this Section needs to be
submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged, provided
that any planned change in the volume or character of the hazardous
waste discharge must be reported as provided in § 344 of this Part. The
notification requirement does not apply to pollutants already reported
under the self-monitoring requirements of this Part.
4. In the case of any notification made under this Section, the user shall
certify that it has in place a program to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated.
1. All required reports submitted by a user must be signed by an
authorized representative, as defined by 40 CFR 403.12(l) to be:
A. A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president if
the user is a corporation;
B. A manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operating
facilities, provided that the manager is authorized to make
management decisions which govern the operation of the
manufacturing facility and where the authority to sign documents
has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedure;
C. A general partner or proprietor if the user is a partnership or sole
proprietorship, respectively;
D. A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in
Subsection 1A, B or C above if the authorization is made in writing
by the person designated in Subsection 1A, B or C, the
authorization specifies either the individual or a position having
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the
§ 346 HOME RULE CHARTER § 347
Ch:463
§ 348. Monitoring Location. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 4.18]
§ 349. Classified Information. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 4.19]
discharge originates, and the authorization is submitted to the
WVSA.
2. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation
or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other
document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to federal
pretreatment regulations and/or this Part, or who falsifies, tampers
with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under federal pretreatment regulations or this Part, shall be
subject to the civil and criminal penalties as set forth in 40 CFR
403.12(n) governing false statements, representations or certifications
in reports required under the Act, as well as 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904, as
amended, and other applicable state law.
1. The WVSA may require to be provided and operated, at the user's own
expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow
measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems
from which a discharge flows into the sewer system. The monitoring
facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the
municipality may, upon application by the user and when such a
location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user,
allow the facility be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area
and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked
vehicles.
2. There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring facility to allow
accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The
monitoring facility shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition at the expense of the user.
3. Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring
facilities shall be provided in accordance with the WVSA's requirements
and all applicable local construction standards and specifications.
Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written
notification of approval of the plans by the WVSA or within such other
time as may be authorized by WVSA.
1. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits, monitoring programs and inspections
shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without
restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the WVSA that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
2. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
§ 347 KINGSTON CODE § 349
Ch:464
§ 350. Accidental Discharges. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 4.20]
be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
related to this Part, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit, and the pretreatment program; provided,
however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the
state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents
and characteristics shall not be recognized as confidential information.
3. Information accepted by the WVSA as confidential shall not be
transmitted to the general public by the WVSA until and unless a tenday
notification is given to the user. Information accepted as
confidential by the WVSA shall be made available to governmental
agencies. If requested by the user, the EPA and PADEP will treat the
submitted information as confidential to the extent provided in 40 CFR
Part 2.
A. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this Part.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials and to
mitigate, reduce, and contain any such discharge shall be provided and
maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and
operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to
the WVSA for review and shall be approved by the WVSA before
construction of the facility. No user who commences discharge of
industrial wastewater to the sanitary sewer system after the effective
date of this Part shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the
system until accidental discharge protection, containment and
countermeasure procedures have been approved by the WVSA. Review
and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve
the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of this Part.
B. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user
to immediately telephone and notify the WVSA of the incident. The
notification shall include location of the discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, and corrective actions being taken.
C. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall
submit to the Executive Director a detailed report describing the cause
of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences. Such notifications shall not relieve the user
of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred
as a result of damage to the WVSA, its facilities, or any other person or
property, nor shall notification relieve the user of any fines, civil
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this Part or other
applicable law. Failure to notify the Executive Director of an accidental
discharge shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this Part.
§ 349 HOME RULE CHARTER § 350
Ch:465
§ 351. Emergency Discharges. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 4.21]
In the case of a nondomestic user that, for reasons of emergency
maintenance, equipment failure, or other similar unforeseen event beyond
the user's reasonable control, must discharge prohibited, high-strength, or
other wastewater of unusual strength, character or volume, the user may
apply to the Executive Director for an emergency discharge permit. The
Executive Director may issue such a permit, on terms and conditions as he
deems appropriate, upon his review of the information provided and in his
sole discretion. No discharge of the unusual wastewater may be made until
and unless an emergency discharge permit has been issued. An emergency
discharge permit shall not be issued for longer than 30 days and may be
renewed only after a new application has been made.
D. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of
an accidental discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees who
may be present in an area where an accidental discharge may occur are
advised of the emergency notification procedure as well as the
containment and countermeasures developed by the user to mitigate
and control any such discharge.
§ 350 KINGSTON CODE § 351
Ch:466
ARTICLE E.
Violations and Enforcement.
§ 361. Notification of Violation. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 5.1]
Whenever the WVSA finds that any nondomestic user has violated or is
violating this Part, the rules and regulations of the WVSA, its industrial
wastewater discharge permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements
contained herein, the WVSA may serve upon such person a written notice
of violation stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of
the notice, or within such other reasonable time as the Executive Director
shall state, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted
to the WVSA by the user.
§ 362. Show Cause Hearing. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 5.2]
§ 363. Other Legal Action. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 5.3]
1. The WVSA may notify any user who is in violation of this Part, an
industrial wastewater discharge permit, or the rules and regulations of
the WVSA to show cause before the WVSA Board of Directors (or such
other adjudicative body as the WVSA shall elect) why a proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice shall be served on
the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the
WVSA regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be
taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show
cause before the WVSA why the proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days
before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a
corporation.
2. A show cause hearing is not subject to the requirements of the Local
Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq., but may be conducted as
provided in that statute at the discretion of the WVSA Board or
adjudicative body.
3. Within a reasonable time after the conclusion of a show cause hearing,
the Board of Directors (or adjudicative body) shall issue an opinion
regarding the alleged violation and any enforcement action which it
believes is appropriate. The WVSA may then proceed to undertake the
recommended enforcement action, if any.
1. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastewater or other wastes
into the sanitary sewer system contrary to the provisions of this Part,
federal or state pretreatment requirements, the WVSA rules and
regulations, or any permit issued by the WVSA, the Municipal Solicitor
may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in
the Courts. When the WVSA determines the need for legal action, said
action shall be undertaken by the municipality within 30 days of
notification by the WVSA.
§ 361 HOME RULE CHARTER § 363
Ch:467
§ 364. Revocation or Suspension of Permit. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012,
§ 5.4]
§ 365. Suspension of Sewer Service. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 5.5]
2. In the alternative, for purposes of enforcement of this Part and the
pretreatment program, the municipality hereby appoints the Wyoming
Valley Sanitary Authority as its agent and authorizes the WVSA or its
duly appointed agents and employees to undertake any legal action in
the name of municipality, including but not limited to the filing of a civil
complaint in the Court of Common Pleas of Luzerne County. In the case
that WVSA acts in the name of the municipality, the municipality shall
cooperate with and support the WVSA in the prosecution of any civil
action as may be necessary.
1. Any user who violates the following conditions of this Part, applicable
state or federal regulations, or an industrial wastewater discharge
permit is subject to having its industrial wastewater discharge permit
revoked or suspended in accordance with the procedures of this
Section:
A. Failure of a user to factually and accurately report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
B. Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or
changes in industrial wastewater constituents and characteristics,
including but not limited to changes in facilities related to the
control of slug discharges as required by § 345.1F;
C. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection or monitoring; or
D. Violation of any condition of the industrial wastewater discharge
permit.
2. Upon notice of suspension or revocation of an industrial wastewater
discharge permit, the user shall immediately cease the discharge of
industrial wastewater to the sewer system. Any discharge of industrial
wastewater to the sewer system after notice of revocation or
suspension shall be a violation of this Part and subject to the penalties
provided herein. In the case of a suspension, the permit shall be
reinstated upon a showing that the user has corrected the condition for
which the suspension was imposed. In the case of a revocation, the user
may only receive a new permit by going through the application process
as stated in § 335 of this Part.
1. The municipality and/or the WVSA may suspend the wastewater
treatment service when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of
the WVSA, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to
the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes
§ 363 KINGSTON CODE § 365
Ch:468
§ 366. Civil Penalties. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 5.6]
§ 367. Right of Appeal. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 5.7]
Any user subject to an enforcement action or issuance or denial of an
industrial wastewater discharge permit under this Part may file an appeal
with the WVSA within 15 days of receipt of the notice of the enforcement
action or permit issuance, revision, or denial. Said appeal shall be
conducted by the WVSA as provided in the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 551 et seq.
interference or pass-through at the WVSA's treatment plan or causes
the WVSA or municipality to violate or be in danger of violating any
condition of an NPDES permit or state-issued water quality
management permit.
2. Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event
of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the municipality may, and the WVSA is authorized to, take such
steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance or
obstruction of the sewer connection from the user's property, to prevent
or minimize damage to the sewer system or the WVSA facilities or
endangerment to any individuals. The WVSA or the municipality shall
reinstate the wastewater treatment service only upon satisfactory proof
of elimination of the noncomplying discharge. All costs associated with
the severance and/or reconnection of a sewer shall be incurred by the
user.
1. Any user who is found to have violated any provision of this Part, the
rules and regulations of the WVSA, as amended, or any regulations or
permits issued by the WVSA or the municipality shall be subject to a
civil penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 per each
violation. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue to occur
shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation.
2. The municipality recognizes that the WVSA has independent civil
penalty authority under the provisions of the Publicly Owned Treatment
Works Penalty Law (Act 9 of 1992, 35 P.S. § 752.1 et seq.). Any violation
of this Part shall constitute a violation of the WVSA's EPA approved
industrial pretreatment program and subject an industrial user to the
penalties provided thereunder. Should WVSA choose to access a civil
penalty under its independent authority against a user who violates any
provision of this Part, the municipality shall cooperate to the extent
necessary to aid WVSA in such an action.
3. In addition to the civil penalties provided herein, the municipality and/
or the WVSA may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court
reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at
law against the person found to have violated this Part, the WVSA rules
and regulations, or any permit issued hereunder.
§ 365 HOME RULE CHARTER § 368
Ch:469
§ 368. Public Notification. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 5.8]
1. The WVSA shall annually publish in a local newspaper of general
circulation a list of the significant industrial users which were
significant noncompliance with the pretreatment standards and
requirements contained herein at least once during the previous
calendar year. Significant noncompliance shall include any of the
following:
A. Chronic violations, defined as those in which 66% or more of all
measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a sixmonth
period are in excess of an applicable numeric pretreatment
standard or requirement, including instantaneous maximum limits;
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in
which 33% or more of all measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits multiplied by the applicable TRC.
TRC is 1.4 for BOD, TSS, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH;
C. Any other violations of a pretreatment standard or requirement
including a narrative standard, which the WVSA determines has
caused or contributed to interference or pass-through;
D. Any discharge that has caused imminent endangerment to human
health and safety or the environment or has resulted in the WVSA's
exercise of its authority to halt or prevent such a discharge under
§ 364 or 365 of this Part;
E. Failure to meet a compliance schedule milestone within 90 days of
the schedule date;
F. Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required
reports as itemized in § 345 of this Part;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
H. Any other violation or groups of violations, including a violation of a
BMP imposed by a permit or implemented as part of a plan
developed by the user and approved by the WVSA, which the WVSA
determines to adversely affect the operation or implementation of
its approved pretreatment program.
2. The newspaper notice shall also summarize any enforcement actions
taken against the user during the same time period.
§ 368 KINGSTON CODE § 368
Ch:470
ARTICLE F.
Cooperation.
§ 371. Township and WVSA to Cooperate. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012,
§ 6]
The municipality and the WVSA shall cooperate in all matters as they
pertain to this Part. Neither the municipality nor the WVSA shall act in any
manner so as to compromise in any way the ability of the other party to
administer this Part.
§ 371 HOME RULE CHARTER § 371
Ch:471

ARTICLE G.
Repealer.
§ 381. Ordinance Repealed. [Ord. 2012-4, 8/8/2012, § 8]
This Part repeals in its entirety all ordinances and parts of other ordinances
which are inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this Part to the extent
of such inconsistency or conflict. In particular, and not by way of limitation,
the wastewater Collection and Treatment Ordinance passed by Kingston
Township on October 12, 1994, is hereby repealed.
§ 381 HOME RULE CHARTER § 381
Ch:473

Part 4
ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM PERMIT
§ 401. Short Title, Statutory Basis, Purpose. [Ord. 1995-9, 1/10/
1996, § I]
§ 402. Permit Requirement. [Ord. 1995-9, 1/10/1996, § II]
§ 403. Enforcement. [Ord. 1995-9, 1/10/1996, § III]
1. This Part shall be known as the "Kingston Township On-Lot Sewage
Disposal System Permit Ordinance."
2. This Part is adopted pursuant to § 7(a)(1) of the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act, as amended, 35 P.S. § 740.7(a)(1).
3. The purpose of this Part is to provide for the permitting of all on-lot
sewage disposal systems within the Township in accordance with the
standards and regulations of 25 Pa. Code, Chapters 72 and 73,
including those systems otherwise eligible for an exemption from the
permitting requirements of the Act, as authorized by § 7(a)(1) of the
Act.
1. From and after the effective date of this Part, all persons proposing to
install an on-lot sewage disposal system on any lot within the Township,
including those persons proposing to install such a system on a lot 10
acres of larger and who are otherwise qualified for a permit exemption
in accordance with the provisions of § 7(a)(1) of the Act, shall apply to
the Township for a permit for the installation of such system.
2. No person shall install or commence construction of any on-lot sewage
disposal system for which a permit is required until such permit has
been issued by a Sewage Enforcement Officer employed or contracted
to, or agent of, the Township.
1. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Part shall be subject to
the civil and criminal penalties authorized pursuant to §§ 13 and 13.1 of
the Act, as amended. (Note: the penalties are not specified here
because of the delayed effective date of the penalty provisions of the
1994 amendments to the Act. Those provisions become effective
December 15, 1995. Thus, the incorporation by reference.)
2. In addition to the penalties for noncompliance set forth in subsection
(1) above, it is further provided that all of the civil and equitable
remedies set forth in §§ 12, 14 and 15 of the Act, 35 P.S. §§ 750.12,
740.14 and 750.15, as amended, shall be applicable to violations of this
Part.
§ 401 HOME RULE CHARTER § 403
Ch:475

Part 5
SEWER LATERAL AND SEWER CONNECTION INSPECTIONS
§ 501. Inspections. [Ord. 2017-7, 9/13/2017]
Prior to the sale or transfer of each lot or parcel of real property lying within
the Township of Kingston, the sewer laterals and sewer connections in and
on that real property shall be inspected and/or televised by the Township
of Kingston, or its designated agent, at the owner's expense, to determine
the condition of the sewer laterals and sewer connections. The owner of the
real property subject to such sale shall notify the Township of Kingston, or
its designated agent, at least 30 days prior to the proposed sale and transfer
of the lot or parcel of real property and shall make all areas to be inspected
and/or televised available to the Township of Kingston, or its designated
agent, upon demand. If the Township of Kingston, or its designated agent,
determines that the sewer laterals and/or sewer connections are in an
unacceptable condition, the sewer laterals and sewer connections shall be
repaired or replaced by the owner of the lot or parcel of real property, at
the owner's expense, prior to the sale or transfer of ownership of the lot
or parcel of said real property. The Township of Kingston, or its designated
agent, shall confirm by inspection and/or televising that the sewer laterals
and sewer connections have been satisfactorily repaired or replaced.
§ 502. Designation of Agent and Delegation of Powers. [Ord.
2017-7, 9/13/2017]
The Township of Kingston hereby designates the Dallas Area Municipal
Authority ("DAMA"), a Pennsylvania general municipal authority, as its
agent to create, implement, conduct, and enforce a program for the
inspection of sewer laterals and sewer connections, as provided herein.
The basis of this designation of agency is that the Township of Kingston
is a constituent member of DAMA, under the Articles of Incorporation of
DAMA, and, further, DAMA has heretofore been designated by the Township
of Kingston as its agent in the provision of all water quality management
services and for compliance with all terms and provisions of the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537)47 for which the Township of
Kingston has primary statutory obligation and duty.
§ 503. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 2017-7, 9/13/2017]
1. DAMA, the designated agent of the Township of Kingston hereunder, is
hereby granted all powers and is duly authorized to do all things
necessary to enforce the provisions of this Part on behalf of the
Township of Kingston.
2. The penalty for a violation of any provision of this Part shall be the
commencement of an action brought before a District Justice having
jurisdiction over the subject real property in the same manner provided
47.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 501 HOME RULE CHARTER § 503
Ch:477
§ 504. Effect on Existing Provisions. [Ord. 2017-7, 9/13/2017]
The provisions of this Part of the Code of the Township of Kingston, so
far as they are the same as those ordinances and regulations enforced
immediately prior to the adoption of this Part, are intended as a
continuation of such ordinances and regulations and not as a new
enactment. The provisions of this Part shall not affect any suit or
prosecution instituted or to be instituted to enforce any prior ordinance or
regulation, except as otherwise provided by law.
§ 505. Severability. [Ord. 2017-7, 9/13/2017]
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Township of Kingston that the
sections, paragraphs, clauses and phrases of this Part are severable. If any
section, paragraph, clause or phrase of this Part is deemed or declared to
be unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid by the judgment or decree
of a court of competent jurisdiction, that invalidity shall not effect any of the
remaining sections, paragraphs, clauses or phrases of this Part.
for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules
of Criminal Procedure. The Solicitor of the municipality or its agent
may assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of the
Luzerne County District Attorney as required under Pennsylvania Rules
of Criminal Procedure No. 83(c) in relation to the trial of summary
offense cases in the enforcement of this Part.
3. Any person or entity convicted of the offense of violating any provision
of this Part shall be subject to criminal fines not to exceed $1,000 per
violation.
4. This Part may be enforced by the Township of Kingston, or by its
designated agent, through an action in equity or law commenced in the
Court of Common Pleas of Luzerne County.
§ 503 KINGSTON CODE § 505
Ch:478
Part 6
Illegal Discharges And Connections To Sanitary Sewer System
§ 601. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2019-1, 6/12/2019]
As used herein, the following words shall have the following meanings;
LATERAL — The part of the sanitary sewage system extending from a sewer
to the curbline or, if there is no curbline, to the property line or, if no such
lateral is provided, then "lateral" shall mean that portion of or place in a
sewer, which is provided for connection thereto of any building sewer.
OCCUPANT — Any person, who occupies any building or premises with the
right of occupancy therein vested by the owner.
OWNER — Any person, vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, trust,
corporation or other group or entity having charge of any improved
premises within the Township of Kingston.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities as of any particular
time, for a system collecting, transporting, treating and disposing of
sanitary sewage situated in or maintained by or the designee by the
Township of Dallas.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
discharged from any improved property.
SEWER — Any pipe, main, or conduit constituting a part of the sewer
system used or usable for sewage collection purposes.
SEWER AUTHORITY — Any sewer authority, acting by and through its
Board of Directors, or an appropriate case acting by and through its
authorized representatives or operated by a municipal-designated sewer
service provider.
§ 602. Discharge of Certain Waters Into Public Sewers or Public
Sanitary Sewer System Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2019-1, 6/12/2019]
It shall be unlawful for any person, occupant, or owner of any building,
improvement, or premises situated in the Township of Kingston to use,
install or maintain or have any connection by whatever means of roof
drains, downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drain, basement drains,
sump pumps, or other sources of surface water runoff or ground water flows
to a pipe, the building sewer, building drain, or lateral, which is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer system for the purpose of
discharging such waters therein.
§ 603. Inspection; Right of Entry; Enforcement; Delegation of
Responsibilities. [Ord. No. 2019-1, 6/12/2019]
§ 601 HOME RULE CHARTER § 603
Ch:479
§ 604. Removal of Prohibited Connections to Public Sanitary Sewer
System. [Ord. No. 2019-1, 6/12/2019]
1. Inspection. The Township of Kingston by its authorized officer(s),
employee(s) or representative(s) or by its designated agent may inspect
periodically, as necessary, any building, improvement, or premises
situated in the Township of Kingston to determine compliance with the
provisions of this Part and to determine if there exists therein any
private connection or infiltration of any prohibited waters hereunder
into a public sanitary sewage system.
2. Entry of Building and Premises.
A. For the purpose of the conduct of any necessary inspection
hereunder, the person, occupant or owner of a building or premises
situated in the Township of Kingston shall permit the designated
and authorized officer(s), employee(s) or representative(s) of the
Township of Kingston or its designated agent hereunder, upon the
production of proper identification and credentials, access during
reasonable hours of the day and after reasonable notice to make all
necessary inspections for the enforcement of this Part. The
inspections hereunder shall be conducted for the purpose of
determining the existence within any such building or any premises
of any private inflow of prohibited effluent therefrom into any
public sanitary sewer system.
B. The right of entry authorized hereunder shall also include the right
to inspect any and all lateral sewer lines (and any connection
thereto) through dye testing, air testing, smoke testing or
utilization of one or more portable television cameras or such
similar testing as may be used for time to time by DAMA and, also,
to inspect roof, surface drains and similar lines to determine
whether or not the same are connected or intersect with any
sanitary sewer lines as a prohibited effluent therefrom, which
enters any public sanitary sewer system.
3. Delegation of Inspection and Enforcement Responsibilities.
A. The Dallas Area Municipal Authority ("DAMA"), through its
authorized officer(s), employee(s) and representatives, is hereby
delegated full authority to act for and on behalf of the Township of
Kingston to conduct all inspections, to issue all directives and
notices necessary to enforce all provisions of this Part and to
undertake all other actions necessary to enforce and secure
compliance with this Part.
B. The delegation to DAMA of enforcement responsibility hereunder
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the commencement and
prosecution of any civil or criminal proceeding(s) for the purpose of
effecting the enforcement and compliance with and for any
violation(s) of this Part.
§ 603 KINGSTON CODE § 604
Ch:480
§ 605. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2019-1, 6/12/2019]
1. Any person, occupant, or owner of any building, improvement or
premises in the Township of Kingston who installs, uses, or maintains
any private devices or connections for the infiltration of waters
prohibited hereunder into a public sanitary sewer system in violation of
this Part shall remove immediately such device or connection to the
public sanitary sewer system. Should such device or connection not be
removed within 30 calendar days following the receipt of written notice
delivered personally or by USPS certified mail to the person, occupant
or owner to cease and desist such action and to remove such device or
connection, the person, occupant or owner of any such building or
premises shall be in violation of this Part and shall be subject to the
penalties for such violations as provided herein.
2. Should any kind, type, or manner of private device or connection
system be found, upon inspection, to have been reinstalled,
remaintained, or reoperated in any building(s) or premise(s) situated in
this municipality by any person, owner or occupant thereof for the
purpose of the discharge of prohibited waters hereunder into any public
sanitary sewer system following the previous removal of a same or
similar private device or water connection system from the building(s)
or the premise(s) after written notice of removal was given, such
private device or water connection system shall be removed
immediately therefrom upon demand and without any prior written
notice of removal, and such action and conduct shall constitute a
violation of this Part, and it shall be subject to the penalties provided
herein.
1. A violation of any provision of this Part shall constitute a summary
offense and shall be enforced by the commencement of an action before
a District Justice by the municipality of the Township of Kingston or its
designated agent in a manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Rules of
Civil Procedure or any amendment thereof.
2. Any person who shall be found to have violated any provision of this
Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more
than $1,000 and all costs of prosecution. Each day that a violation of
this Part continues shall constitute a separate offense.
3. In addition to all other remedies provided herein for violations of this
Part, the Township of Kingston or its authorized representative(s) or
designated public sewer provider shall have the right to proceed in any
court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of obtaining an
injunction, restraining order, or other appropriate remedy to compel
compliance with the provisions of this Part. The remedies provided
herein for the enforcement of this Part, or any remedy provided by law,
shall not be deemed mutually exclusive; rather, they may be employed
simultaneously or consecutively, at the option of the Township of
§ 604 HOME RULE CHARTER § 605
Ch:481
§ 606. Savings Clause. [Ord. No. 2019-1, 6/12/2019]
The provisions of this Part of the Township of Kingston, so far as they are the
same as those ordinances and regulations enforced immediately prior to the
adoption of this Part are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as a new enactment. The provisions of this Part shall
not affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any
of the prior ordinances, except as provided by law.
§ 607. Repealer. [Ord. No. 2019-1, 6/12/2019]
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent with the terms of this
Part are hereby repealed; provided, however, that such repeal shall only be
to the extent of such inconsistencies, and in all other respects, this Part
shall be cumulative with the other ordinances regulating and governing the
subject matter covered by this Part.
§ 608. When Effective. [Ord. No. 2019-1, 6/12/2019]
This Part shall become effective in accordance with law.
Kingston or its authorized representative(s) or its designated public
sanitary sewer system provider.
§ 605 KINGSTON CODE § 608
Ch:482
Chapter 19
SIGNS
§ 608 HOME RULE CHARTER § 608
Ch:483

Part 1
REGULATIONS
§ 101. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. No. 2018-5, 12/12/2018]
The purpose and intent of this Part is to implement an overall plan and
program for public safety, economic and community development and the
general welfare of Kingston Township. This Part shall control and promote
the erection of signs which preserve the wholesome, attractive character
of the Township; preserve and protect property values; preserve the
architectural character and environment of the Township; avoid the
uncontrolled proliferation of signs; encourage and support business activity
through reasonable standards for advertising signs; and avoid undue
concentrations of signs, which distract and endanger traffic safety.
§ 102. Repealer; Designation of New Provisions. [Ord. No. 2018-5,
12/12/2018]
§ 103. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2018-5, 12/12/2018]
Words and terms used in this Part shall have the meanings given herein.
Unless expressly stated otherwise, any pertinent word or term not part of
this listing, but vital to the interpretation of this Part, shall be construed to
have its legal definition, or in absence of a legal definition, its meaning as
commonly accepted by practitioners, including civil engineers, surveyors,
architects, landscape architects, and planners.
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign which has not identified or advertised a
current business, service, owner, product, or activity for a period of at least
180 days, in the case of off-premises signs, or at least 360 days in the case
of on-premises signs.
ADDRESS SIGN — A sign that designates the street number and/or street
name for identification purposes, as designated by the United States Postal
Service (also known as "nameplate sign").
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign depicting action, motion, or light or color
changes through electrical or mechanical means.
AWNING — A cloth, plastic, or other nonstructural covering that projects
from a wall for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window. An awning is
1. Chapter 19 (Signs) of the Code of Ordinances of the Township of
Kingston and all parts thereof, including Part 1 (General Provisions),
Part 2 (Township Sign Regulations), and Part 3 (Administration and
Enforcement), as enacted by Kingston Township Ordinance No. 1981-9,
effective August 12, 1981, and as amended by Kingston Township
Ordinance No. 1993-4, effective November 10, 1993, are hereby
repealed in their entirety.
2. The provisions enacted by this Part shall be designated as Chapter 19
(Signs) of the Code of Ordinances of the Township of Kingston.
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 103
Ch:485
either permanently attached to a building or can be raised or retracted to a
position against the building when not in use.
AWNING SIGN — Any sign painted on, or applied to, an awning.
BALLOON SIGN — A lighter-than-air, gas-filled balloon, tethered in a fixed
location, which contains an advertisement message on its surface or
attached to the balloon in any manner.
BANNER — Any cloth, bunting, plastic, paper, or similar nonrigid material
attached to any structure, staff, pole, rope, wire, or framing which is
anchored on two or more edges or at all four corners. Banners are
temporary in nature and do not include flags.
BEACON LIGHTING — Any source of electric light, whether portable or
fixed, the primary purpose of which is to cast a concentrated beam of light
generally skyward as a means of attracting attention to its location rather
than to illuminate any particular sign, structure, or other object.
BUILDING FRONTAGE — The maximum linear width of a building
measured in a single straight line parallel, or essentially parallel, with the
abutting public street or parking lot.
CANOPY — A structure other than an awning made of fabric, metal or other
material that is supported by columns or posts affixed to the ground and
may also be connected to a building.
CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is part of, or attached to, a canopy.
CHANGEABLE-COPY SIGN — A sign or portion thereof on which the copy
or symbols change either automatically through electrical or electronic
means, or manually through placement of letters or symbols on a panel
mounted in or on a track system. The two types of changeable-copy signs
are manual changeable copy signs and electronic changeable copy signs,
which include: message center signs, digital displays, and Tri-Vision boards.
CHANNEL-LETTER SIGN — A sign consisting of fabricated or formed threedimensional
letters, individually applied to a wall, which may accommodate
a light source.
CLEARANCE — The distance above the walkway, or other surface if
specified, to the bottom edges of a sign. This term can also refer to a
horizontal distance between two objects.
DIGITAL DISPLAY — The portion of a sign message made up of internally
illuminated components capable of changing the message periodically.
Digital displays may include but are not limited to LCD, LED, or plasma
displays.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Signs designed to provide direction to pedestrian
and vehicular traffic into and out of, or within, a site.
EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION — Artificial light, located away from the sign,
which lights the sign, the source of which may or may not be visible to
persons viewing the sign from any street, sidewalk, or adjacent property.
FESTOON LIGHTING — A type of illumination comprised of either:
§ 103 KINGSTON CODE § 103
Ch:486
FLAG — Any sign printed or painted on cloth, plastic, canvas, or other like
material, with distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, attached to a pole or
staff and anchored along only one edge or supported or anchored at only
two corners.
FLASHING SIGN — A sign whose artificial illumination is not kept constant
in intensity at all time when in use and which exhibits changes in light,
color, direction, or animation. This definition does not include electronic
message center signs or digital displays that meet the requirements set
forth herein.
FOOT-LAMBERT — A unit of emitted light (from a surface) stated in lumens
per square foot and measurable with an illuminance meter, also known as a
footcandle or light meter. One foot-lambert is equal to one lumen per square
foot.
FOOTCANDLE — A unit of incident light (on a surface) stated in lumens
per square foot and measurable with an illuminance meter, also known as a
footcandle or light meter. One footcandle is equal to one lumen per square
foot.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign supported by structures or supports that
are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that is independent and
detached from any building or other structure. The following are subtypes
of freestanding signs:
GAS STATION CANOPY — A freestanding, open-air structure constructed
for the purpose of shielding service station islands from the elements.
GAS STATION CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is part of, or attached to, the
vertical sides of the gas station canopy roof structure. For the purposes of
this Part, gas station canopy signs shall be considered wall signs.
GOVERNMENT/REGULATORY SIGN — Any sign for the control of traffic
or for identification purposes, street signs, warning signs, railroad crossing
signs, and signs of public service companies indicating danger or
construction, which are erected by or at the order of a public officer,
employee or agent thereof in the discharge of official duties.
A group of incandescent light bulbs hung or strung overhead or on a
building or other structure; or
A.
Light bulbs not shaded or hooded or otherwise screened to prevent
direct rays of light from shining on adjacent properties or rights-of-way.
B.
GROUND SIGN — A sign permanently affixed to the ground at its base,
supported entirely by a base structure, and not mounted on a pole or
attached to any part of a building (also known as "monument sign").
A.
POLE SIGN — A freestanding sign that is permanently supported in
a fixed location by a structure of one or more poles, posts, uprights,
or braces from the ground and not supported by a building or a base
structure.
B.
§ 103 HOME RULE CHARTER § 103
Ch:487
HALO ILLUMINATION — A sign using a three-dimensional message, logo,
etc., which is lit in such a way as to produce a halo effect (also known as
"backlit illumination").
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A district or zone designated by a local, state,
or federal government, within which buildings, structures, and/or
appurtenances are deemed important because of their association with
history, or because of their unique architectural style and scale.
HOLIDAY DECORATIONS — Signs or displays, including lighting, which are
a nonpermanent installation celebrating national, state, and local holidays,
religious or cultural holidays, or other holiday seasons (also known as
"seasonal decorations").
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign with electrical equipment installed for
illumination, either internally illuminated through its sign face by a light
source contained inside the sign or externally illuminated by a light source
aimed at its surface.
ILLUMINATION — A source of any artificial or reflected light, either directly
from a source of light incorporated in, or indirectly from, an artificial
source.
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A sign that displays general site information,
instructions, directives, or restrictions that are primarily oriented to
pedestrians and motor vehicle operators who have entered a property from
a public street. These signs shall not contain any commercial advertising.
INCIDENTAL WINDOW SIGN — Signs displayed in the window displaying
information such as the business's hours of operation, credit institutions
accepted, commercial and civic affiliations, and similar information. These
signs shall be informational only and shall not contain a commercial
message.
INFLATABLE SIGN — A sign that is an air-inflated object, which may be of
various shapes, made of flexible fabric, resting on the ground or structure
and equipped with a portable blower motor that provides a constant flow of
air into the device.
INTERACTIVE SIGN — An electronic or animated sign that reacts to the
behavior or electronic signals of motor vehicle drivers.
INTERNAL ILLUMINATION — A light source that is concealed or contained
within the sign and becomes visible in darkness through a translucent
surface. Message center signs, digital displays, and signs incorporating
neon lighting shall not be considered internal illumination for the purposes
of this Part.
LEGIBILITY — The physical attributes of a sign that allow for an observer's
differentiation of its letters, words, numbers, or graphics.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Light emitted by a lighting installation which extends
beyond the boundaries of the property on which the installation is sited.
§ 103 KINGSTON CODE § 103
Ch:488
LIMITED-DURATION SIGN — A nonpermanent sign that is displayed on
private property for more than 30 days, but not intended to be displayed for
an indefinite period.
LUMINANCE — An objective measurement of the brightness of
illumination, including illumination emitted by an electronic sign, measured
in candles per square foot (cd/ft2).
MANUAL CHANGEABLE-COPY SIGN — A sign or portion thereof on which
the copy or symbols are changed manually through placement or drawing
of letters or symbols on a sign face.
MARQUEE — A permanent structure, other than a roof or canopy, attached
to, supported by, and projecting from a building and providing protection
from the elements.
MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign attached to a marquee for the purpose of
identifying a use or product. If attached to a theater, performing arts center,
cinema, or other similar use, it may also advertise films or productions.
MECHANICAL MOVEMENT SIGN — A sign having parts that physically
move rather than merely appear to move as might be found in a digital
display. The physical movement may be activated electronically or by
another means, but shall not include wind-activated movement such as used
for banners or flags. Mechanical movement signs do not include digital
signs that have changeable, programmable displays.
MEMORIAL SIGN — A memorial plaque or tablet, including grave markers
or other remembrances of persons or events, which is not used for a
commercial message.
MENU SIGN — A permanent sign for displaying the bill of fare available at
a restaurant, or other use serving food or beverages.
MESSAGE CENTER SIGN — A type of illuminated, changeable-copy sign
that consists of electronically changing alphanumeric text, often used for
gas price display signs and athletic scoreboards.
MESSAGE SEQUENCING — The spreading of one message across more
than one sign structure.
MULTI-TENANT SIGN — A freestanding sign used to advertise businesses
that occupy a shopping center or complex with multiple tenants.
MURAL (OR MURAL SIGN) — A large picture/image (including, but not
limited to, painted art) which is painted, constructed, or affixed directly
onto a vertical building wall, which may or may not contain text, logos, and/
or symbols.
NEON SIGN — A sign illuminated by a neon tube, or other visible lightemanating
gas tube, that is bent to form letters, symbols, or other graphics.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign that was legally erected and maintained
at the effective date of this Part, or amendment thereto, that does not
currently comply with sign regulations of the district in which it is located.
§ 103 HOME RULE CHARTER § 103
Ch:489
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — An outdoor sign whose message directs attention
to a specific business, product, service, event or activity, or other
commercial or noncommercial activity, or contains a noncommercial
message about something that is not sold, produced, manufactured,
furnished, or conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located
(also known as a "third-party sign," "billboard," or "outdoor advertising").
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGN — Official highway route number signs, street
name signs, directional signs, and other traffic signs erected and
maintained on public highways and roads in the interest of public safety or
for the regulation of traffic.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign whose message and design relate to an
individual business, profession, product, service, event, point of view, or
other commercial or noncommercial activity sold, offered, or conducted on
the same property where the sign is located.
PENNANT — A triangular or irregular piece of fabric or other material,
commonly attached in strings or strands, or supported on small poles,
intended to flap in the wind.
PERMANENT SIGN — A sign attached or affixed to a building, window,
or structure, or to the ground, in a manner that enables the sign to resist
environmental loads, such as wind, and that precludes ready removal or
movement of the sign and whose intended use appears to be indefinite.
PERSONAL EXPRESSION SIGN — An on-premises sign that expresses an
opinion, interest, position, or other noncommercial message.
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign designed to be transported or moved and not
permanently attached to the ground, a building, or other structure.
PRIVATE DRIVE SIGN — A sign indicating a street or drive which is not
publicly owned and maintained and used only for access by the occupants
of the development and their guests.
PROJECTING SIGN — A building-mounted double-sided sign with the two
faces generally perpendicular to the building wall, not to include signs
located on a canopy, awning, or marquee (also known as "blade sign").
PUBLIC SIGN — A sign erected or required by government agencies or
utilities, including traffic, utility, safety, railroad crossing and identification
signs for public facilities.
REFLECTIVE SIGN — A sign containing any material or device which has
the effect of intensifying reflected light.
REVOLVING SIGN — A sign which revolves in a circular motion, rather than
remaining stationary on its supporting structure.
ROOF SIGN — A building-mounted sign erected upon, against, or over the
roof of a building.
SANDWICH-BOARD SIGN — A type of freestanding, portable, temporary
sign consisting of two faces connected and hinged at the top and whose
message is targeted to pedestrians (also known as "A-frame sign").
§ 103 KINGSTON CODE § 103
Ch:490
SCOREBOARD — A sign contained within an athletic venue and intended
solely to provide information to the attendees of an athletic event.
SECURITY SIGN — An on-premises sign regulating the use of the premises,
such as a "no trespassing," "no hunting" or "no soliciting" sign (also known
as "warning sign").
SHIELDED — The description of a luminaire from which no direct glare
is visible at normal viewing angles, by virtue of its being properly aimed,
oriented, and located and properly fitted with such devices a shields, barn
doors, baffles, louvers, skirts, or visors.
SIGN — Any device, structure, fixture, painting, emblem, or visual that uses
words, graphic, colors, illumination, symbols, numbers, or letters for the
purpose of communicating a message. Sign includes the sign faces as well
as any sign supporting structure.
SIGN AREA — The total dimensions of a sign surface used to display
information, messages, advertising, logos or symbols. See § 106, Subsection
4, for standards for measuring sign area.
SIGN FACE — The part of the sign that is or can be used for the sign area.
The sign area could be smaller than the sign face.
SIGN HEIGHT — The vertical dimension of a sign as measured using the
standards in § 106, Subsection 5.
SIGN SUPPORTING STRUCTURE — Poles, posts, walls, frames, brackets,
or other supports holding a sign in place.
SNIPE SIGN — A sign tacked, nailed, posted, glued, or otherwise attached
to trees, poles, stakes, fences, public benches, streetlights, or other objects
or placed on any public property or in the public right-of-way or on any
private property without the permission of the property owner (also known
as "bandit sign").
STOREFRONT — The exterior facade of a building housing a commercial
use visible from a street, sidewalk or other pedestrianway accessible to
the public and containing the primary entrance to the commercial
establishment.
STREAMERS — A display made of lightweight, flexible materials, consisting
of long, narrow, wavy strips hung individually or in a series, with or without
a logo or advertising message printed or painted on them and typically
designed to move in the wind.
STREET FRONTAGE — The side or sides of a lot abutting on a public street
or right-of-way.
STREET POLE BANNER — A banner suspended above a public sidewalk
and attached to a single street pole. These signs shall not contain any
commercial advertising.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A type of nonpermanent sign that is located on
private property that can be displayed for no more than 30 consecutive days
at one time.
§ 103 HOME RULE CHARTER § 103
Ch:491
TRI-VISION BOARDS — An outdoor unit with a slatted face that allows
three different copy messages to revolve at intermittent intervals.
VEHICULAR SIGN — A sign affixed to a vehicle in such a manner that the
sign is used primarily as a stationary advertisement for the business on
which the vehicle sits or is otherwise not incidental to the vehicle's primary
purpose.
VENDING MACHINE SIGN — A sign displayed on a vending machine
indicating the name of the product being sold and/or the price of such
product.
WALL SIGN — A building-mounted sign which is either attached to,
displayed on, or painted on an exterior wall in a manner parallel with the
wall surface. A sign installed on a false or mansard roof is also considered a
wall sign (also known as "fascia sign," "parallel wall sign" or "band sign").
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign that is applied, painted or affixed to a window
or placed inside a window, within three feet of the glass, facing the outside
of the building, and easily seen from the outside. Customary displays of
merchandise or objects and material without lettering behind a store
window are not considered signs.
§ 104. Prohibited Signs. [Ord. No. 2018-5, 12/12/2018]
1. The following signs are unlawful and prohibited:
A. Abandoned signs.
B. Snipe Signs. Signs shall only be attached to utility poles in
conformance with state and utility regulations and the
requirements of this Part.
C. Vehicular Signs. This regulation does not include the use of
business logos, identification or advertising on vehicles primarily
and actively used for business purposes and/or personal
transportation.
D. Mechanical movement signs, including revolving signs.
E. Pennant strings and streamers.
F. Animated signs, flashing signs, or signs that scroll or flash text or
graphics.
G. Inflatable devices or balloons signs, with the exception of balloons
used in temporary, noncommercial situations.
H. Any signs that imitate, resemble, interfere with, or obstruct official
traffic lights, signs, or signals.
I. Signs which prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window,
or fire escape, or that prevent free access from one part of a roof to
any other part. No sign other than a safety sign shall be attached to
a standpipe or fire escape.
§ 103 KINGSTON CODE § 104
Ch:492
§ 105. Signs Exempt from Permit Requirements. [Ord. No. 2018-5,
12/12/2018]
J. Signs which emit smoke, visible vapors, particulate matter, sound,
or odor or contain open flames.
K. Reflective signs or signs containing mirrors.
L. Interactive signs.
M. Signs incorporating beacon or festoon lighting.
N. Any banner or sign of any type suspended across a public street,
without the permission of the owner of the property and road.
O. Roof signs.
P. Signs erected without the permission of the property owner, with
the exception of those authorized or required by local, state, or
federal government.
Q. Any sign containing information which states or implies that a
property may be used for any purpose not permitted under the
provisions of the Township of Kingston Zoning Ordinance.48
R. Signs that exhibit statements, words, or pictures of obscene or
pornographic subjects as determined by the Township of Kingston.
S. Any sign that promotes illegal activity.
1. The following signs shall be allowed without a sign permit and shall not
be included in the determination of the type, number, or area of
permanent signs allowed within a zoning district, provided such signs
comply with the regulations in this section, if any:
A. Official traffic signs.
B. Government/regulatory signs.
C. Signs inside a building, or other enclosed facility, which are not
meant to be viewed from the outside, and are located greater than
three feet from the window.
D. Holiday and seasonal decorations.
E. Personal expression signs of any sign type, including flags,
provided that they do not exceed three square feet in area per side,
are noncommercial in nature, and not illuminated.
F. Address signs: up to two signs stating address, number and/or
name of occupants of the premises and do not include any
commercial advertising or other identification.
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 27, Zoning.
§ 104 HOME RULE CHARTER § 105
Ch:493
(1) Residential districts: signs not to exceed three square feet in
area.
(2) Nonresidential districts: signs not to exceed five square feet in
area.
G. Public signs: signs erected or required by government agencies or
utilities, including traffic, utility, safety, railroad crossing, and
identification or directional signs for public facilities.
H. Signs or emblems of a religious, civil, philanthropic, historical or
educational organization that do not to exceed four square feet in
area.
I. Private drive signs: one sign per driveway entrance, not to exceed
two square feet in area.
J. Security and warning signs: These limitations shall not apply to the
posting of conventional "no trespassing" signs in accordance with
state law.
(1) Residential districts: signs not to exceed two square feet in
area.
(2) Nonresidential districts: maximum of one large sign per
property, not to exceed five square feet in area. All other
posted security and warning signs may not exceed two square
feet in area.
K. Flags:
(1) Location. Flags and flagpoles shall not be located within any
right-of-way.
(2) Height. Flags shall have a maximum height of 30 feet.
(3) Number. No more than two flags per lot in residential districts;
no more than three flags per lot in all other districts.
(4) Size. Maximum flag size is 24 square feet in residential
districts; 35 square feet in all other districts.
(5) Flags containing commercial messages may be used as
permitted freestanding or projecting signs, and, if so used, the
area of the flag shall be included in, and limited by, the
computation of allowable area for signs on the property.
(6) Flags up to three square feet in area containing
noncommercial messages are considered personal expression
signs and are regulated in accordance with § 105, Subsection
1E.
L. Legal notices.
§ 105 KINGSTON CODE § 105
Ch:494
§ 106. General Regulations. [Ord. No. 2018-5, 12/12/2018]
M. Vending machine signs.
N. Memorial signs, public monuments or historical identification signs
erected by the Township of Kingston, including plaque signs up to
three square feet in area.
O. Signs which are permanent architectural feature of a building or
structure, existing at the time of adoption of this Part.
P. Signs advertising the variety of crops growing in a field. Such signs
shall be removed after the growing season.
Q. Incidental signs, including incidental window signs.
R. Directional signs, provided they do not contain any commercial
messaging.
(1) Area. No single directional sign shall exceed four square feet in
area.
(2) Height. Directional signs shall have a maximum height of five
feet.
(3) Illumination. Directional signs shall be nonilluminated.
S. Art and murals, provided such signs do not contain any commercial
messaging.
T. Temporary signs in accordance with § 110, Regulations by Sign
Type: Temporary Signs.
1. Sign Location.
A. No sign shall be placed in such a position as to endanger
pedestrians, bicyclists, or traffic on a street by obscuring the view
or by interfering with official street signs or signals by virtue of
position or color.
B. No sign may occupy a sight triangle.
C. Signs and their supporting structures shall maintain clearance and
noninterference with all surface and underground utility and
communications lines or equipment.
2. Sign Materials and Construction: Every sign shall be constructed of
durable materials, using noncorrosive fastenings; shall be structurally
safe and erected or installed in strict accordance with the Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code; and shall be maintained in safe condition
and good repair at all times so that all sign information is clearly
legible.
3. Sign Area.
§ 105 HOME RULE CHARTER § 106
Ch:495
A. The area of a sign shall mean the area of all lettering, wording, and
accompanying designs, logos, and symbols. The area of a sign shall
not include any supporting framework, bracing or trim which is
incidental to the display, provided that it does not contain any
lettering, wording or symbols.
B. Where the sign consists of individual letters, designs, or symbols
attached to a building, awning, wall, or window, the area shall be
that of the smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters,
designs and symbols.
C. Signs may be double-sided.
(1) On-Premises Signs.
(a) Only one side shall be considered when determining the
sign area, provided that the faces are equal in size, the
interior angle formed by the faces is less than 45° and the
two faces are not more than 18 inches apart.
(b) Where the faces are not equal in size, but the interior
angle formed by the faces is less than 45° and the two
faces are not more than 18 inches apart, the larger sign
face shall be used as the basis for calculating sign area.
(c) When the interior angle formed by the faces is greater
than 45° or the faces are greater than 18 inches apart, all
sides of such sign shall be considered in calculating the
sign area.
(2) Off-Premises Signs.
(a) Only one side shall be considered when determining the
sign area, provided that the faces are equal in size, the
interior angle formed by the faces is less than 45°, and the
two faces are not more than five feet apart.
(b) Where the faces are not equal in size, but the interior
angle formed by the faces is less than 45° and the two
faces are not more than five feet apart, the larger sign face
shall be used as the basis for calculating sign area.
(c) When the interior angle formed by the faces is greater
than 45°, or the faces are greater than five feet apart, all
sides of such sign shall be considered in calculating the
sign area.
D. Signs that consist of, or have attached to them, one or more threedimensional
or irregularly shaped objects shall have a sign area of
the sum of two adjacent vertical sign faces of the smallest cube
encompassing the sign or object.
§ 106 KINGSTON CODE § 106
Ch:496
E. If elements of a sign are movable or flexible, such as a flag or
banner, the measurement is taken when the elements are fully
extended and parallel to the plane of view.
F. The permitted maximum area for all signs is determined by the sign
type and the zoning district in which the sign is located. (See §§ 113
through 118.)
4. Sign Height.
A. Sign height shall be measured as the distance from the highest
portion of the sign to the mean finished grade of the street closest
to the sign. In case of a sign located greater than 100 feet from a
public street, height shall be measured to the mean grade at the
base of the sign.
B. Clearance for freestanding and projecting signs shall be measured
as the smallest vertical distance between finished grade and the
lowest point of the sign, including any framework or other
structural elements.
C. The permitted maximum height for all signs is determined by the
sign type and the zoning district in which the sign is located. (See
§§ 113 through 118.)
5. Sign Spacing. The spacing between sign structures shall be measured
as a straight-line distance between the closest edges of each sign.
6. Sign Illumination.
A. Signs may be illuminated, unless otherwise specified herein,
consistent with the following standards:
(1) Location. The summary table (§ 106, Subsection 6G) provides
detailed information about what types of illumination are
permitted in each zoning district.
(2) Light sources to illuminate signs shall neither be visible from
any street right-of-way, nor cause glare hazardous or
distracting to pedestrians, vehicle drivers, or adjacent
properties.
(3) No more than 0.2 footcandle of light shall be detectable at the
boundary of any abutting property.
(4) Hours of Operation:
(a) Signs on nonresidential properties may be illuminated
from 5:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m., or 1/2 hour past the close
of business of the facility being identified or advertised,
whichever is later.
(b) Signs shall provide an automatic timer to comply with the
intent of this section.
§ 106 HOME RULE CHARTER § 106
Ch:497
(5) Brightness: Message center signs and digital displays are
subject to the following brightness limits.
(a) During daylight hours between sunrise and sunset,
luminance shall be no greater than 5,000 nits.
(b) At all other times, luminance shall be no greater than 250
nits.
(c) Each sign must have a light-sensing device that will
automatically adjust the brightness of the display as the
natural ambient light conditions change, to comply with
the limits set here within.
(6) Message Duration: The length of time each message may be
displayed on a message center sign, digital display, or Tri-
Vision board sign is based upon the visibility and speed limit
unique to individual signs and adjacent road conditions. The
following method should be used to calculate message
duration for message center signs, digital displays, or Tri-
Vision board signs.
(a) Determine the greatest distance from which the sign
becomes visible on the road the sign is primarily intended
to serve. If a sign is intended to be seen by more than one
roadway, the road with the lower posted speed limit shall
be used for determining message duration.
(b) Multiply the road's posted speed limit (mph) by 5,280 and
then divide by 3,600 to obtain the speed limit in feet per
second.
(c) Divide the visibility distance by the speed limit (feet per
second).
(d) Add an additional 10% of this number to the total.
(e) The resulting amount of time is the minimum permitted
message duration, except where this value is less than
eight seconds, in which case the minimum message
duration shall be no less than eight seconds.
B. Types of Illumination: Where permitted, illumination may be:
(1) External: Externally illuminated signs, where permitted, are
subject to the following regulations:
(a) The source of the light must be concealed by translucent
covers.
(b) External illumination shall be by a steady, stationary light
source, shielded and directed solely at the sign. The light
source must be static in color.
§ 106 KINGSTON CODE § 106
Ch:498
(2) Internal: Internally illuminated signs, where permitted, are
subject to the following regulations:
(a) Internal illumination, including neon lighting, must be
static in intensity and color.
(b) Message center signs are permitted in accordance with
the regulations contained in § 106, Subsection 6C.
(c) Digital displays are permitted in accordance with the
regulations contained in § 106, Subsection 6D.
C. Message center signs are subject to the following regulations, in
addition to all other illumination requirements established in this
section.
(1) Sign Type: Message center signs are permitted in the form of
freestanding, monument, and wall signs, both on-premises and
off-premises, in accordance with the regulations established in
§§ 107 and 108.
(2) Height: A message center sign shall have the same height
limits as other permitted signs of the same type and location.
(3) Area:
(a) When used as an on-premises sign, message center signs
shall not exceed 50% of the sign area for any one sign, and
shall not exceed more than 30% of the total area for all
signs permitted on a property.
(b) When used as an off-premises sign, message center signs
may be used for the full permitted sign area.
(4) Maximum Number: Where permitted, one message center sign
is permitted per street frontage, up to a maximum of two
message center signs per property.
(5) Message Display:
(a) No message center sign may contain text which flashes,
pulsates, moves, or scrolls. Each complete message must
fit on one screen.
(b) The content of a message center sign must transition by
changing instantly (e.g., no fade-out or fade-in).
(c) Default Design: The sign shall contain a default design
which shall freeze the sign message in one position if a
malfunction should occur.
(6) Conversion of a permitted non-message-center sign to a
message center sign requires the issuance of a permit
pursuant to § 121, Permits and Applications.
§ 106 HOME RULE CHARTER § 106
Ch:499
(7) The addition of any message center sign to a nonconforming
sign is prohibited.
(8) Public Service Announcements: The owner of every message
center sign shall coordinate with the local authorities to
display, when appropriate, emergency information important
to the traveling public, including, but not limited to, Amber
Alerts or alerts concerning terrorist attacks or natural
disasters. Emergency information messages shall remain in the
advertising rotation according to the protocols of the agency
that issues the information.
D. Digital display signs are subject to the following regulations in
addition to all other requirements established by this section:
(1) Sign Type: Digital displays are permitted in the form of
freestanding, monument, and wall signs, both on-premises and
off-premises, in accordance with the regulations established in
§§ 107 and 108.
(2) Height: A digital display shall have the same height limits as
for other permitted signs of the same type and location.
(3) Area:
(a) When used as an on-premises sign, digital displays shall
not exceed more than 30% of the total sign area permitted
on the site.
(b) When used as an off-premises sign, digital displays may be
used for the full permitted sign area.
(4) Maximum Number per Property: Where permitted, one digital
display sign is permitted per property.
(5) Message Display:
(a) Any digital display containing animation, streaming video,
or text or images which flash, pulsate, move, or scroll is
prohibited. Each complete message must fit on one screen.
(b) One message/display may be brighter than another, but
each individual message/display must be static in intensity.
(c) The content of a digital display must transition by
changing instantly, with no transition graphics (e.g., no
fade-out or fade-in).
(d) Default Design: The sign shall contain a default design
which shall freeze the sign message in one position if a
malfunction should occur.
§ 106 KINGSTON CODE § 106
Ch:500
(6) Conversion of a permitted nondigital sign to a digital sign
requires the issuance of a permit pursuant to § 121, Permits
and Applications.
(7) The addition of any digital display to a nonconforming sign is
prohibited.
(8) Public Service Announcements: The owner of every digital sign
shall coordinate with the local authorities to display, when
appropriate, emergency information important to the traveling
public, including, but not limited to, Amber Alerts or alerts
concerning terrorist attacks or natural disasters. Emergency
information messages shall remain in the advertising rotation
according to the protocols of the agency that issues the
information.
E. Electrical Standards.
(1) Permits for illuminated signs will not be issued without an
approved electrical permit, if required. Applications for
electrical permits shall be filed at the same time as the sign
permit application.
(2) All work shall be completed in full compliance with the
Township of Kingston Electric Code as set forth in the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
(3) The electrical supply to all exterior signs, whether to the sign
itself or to lighting fixtures positioned to illuminate the sign,
shall be provided by means of concealed electrical cables.
Electrical supply to freestanding signs shall be provided by
means of underground cables.
(4) The owner of any illuminated sign shall arrange for a
certification showing compliance with the brightness
standards set forth herein by an independent contractor and
provide the certification documentation to the Township of
Kingston as a condition precedent to the issuance of a sign
permit.
F. Glare Control: Glare control shall be achieved primarily through
the use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields, and baffles, and
appropriate application of fixture mounting height, wattage, aiming
angle, and fixture placement. Vegetation screens shall not be
employed to serve as the primary means for controlling glare.
G. Illumination Standards by District.49
49.Editor's Note: The Illumination Standards by District Table is included as an attachment
to this chapter.
§ 106 HOME RULE CHARTER § 107
Ch:501
§ 107. Regulations by Sign Type: On-Premises Signs. [Ord. No.
2018-5, 12/12/2018]
1. Wall Signs.
A. No portion of a wall sign shall be mounted less than eight feet
above the finished grade or extend out more than 12 inches from
the building wall on which it is affixed. If the wall sign projects less
than three inches from the building wall on which it is affixed, the
eight-foot height requirement need not be met.
2. Canopy or Awning Signs.
A. A canopy or awning without lettering or other advertising shall not
be regulated as a sign.
B. Canopy or awning signs must be centered within or over
architectural elements such as windows or doors.
C. No awning or canopy sign shall be wider than the building wall or
tenant space it identifies.
D. Sign Placement.
(1) Letters or numerals shall be located only on the front and side
vertical faces of the awning or canopy.
(2) Logos or emblems are permitted on the top or angled portion
of the awning or canopy up to a maximum of three square feet.
No more than one emblem or logo is permitted on any one
awning or canopy.
E. Sign Height.
(1) The lowest edge of the canopy or awning sign shall be at least
eight feet above the finished grade.
F. Any ground-floor awning projecting into a street right-of-way must
be retractable.
G. Awnings above the ground floor may be fixed, provided they do not
project more than four feet from the face of the building.
H. Multi-tenant Buildings. If the awning or canopy sign is mounted on
a multi-tenant building, all awning or canopy signs shall be similar
in terms of height, projection, and style across all tenants in the
building.
3. Projecting Signs.
A. No portion of a projecting sign shall project more that four feet
from the face of the building.
B. The outermost portion of a projecting sign shall project no closer
than five feet from a curbline or shoulder of a public street.
§ 107 KINGSTON CODE § 107
Ch:502
§ 108. Regulations by Sign Type: Off-Premises Signs. [Ord. No.
2018-5, 12/12/2018]
C. Sign Height. The lowest edge of a projecting sign shall be at least
eight feet above the finished grade.
4. Window Signs.
A. Incidental window signs displaying pertinent business information,
such as the business hours of operation and credit cards accepted,
shall be excluded from area calculations for window signs.
5. Marquee Signs.
A. Such signs shall be located only above the principal entrance of a
building facing a public street or parking lot.
B. No marquee shall be wider than the entrance it serves, plus two
feet on each side thereof.
C. No marquee shall extend closer to the curb than three feet.
D. Sign Height.
(1) No portion of a marquee sign shall extend vertically above the
eaveline.
(2) The lowest edge of the marquee sign shall be at least 10 feet
above the finished grade.
6. Freestanding Signs.
A. The lowest edge of any freestanding pole sign shall be either less
than four feet or greater than seven feet above the ground.
B. Freestanding ground signs shall be supported and permanently
placed by embedding, anchoring, or connecting the sign in such a
manner as to incorporate it into the landscape or architectural
design scheme.
C. Sign Placement.
(1) All freestanding signs shall be set back five feet from the rightof-
way, except for official traffic signs and government/
regulatory signs.
(2) No freestanding sign may occupy an area designated for
parking, loading, walkways, driveways, fire lane, easement,
cartway of the right-of-way or other areas required to remain
unobstructed.
7. Manual Changeable-Copy Signs: Manual changeable-copy signs are
permitted only when integrated into a freestanding, marquee, wall, or
portable sign.
§ 107 HOME RULE CHARTER § 108
Ch:503
1. Location Permitted.
A. Off-premises signs are permitted in the following locations:
(1) {List zones/district permitted}.
2. Sign Size: An off-premises advertising sign is subject to the following
size restrictions according to the posted speed limit of the road which
the off-premises sign faces.
Posted Speed Limit
(mph)
<35 36-45 46-55 56-65 Limited
Access
Maximum Sign
Area
(square feet)
60 100 150 200 300
3. Height and Location of Sign.
A. The lowest edge of an off-premises sign shall be at least seven feet
above the finished grade.
B. Off-premises signs shall have a maximum height of 30 feet.
4. Spacing. Off-premises signs shall be:
A. Set back from the ultimate right-of-way a distance equal to the
height of the off-premises sign or 15 feet, whichever is greater.
B. Located no closer than 25 feet from any property line.
C. Located no closer than 50 feet from any building, structure, or onpremises
sign located on the same property.
D. Located no closer than 1,500 feet from another off-premises sign on
either side of the road, measured linearly.
E. Located no closer than 500 feet from any intersection, or
interchange (on/off-ramp).
F. Located no closer than 1,000 feet from any property line abutting a
public park, playground, religious institution, cemetery, school, or
residential district.
G. Not attached to the external wall or otherwise affixed to any part of
any building and shall not extend over any public property or rightof-
way.
H. Not located on sewer rights-of-way, or water, electric, or petroleum
pipelines.
§ 108 KINGSTON CODE § 108
Ch:504
I. Not located on a bridge.
5. Number of Signs Per Lot: There shall be no more than one off-premises
sign per lot. Vertically or horizontally stacked signs shall not be
permitted.
6. Content: Off-premises signs shall not display any message or graphic of
an obscene or pornographic nature as determined by the Township of
Kingston.
7. Double-sided Off-Premises Signs: Signs may be single- or double-sided,
in accordance with § 106, Subsection 3, Sign Area.
8. Message Sequencing: Message sequencing is prohibited.
9. Construction and Maintenance.
A. All plans for off-premises signs shall be certified by a licensed
engineer registered in Pennsylvania.
B. All off-premises advertising signs shall be constructed in
accordance with industry-wide standards established by the
Outdoor Advertising Association of America and the Institute of
Outdoor Advertising, or their successor organizations. All offpremises
advertising signs shall be structurally sound and
maintained in good condition and in compliance with the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
C. The rear face of a single-face, off-premises advertising sign shall be
painted and maintained with a single neutral color as approved by
the Township of Kingston.
D. Every three years, the owner of the billboard shall have a structural
inspection made of the billboard by a licensed engineer registered
in Pennsylvania and shall provide to the Township of Kingston a
certificate certifying that the billboard is structurally sound.
10. Identification of Sign Owner: All off-premises signs shall be identified
on the structure with the name, address, and phone number of the
owner of such sign.
11. Landscaping.
A. Landscaping shall be provided at the base of all off-premises signs.
Trees and shrubbery, including evergreen and flowering trees, of
sufficient size and quantity shall be used to achieve the purpose of
this section.
B. Trees greater than four inches in diameter removed for
construction of the sign shall be replaced on site at a ratio of one
replacement tree for each removed tree using native species no
less than three inches in diameter.
§ 108 HOME RULE CHARTER § 108
Ch:505
12. Additional Regulations. All off-premises signs shall comply with any and
all applicable zoning regulations of the Township of Kingston, and any
and all municipal, state and/or federal regulations. In the event any
other applicable regulation is in conflict with the provisions of this
section, the more-strict regulation shall apply.
13. Application/Plan Requirements. Plans submitted for off-premises
advertising signs shall show the following:
A. The location of the proposed sign on the lot with the required sign
setbacks from the property line and ultimate right-of-way.
B. The location and species of existing trees.
C. The distance to the nearest existing off-premises advertising sign.
D. The distance to the nearest right-of-way, property line, building,
structure, on-premises sign, off-premises sign, intersection,
interchange, safety rest area, bridge, residential district, or
institutional use, sewer rights-of-way, and water, electric or
petroleum pipelines.
E. Site plan containing all of the applicable requirements set forth in
the Township of Kingston Zoning Code, as amended.50
F. Certification under the seal by a licensed engineer that the offpremises
sign, as proposed, is designed in accordance with all
federal, state, and local laws, codes, and professional standards.
14. Illumination and Changeable Copy of Off-Premises Signs.
A. Off-premises signs may incorporate manual changeable-copy signs.
B. Off-premises signs may be illuminated, provided that:
(1) All light sources are designed, shielded, arranged, and
installed to confine or direct all illumination to the surface of
the off-premises sign and away from adjoining properties.
(2) Light sources are not visible from any street or adjoining
properties.
C. The following illumination types shall be permitted, subject to the
regulations in § 106, Subsection 6, Sign Illumination:
(1) Message center sign.
(2) Digital display.
(3) External illumination.
(4) Internal illumination.
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 27, Zoning.
§ 108 KINGSTON CODE § 108
Ch:506
§ 109. Regulations by Sign Type: Limited-Duration Signs. [Ord. No.
2018-5, 12/12/2018]
D. Off-premises signs may incorporate Tri-Vision boards.
(1) The length of time each message of the Tri-Vision board may be
displayed before changing is based upon the visibility and
posted speed limit unique to individual signs and adjacent road
conditions. The message duration for Tri-Vision boards shall be
calculated using the method described in § 106, Subsection
6A(6), Message Duration.
15. Safety. In applying for special exception relief, the applicant bears the
burden of proof to establish that the proposed off-premises sign will not
create a public health or safety hazard in the matter and location that it
is proposed and in the manner by which it is to be operated.
1. Limited-duration signs, as defined in this section, located on private
property are subject to the regulations set forth below. Limited-duration
signs that comply with the requirements in this subsection shall not be
included in the determination of the type, number, or area of signs
allowed on a property. Unless otherwise stated below, the requirements
listed below shall apply to both commercial and noncommercial signs.
2. Size and Number.
A. Nonresidential Zones:
(1) Large Limited-Duration Signs: One large limited-duration sign
is permitted per property in all nonresidential zones. If a
property is greater than five acres in size and has at least 400
feet of street frontage or has more than 10,000 square feet of
floor area, one additional large limited-duration sign may be
permitted so long as there is a minimum spacing of 200 feet
between the two large limited-duration signs.
(a) Type:
1) Freestanding sign.
2) Window sign.
3) Wall sign.
(b) Area: Each large limited-duration sign shall have a
maximum area of 16 square feet.
(c) Height: Large limited-duration signs that are freestanding
shall have a maximum height of eight feet.
(2) Small Limited-Duration Signs: In addition to the large limitedduration
sign(s) outlined above, one small limited-duration
sign is permitted per property in all nonresidential zones. If a
§ 108 HOME RULE CHARTER § 109
Ch:507
property is greater than five acres in size and has at least 400
feet of street frontage or has more than 10,000 square feet of
floor area, one additional small sign may be permitted.
(a) Type:
1) Freestanding sign.
2) Window sign.
3) Wall sign.
(b) Area: Each small limited-duration sign shall have a
maximum area of six square feet.
(c) Height: Small limited-duration signs that are freestanding
shall have a maximum height of six feet.
B. Residential Zones:
(1) Large Limited-Duration Sign: One large limited-duration sign
is permitted per property so long as the property is greater
than five acres in size and has at least 400 feet of street
frontage or has more than 10,000 square feet of floor area.
(a) Type:
1) Freestanding sign.
2) Window sign.
3) Wall sign.
(b) Area: Each large limited-duration sign shall have a
maximum area of 16 square feet.
(c) Height: Large limited-durations signs that are
freestanding shall have a maximum height of eight feet.
(2) Small Limited-Duration Sign: One small limited-duration sign
is permitted per property.
(a) Type:
1) Freestanding sign.
2) Window sign.
3) Wall sign.
(b) Area: Each small limited-duration sign shall have a
maximum area of six square feet.
(c) Height: Small limited-duration signs that are freestanding
shall have a maximum height of six feet.
§ 109 KINGSTON CODE § 109
Ch:508
3. Permit Requirements.
A. A permit for a limited-duration sign is issued for one year and may
be renewed annually.
B. One sign is allowed per permit. An applicant may request up to two
permits per address, but is subject to the size and number
requirements set forth in this section.
C. An application for a limited-duration sign permit must include:
(1) A description of the sign indicating the number, size, shape,
dimensions, and colors of the sign, and the expected length of
time the sign will be displayed;
(2) A schematic drawing of the site showing the proposed location
of the sign in relation to nearby building and streets;
(3) The number of signs on the site.
4. Installation and Maintenance.
A. All limited-duration signs must be installed such that, in the opinion
of the Township of Kingston Building Official, they do not create a
safety hazard.
B. All limited-duration signs must be made of durable materials and
shall be well maintained.
C. Limited-duration signs that are frayed, torn, broken, or that are no
longer legible will be deemed unmaintained and required to be
removed.
5. Illumination: Illumination of any limited-duration sign is prohibited.
6. Summary Table for Limited-Duration Signs.
§ 109 HOME RULE CHARTER § 109
Ch:509
§ 110. Regulations by Sign Type: Temporary Signs. [Ord. No.
2018-5, 12/12/2018]
Limited-Duration Signs
Nonresidential
Districts Residential Districts
Large limitedduration
signs
(maximum area 16
square feet)
Number: 1 per
property; 2 if property
is 5+ acres with 400
+ feet of street
frontage or has >
10,000 square feet of
floor area
Height: Maximum 8
feet
Number:1 per
property if property is
5+ acres with 400+
feet of street frontage
or has > 10,000
square feet of floor
area
Height: Maximum 8
feet
Small limited-duration
signs (maximum area
6 square feet)
Number: 1 per
property; 2 if property
is 5+ acres with 400+
feet of frontage or has
> 10,000 square feet
of floor area
Height: Maximum 6
feet
Number: 1 per
property
Height: Maximum 6
feet
1. Temporary signs, as defined in this section, located on private property,
are exempt from standard permit requirements. Temporary signs that
comply with the requirements in this section shall not be included in the
determination of the type, number, or area of signs allowed on a
property.
A. Unless otherwise stated below, the requirements listed below shall
apply to both commercial and noncommercial signs.
B. Size and Number.
(1) Nonresidential Districts:
(a) Large Temporary Signs: One large temporary sign is
permitted per property in all nonresidential districts. If a
property is greater than five acres in size and has at least
400 feet of street frontage or has more than 10,000 square
feet of floor area, one additional large temporary sign may
be permitted so long as there is a minimum spacing of 200
feet between the two large temporary signs.
1) Type:
a) Freestanding.
§ 109 KINGSTON CODE § 110
Ch:510
b) Window.
c) Wall sign.
d) Banner.
2) Area:
a) Each large temporary freestanding, window, or
wall sign shall have a maximum area of 16 square
feet.
b) Each large temporary banner shall have a
maximum area of 32 square feet.
3) Height:
a) Large temporary signs that are freestanding shall
have a maximum height of eight feet.
b) Banners shall hang at a height no greater than 24
feet.
(b) Small Temporary Signs: In addition to the large temporary
sign(s) outlined above, one small temporary sign is
permitted per property in all nonresidential districts. If a
property is greater than five acres in size and has at least
400 feet of street frontage or has greater than 10,000
square feet of floor area, one additional small sign may be
permitted so long as there is a minimum spacing of 200
feet between both sets of small temporary signs.
1) Type:
a) Freestanding sign.
b) Window sign.
c) Wall sign.
2) Area: Each small temporary sign shall have a
maximum area of six square feet.
3) Height: Small temporary signs shall have a maximum
height of six feet.
(2) Residential Districts:
(a) Large Temporary Signs: One large temporary sign is
permitted per residential property so long as the property
is greater than five acres in size and has at least 400 feet of
street frontage or has more than 10,000 square feet of
floor area.
1) Type:
§ 110 HOME RULE CHARTER § 110
Ch:511
a) Freestanding sign.
b) Window sign.
c) Wall sign.
d) Banner sign.
2) Area:
a) Each large temporary freestanding, window, or
wall sign shall have a maximum area of 16 square
feet.
b) Each large temporary banner shall have a
maximum area of 32 square feet.
3) Height:
a) Large temporary signs that are freestanding shall
have a maximum height of eight feet.
b) Banners shall hang at a height no greater than 24
feet.
(b) Small Temporary Signs: One small temporary sign is
permitted per residential property.
1) Type:
a) Freestanding sign.
b) Window sign.
c) Wall sign.
2) Area: Each small temporary sign shall have a
maximum area of six square feet.
3) Height: Small temporary sign shall have a maximum
height of six feet.
C. Duration and Removal.
(1) Temporary signs may be displayed up to a maximum of 30
consecutive days, two times per year.
(2) The Township of Kingston or the property owner may
confiscate signs installed in violation of this Part. Neither the
Township of Kingston nor the property owner is responsible for
notifying sign owners of confiscation of an illegal sign.
D. Permission: The party posting the temporary sign is solely
responsible for obtaining the permission of the property owner
before posting their temporary sign.
§ 110 KINGSTON CODE § 110
Ch:512
E. Municipal Notification: Temporary signs are exempt from the
standard permit requirements, but the date of erection of a
temporary sign must be written in indelible ink on the lower righthand
corner of the sign.
F. Installation and Maintenance.
(1) All temporary signs must be installed such that in the opinion
of the Township of Kingston's Building Official, they do not
create a safety hazard.
(2) All temporary signs must be made of durable materials and
shall be well maintained.
(3) Temporary signs that are frayed, torn, broken, or that are no
longer legible will be deemed unmaintained and required to be
removed.
G. Illumination: Illumination of any temporary sign is prohibited.
H. Summary Table for Temporary Signs.
Temporary Signs
Nonresidential
Districts
Residential
Districts
Large temporary
signs (maximum
area: 32 square feet
for banner, 16
square feet for all
other signs)
Number: 1 per
property; 2 if
property is 5+ acres
with 400+ feet of
street frontage, or
has > 10,000 square
feet of floor area
Height:
Ground: Maximum 8
feet
Banner: Maximum
24 feet
Number: 1 per
property if property
is 5+ acres with
400+ feet of street
frontage or has >
10,000 square feet of
floor area
Height:
Ground: Maximum 8
feet
Banner: Maximum 24
feet
Small temporary
signs (maximum
area: 6 square feet)
Number: 1 per
property; 2 if
property is 5+ acres
with 400+ feet of
street frontage, or
has > 10,000 square
feet of floor area
Height: Maximum 6
feet
Number: 1 per
property
Height: Maximum 6
feet
§ 110 HOME RULE CHARTER § 111
Ch:513
§ 111. Regulations by Sign Type: Portable Signs. [Ord. No. 2018-5,
12/12/2018]
1. General Provisions.
A. Illumination: Illumination of any portable sign is prohibited.
B. Hours of Display.
(1) Signs shall not be displayed on any premises before 6:00 a.m.
and shall be removed each day at or before 10:00 p.m.
However, all portable signs must be taken in during hours of
nonoperation of the business being advertised.
(2) All portable signs must be taken in during inclement weather.
2. Sandwich-Board or A-Frame Signs. Sandwich-board signs that comply
with the requirements in this subsection shall not be included in the
determination of the type, number, or area of signs allowed on a
property.
A. Number: One sandwich-board sign is permitted per establishment.
For the purposes of this subsection, a parking garage or parking lot
shall be considered an establishment.
B. Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of seven square feet
per sign face.
C. Height: Signs shall have a maximum height of 3.5 feet.
D. Sign Placement.
(1) If a sign is located on a public or private sidewalk, a minimum
of 36 inches of unobstructed sidewalk clearance must be
maintained between the sign and any building or other
obstruction.
(2) The sign must be located on the premises, and within 12 feet of
the primary public entrance, of the establishment it advertises.
For the purposes of this subsection, a public entrance includes
a vehicular entrance into a parking garage or parking lot.
(3) Portable signs shall be weighted, temporarily secured, or
strategically placed so as to avoid being carried away by high
winds.
E. Manual Changeable Copy.
(1) Manual changeable-copy signs are permitted when integrated
into a sandwich-board sign.
(2) Commercial messages must advertise only goods and services
available on the premises.
§ 111 KINGSTON CODE § 111
Ch:514
§ 112. Regulations by Sign Type: Street Pole Banners. [Ord. No.
2018-5, 12/12/2018]
F. Vehicular Signs: Vehicular signs are subject to the regulations
found in the Township of Kingston's Vehicle Code.
1. General Provisions. Street pole banner signs that comply with the
requirements in this subsection shall not be included in the
determination of the type, number, or area of signs allowed on a
property.
A. Illumination: Illumination of any street pole banner is prohibited.
B. Area: Each street pole banner shall have a maximum area of 12.5
square feet and a maximum width of three feet. Up to two street
pole banners are permitted per street pole.
C. Height:
(1) When the street pole banner's edge is less than 18 inches from
the curb, the lowest edge of the street pole banner shall be at
least 14 feet above the finished grade.
(2) When the street pole banner's edge is greater than 18 inches
from the curb, the lowest edge of the street pole banner shall
be at least eight feet above the finished grade.
D. Location.
(1) No street pole banner shall extend beyond the curbline.
(2) Street pole banners shall maintain a minimum of three-foot
vertical clearance below any luminaires located on the pole
measured from where the ballasts connect to the poles.
(3) Street pole banners shall not interfere with the visibility of
traffic signals or signs.
(4) No street pole banner shall be located on a pole that has traffic
or pedestrian control signals.
E. Installation and Maintenance.
(1) All street pole banners must be made of lightweight and
durable fabrics with wind slits.
(2) Street pole banners that are frayed, torn, or faded so that they
are no longer legible will be deemed unmaintained and will be
required to be removed.
2. Permit Requirements.
A. A permit for a street pole banner is issued for one year and may be
renewed annually.
§ 111 HOME RULE CHARTER § 112
Ch:515
§ 113. Signs in Agricultural, Rural, and Open Space Districts. [Ord.
No. 2018-5, 12/12/2018]
B. An application for a street pole banner permit must include the
following:
(1) A diagram or map of the specific poles to be used for street
pole banner installation and the streets on which the poles are
located.
(2) A proof of the street pole banner design, including the banner's
dimensions.
(3) If brackets are to be installed, submit specifications for the
bracket installation system.
1. In addition to the exempt signs described in § 105, Signs Exempt from
Permit Requirements, the following numbers and types of signs may be
erected in the {Insert names of applicable agricultural/rural/open
space districts}, subject to the conditions specified here and in §§ 107
through 110.
A. Any limited-duration sign as defined and regulated in § 109,
Regulations by Sign Type: Limited-Duration Signs.
B. Any temporary sign as defined and regulated in § 110, Regulations
by Sign Type: Temporary Signs.
C. Signs associated with a residential use or parcel within an
agricultural/rural zone shall comply with § 114, Signs in Residential
Districts.
D. Parks and Open Space.
(1) Freestanding signs shall be permitted subject to the following
regulations:
(a) Number: One sign per street access to a park or open
space facility.
(b) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 24 square
feet per sign face.
(c) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height of 10 feet.
(d) Illumination: The following illumination types shall be
permitted, subject to the regulations in § 106, Subsection
6, Sign Illumination.
1) External illumination.
(2) Signs located on the interior of the site used to identify various
use areas, facility boundaries, on-site traffic direction, trail use
information, the hours and rules for the use of the grounds,
§ 112 KINGSTON CODE § 113
Ch:516
etc., are exempt from permit requirements, subject to the
following:
(a) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 10 square
feet.
(b) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height of eight feet.
(c) Illumination: These signs shall be nonilluminated.
(3) Signs for recreation and sporting facilities shall be allowed,
provided that the following criteria is met:
(a) Signs on the interior walls or fence of an open stadium or
field shall be no greater than 24 square feet in size and
shall be designed to be viewed from the inside of the
stadium only, and nonilluminated.
(b) One freestanding scoreboard, not to exceed 200 square
feet in area and 20 feet in height, is permitted per playing
field.
1) Commercial messages shall not exceed 30% of the
front face of the scoreboard.
2) The face of all scoreboards, including any attached
commercial signs and panels, shall be permanently
oriented toward the recreation and spectator area.
3) Illumination: The following illumination types shall be
permitted subject to the regulations in § 106,
Subsection 6, Sign Illumination:
a) Internal illumination.
b) External illumination.
c) Message center sign.
d) Digital display (not to exceed 30% of the total
scoreboard area).
E. Freestanding signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted,
subject to the following regulations:
(1) Number: One sign at each street access, up to a maximum of
two signs per lot.
(2) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 32 square feet
per sign face.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height of six feet.
(4) Illumination: These signs shall be nonilluminated.
§ 113 HOME RULE CHARTER § 113
Ch:517
F. Wall and projecting signs for nonresidential uses shall be
permitted, subject to the following regulations:
(1) Number: One sign per tenant per building frontage up to a
maximum of two signs per tenant.
(2) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 20 square feet
per sign face.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the
eaveline or the bottom of the second-story windowsill,
whichever is lower.
(4) Illumination: These signs shall be nonilluminated.
G. Window signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted, subject to
the following regulations:
(1) Area: A maximum of 15% of the total window area of any single
building frontage may be used for signs.
(2) Illumination: These signs shall be nonilluminated.
H. Off-premises signs (where/if permitted) are subject to the
regulations found in § 108, Regulations by Sign Type: Off-Premises.
I. Summary Table for Signs in Agricultural, Rural, and Open Space
Districts.
§ 113 KINGSTON CODE § 113
Ch:518
§ 114. Signs in Residential Districts. [Ord. No. 2018-5, 12/12/2018]
Agricultural, Rural, and Open Space
Districts
Wall and
Projecting Window Freestanding
Maximum
number
Nonresidential
uses: 1 per
tenant per
building
frontage, up to
a maximum of
2 signs per
tenant
N/A Parks and open
space: 1 per
street access
plus 1
freestanding
scoreboard per
playing field
Nonresidential
uses: 1 per
street access
up to a
maximum of 2
signs per lot
Maximum area
(square feet)
Parks and open
space: signs on
the interior
walls or fence
of an open
stadium: 24
Nonresidential
uses: 20
Nonresidential
uses: 15% of
total window
area
Parks and open
space: 24
(entrance), 200
(scoreboard),
10 (signs
interior to the
site)
Nonresidential
uses: 32
Maximum
height
Nonresidential
uses: the
eaveline or the
bottom of the
second-story
windowsill,
whichever is
lower
N/A Parks and open
space: 10 feet
(entrance), 20
feet
(scoreboard), 8
feet (signs
interior to the
site)
Nonresidential
uses: 6 feet
1. In addition to the exempt signs described in § 105. Signs Exempt from
Permit Requirements, the following numbers and types of signs may be
erected in the {insert names of applicable residential districts}, subject
to the conditions specified here and in §§ 107 through 112.
A. Any limited-duration sign as defined and regulated in § 109,
Regulations by Sign Type: Limited-Duration Signs.
§ 113 HOME RULE CHARTER § 114
Ch:519
B. Any temporary sign as defined and regulated in § 110, Regulations
by Sign Type: Temporary Signs.
C. Home Occupation.
(1) One freestanding sign shall be permitted subject to the
following regulations:
(a) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of six square
feet per sign face.
(b) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height of six feet.
(c) Illumination: These signs shall be nonilluminated.
(2) One wall or projecting sign shall be permitted, up to two
square feet in area.
(a) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the
eaveline or the bottom of the second-story windowsill,
whichever is lower.
(b) Illumination: These signs shall be nonilluminated.
D. Freestanding signs for residential developments or apartment
buildings containing more than 10 units shall be permitted, subject
to the following regulations:
(1) Number: One sign per street frontage.
(2) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 15 square feet
per sign face.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height of eight feet.
(4) Illumination: The following illumination types shall be
permitted, subject to the regulations in § 106, Subsection 6,
Sign Illumination:
(a) External illumination.
E. Summary Table for Signs in Residential Districts.
§ 114 KINGSTON CODE § 114
Ch:520
§ 115. Signs in Institutional Districts. [Ord. No. 2018-5, 12/12/
2018]
Residential Districts
Wall and
Projecting Freestanding
Maximum number Home occupations: 1
per lot
Home occupations: 1
per lot
Residential
developments: 1 per
lot
Maximum area
(square feet)
Home occupations: 2 Home occupations: 6
Residential
developments: 15
Maximum height The eaveline or the
bottom of the
second-story
windowsill,
whichever is lower
Home occupations: 6
feet
Residential
developments: 8 feet
1. In addition to the exempt signs described in § 109, Exempt Signs, the
following numbers and types of signs may be erected for institutional
uses, including schools, religious institutions, municipal buildings,
hospitals, clubs, or permitted uses of a similar nature, subject to the
conditions specified here and in §§ 107 through 112.
A. Any limited-duration sign as defined and regulated in § 109,
Regulations by Sign Type: Limited-Duration Signs.
B. Any temporary sign as defined and regulated in § 110, Regulations
by Sign Type: Temporary Signs.
C. Any portable sign as defined and regulated in § 111, Regulations by
Sign Type: Portable Signs.
D. Any street pole banner as defined and regulated in § 112,
Regulations by Sign Type: Street Pole Banners.
E. Signs associated with a park or open space use in an institutional
district shall comply with § 113, Subsection 1D.
F. Signs associated with a residential use or parcel within an
institutional district shall comply with § 114, Signs in Residential
Districts.
G. Freestanding signs for institutional uses, other than parks and
open space, shall be permitted, subject to the following regulations.
§ 114 HOME RULE CHARTER § 115
Ch:521
(1) Number: One sign per street access, up to two signs per
property held in single and separate ownership.
(2) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area based on the lot
size of the property as follows:
(a) On lots less than two acres: 24 square feet.
(b) On lots of two acres or more but less than five acres: 40
square feet.
(c) On lots of five acres or more: 60 square feet.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height of 10 feet.
(4) Illumination: The following illumination types shall be
permitted, subject to the regulations in § 106, Subsection 6,
Sign Illumination:
(a) Internal illumination.
(b) External illumination.
(c) Message center sign.
H. Freestanding signs located on the interior of the site used to
identify facilities, on-site traffic direction, hours of operation, and
other information are exempt from permit requirements, subject to
the following:
(1) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 10 square feet.
(2) Height: Each sign shall have a maximum height of eight feet.
(3) Illumination: These signs shall be nonilluminated.
I. Building signs, including wall signs, awning or canopy signs,
projecting signs, and window signs, are permitted for institutional
uses. The total maximum sign area of all building signs shall be
based on the lot size of the property and wall area of the building as
follows:
(1) Area:
(a) On lots less than two acres:
1) Total sign area of all building signs shall not exceed
5% of the total wall area for all walls that directly face
a public street or parking lot.
2) No single building sign shall exceed 24 square feet.
(b) On lots of two acres or more but less than five acres:
§ 115 KINGSTON CODE § 115
Ch:522
1) Total sign area of all building signs shall not exceed
6% of the total wall area for all walls that directly face
a public street or parking lot.
(2) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the
eaveline.
(3) Illumination: The following illumination types shall be
permitted subject to the regulations in § 106, Subsection 6,
Sign Illumination.
(a) Internal illumination.
(b) External illumination, lit from above.
(c) Halo illumination or backlit letters.
J. Optional: Upper-level building identification signs shall be
permitted, subject to the following regulations.
(1) Number: Two signs per building.
(2) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 200 square feet.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height of 10 feet and shall
not extend vertically beyond the eaveline.
(4) Location: Signs shall be limited to buildings at least three
stories in height and shall be located only on the top floor of
such buildings.
(5) Illumination: The following illumination types shall be
permitted subject to the regulations in § 106, Subsection 6,
Sign Illumination:
(a) Internal illumination.
K. Summary Table for Signs in Institutional Districts.
§ 115 HOME RULE CHARTER § 115
Ch:523
§ 116. Optional: Signs in Main Street Districts. [Ord. No. 2018-5,
12/12/2018]
Institutional Districts
Wall, Awning/
Canopy,
Projecting,
and Window Freestanding
Optional:
Building
Identification
Maximum Number N/A 1 per street
access, up to 2
per lot
2 per building
Lots < 2 acres 5% of the total
wall face area
of walls that
directly face a
public street
or parking lot.
No single wall
sign shall
exceed 24
square feet.
24 square feet
Lots > 2 and
<5 acres
6% of the total
wall face area
of walls that
directly face a
public street
or parking lot.
No single wall
sign shall
exceed 36
square feet.
40 square feet
Maximum
Area
Lots > 5 acres 7% of the total
wall face area
of walls that
directly face a
public street
or parking lot.
No single wall
sign shall
exceed 60
square feet.
60 square feet
200 square
feet
Maximum Height The eaveline 10 feet The eaveline
1. In addition to the exempt signs described in § 105, Signs Exempt from
Permit Requirements, the following numbers and types of signs may be
erected in the {insert names of applicable Main Street districts},
subject to the conditions specified here and in §§ 107 through 112:
§ 115 KINGSTON CODE § 116
Ch:524
A. Any sign permitted in residential districts, for the appropriate uses,
as defined and regulated in § 114, Signs in Residential Districts.
B. Any portable sign as defined and regulated in § 111, Regulations by
Sign Type: Portable Signs.
C. Any street pole banner as defined and regulated in § 112,
Regulations by Sign Type: Street Pole Banners.
D. The total area of all wall, awning/canopy, and projecting signs shall
be limited to two square feet per one linear foot of building
frontage that faces a public street or parking lot, subject to
maximum size limitations based on sign type.
E. Wall signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted, subject to the
following regulations:
(1) Number: One sign per tenant per street frontage, up to a
maximum of two signs per tenant. Where a property has
entrances facing both a street and a parking lot, an additional
sign is permitted to face the parking lot.
(2) Area: No single wall sign shall exceed 24 square feet in area.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the
eaveline or the bottom of the second-story windowsill,
whichever is lower.
(4) Illumination: The following illumination types shall be
permitted subject to the regulations in § 106, Subsection 6,
Sign Illumination:
(a) External illumination, lit from above.
(b) Halo illumination or backlit letters.
(c) Neon lighting.
F. Awning or canopy signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted,
subject to the following regulations:
(1) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the
eaveline or the bottom of the second-story windowsill,
whichever is lower.
(2) Illumination: The following illumination types shall be
permitted, subject to the regulations in § 106, Subsection 6,
Sign Illumination:
(a) External illumination, lit from above.
G. Projecting signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted, subject
to the following regulations:
§ 116 HOME RULE CHARTER § 116
Ch:525
(1) Number: One sign per ground-floor establishment, plus one
sign per building entrance serving one or more commercial
tenants without a ground-floor entrance.
(2) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 12 square feet
per sign face.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the
eaveline or the bottom of the second-story windowsill,
whichever is lower.
(4) Illumination: The following illumination types shall be
permitted, subject to the regulations in § 106, Subsection 6,
Sign illumination:
(a) External illumination, lit from above.
(b) Neon lighting.
H. Window signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted, subject to
the following regulations:
(1) Area: A maximum of 15% of the total window area of any single
storefront may be used for permanent signs that are etched,
painted or otherwise permanently affixed to the window. A
maximum of 25% of the total window area of any single
storefront may be covered by a combination of permanent and
temporary window signs.
(2) Illumination: the following illumination types shall be
permitted, subject to the regulations in § 106, Subsection 6,
Sign Illumination.
(a) Neon lighting.
I. Marquee signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted, subject
to the following regulations.
(1) Number: One marquee structure per building.
(2) Area: The total area of all signs on a single marquee structure
shall not exceed 150 square feet in area.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the
eaveline.
(4) Illumination: The following illumination types shall be
permitted, subject to the regulations in § 106, Subsection 6,
Sign Illumination:
(a) Internal illumination.
(b) Message center sign.
J. Summary Table for Signs in Main Street Districts.
§ 116 KINGSTON CODE § 116
Ch:526
§ 117. Optional: Signs in Village Commercial Districts. [Ord. No.
2018-5, 12/12/2018]
Main Street Districts
Wall and
Awning/
Canopy Projecting Window Marquee
Maximum
number
Wall: 1 per
tenant per
street frontage
(up to 2 per
tenant)
Awning/
Canopy: N/A
(See § 107)
1 per groundfloor
establishment,
plus 1 per
building
entrance
serving
tenants
without a
ground-floor
entrance
N/A 1 per building
Maximum area
(total)
2 square feet per linear foot of
building frontage facing a
public street or parking lot,
subject to maximum size
limitations based on sign type
N/A N/A
Maximum area
(individual)
Wall: 24
square feet
Awning/
Canopy: N/A
(See § 107)
12 square feet 15% of total
window area
(permanent
signs); 25%
total window
area (all signs)
150 square
feet
Maximum
height
The eaveline or the bottom of
the second-story windowsill,
whichever is lower
N/A The eaveline
1. In addition to the exempt signs described in § 105. Signs Exempt from
Permit Requirements, the following number and types of signs may be
erected in the {insert names of applicable Village Commercial
districts}, subject to the conditions specified here and in §§ 107 through
112:
A. Any sign permitted in residential districts, for appropriate uses, as
defined and regulated in § 114, Signs in Residential Districts.
B. Any portable sign as defined and regulated in § 111, Regulations by
Sign Type: Portable Signs.
C. Any street pole banner as defined and regulated in § 112,
Regulations by Sign Type: Street Pole Banners.
§ 116 HOME RULE CHARTER § 117
Ch:527
D. The total area of all wall, awning/canopy, and projecting signs shall
be limited to 1.5 square feet per one linear foot of building frontage
that faces a public street or parking lot, subject to maximum size
limitations based on sign type.
E. Wall signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted, subject to the
following regulations:
(1) Number: One sign per tenant per street frontage, up to two
signs per tenant. Where a property has entrances facing both a
street and a parking lot, a second sign is permitted to face the
parking lot.
(2) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 12 square feet
per sign face.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the
eaveline or the bottom of the second-story windowsill,
whichever is lower.
(4) Illumination: The following illumination types shall be
permitted, subject to the regulations in § 106, Subsection 6,
Sign Illumination:
(a) External illumination, lit from above.
(b) Halo illumination or backlit letters.
F. Awning or canopy signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted,
subject to the following regulations:
(1) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the
eaveline or the bottom of the second-story windowsill,
whichever is lower.
(2) Illumination: These signs shall be nonilluminated.
G. Projecting signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted, subject
to the following regulations:
(1) Number: One sign per ground-floor establishment, plus one
sign per building entrance serving one or more commercial
tenants without a ground-floor entrance.
(2) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 10 square feet
per sign face.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the
eaveline or the bottom of the second-story windowsill,
whichever is lower.
(4) Illumination: These signs shall be nonilluminated.
§ 117 KINGSTON CODE § 117
Ch:528
H. Window signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted, subject to
the following regulations.
(1) Area: A maximum of 15% of the total window area of any single
storefront may be used for permanent signs that are etched,
painted, or otherwise permanently affixed to the window.
(2) Illumination: These signs shall be nonilluminated.
I. Freestanding signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted,
subject to the following regulations:
(1) Number: One sign per street frontage, up to two signs per
property held in single and separate ownership.
(2) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 15 square feet,
plus an additional five square feet per tenant, up to a maximum
of 30 square feet.
(3) Height: Freestanding signs shall have a maximum height of 10
feet.
(4) Illumination: The following illumination types shall be
permitted, subject to the regulations in § 106, Subsection 6.
Sign Illumination:
(a) External illumination.
J. Summary Table for Signs in Village Commercial Districts.
Village Commercial Districts
Wall and
Awning/
Canopy Projecting Window Freestanding
Maximum
number
Wall: 1 per
tenant per
street frontage
(up to 2 per
tenant)
Awning/
Canopy: N/A
(See § 107)
1 per groundfloor
establishment,
plus 1 per
building
entrance
serving
tenants
without a
ground-floor
entrance
N/A 1 per street
frontage, up to
2 per lot
Maximum area
(total)
1.5 square feet per linear foot
of building frontage facing a
public street or parking lot,
subject to maximum size
limitations based on sign type
N/A N/A
§ 117 HOME RULE CHARTER § 117
Ch:529
§ 118. Signs in General Commercial and Industrial Districts. [Ord.
No. 2018-5, 12/12/2018]
Village Commercial Districts
Wall and
Awning/
Canopy Projecting Window Freestanding
Maximum area
(individual)
Wall: 12
square feet
Awning/
Canopy: N/A
(See § 107)
10 square feet 15% total
window area
(permanent
signs); 25%
total window
area (all signs)
15 square feet
plus 5 square
feet per
additional
tenant up to
30 square feet
Maximum
height
The eaveline N/A 10 feet
1. Except as noted below, the following numbers and types of signs may be
erected in any industrial district or the {insert names of the applicable
commercial zoning districts}, subject to the conditions specified here
and in §§ 107 through 112:
A. Any sign permitted in residential districts, for the appropriate uses,
as defined and regulated in § 114, Signs in Residential Districts.
B. Any portable sign as defined and regulated in § 111, Regulations by
Sign Type: Portable Signs.
C. Any street pole banner as defined and regulated in § 112,
Regulations by Sign Type: Street Pole Banners.
D. The total area of all wall, awning/canopy, and projecting signs for
nonresidential uses shall be limited to 1.5 square feet per one
linear foot of building frontage that faces a public street or parking
lot, subject to maximum size limitations based on sign type.
E. Wall signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted, subject to the
following regulations:
(1) Number: One sign per tenant per street frontage, up to a
maximum of two signs per tenant. Where a store has entrances
facing both a street and a parking lot, a second sign is
permitted to face the parking lot.
(2) Area. Each sign shall have a maximum area of 32 square feet
per sign face.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the
eaveline.
§ 117 KINGSTON CODE § 118
Ch:530
(4) Illumination: The following illumination types shall be
permitted subject to the regulations in § 106, Subsection 6.
Sign Illumination:
(a) Internal illumination.
(b) External illumination, lit from above.
(c) Halo illumination or backlit letters.
(d) Neon lighting.
F. Awning or canopy signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted,
subject to the following regulations:
(1) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the
eaveline.
(2) Illumination: The following illumination types shall be
permitted, subject to the regulations in § 106, Subsection 6,
Sign Illumination:
(a) External illumination, lit from above.
G. Projecting signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted, subject
to the following regulations:
(1) Number: One sign per ground-floor establishment, plus one
sign per building entrance serving one or more commercial
tenants without a ground-floor entrance.
(2) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 20 square feet
per sign face.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the
eaveline.
(4) Illumination: The following illumination types shall be
permitted, subject to the regulations in § 106, Subsection 6,
Sign Illumination:
(a) External illumination, lit from above.
(b) Neon lighting.
H. Window signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted, subject to
the following regulations:
(1) Area: A maximum of 25% of the total window area of any single
storefront may be used for permanent signs that are etched,
painted, or permanently affixed to the window. A maximum of
35% of the total window area of any single storefront may be
covered by a combination of permanent and temporary window
signs.
§ 118 HOME RULE CHARTER § 118
Ch:531
(2) Illumination: The following illumination types shall be
permitted, subject to the regulations in § 106, Subsection 6,
Sign Illumination:
(a) Neon lighting.
I. Marquee signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted, subject
to the following regulations:
(1) Number: One marquee sign per building.
(2) Area: The total area of signs on a single marquee structure
shall not exceed 200 square feet in area.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height equal to the
eaveline.
(4) Illumination: The following illumination types shall be
permitted, subject to the regulations in § 106, Subsection 6,
Sign Illumination:
(a) Internal illumination.
(b) Message center sign.
(c) Digital display.
J. In addition to building signs, freestanding signs for nonresidential
uses shall be permitted, subject to the following regulations:
(1) Number: One sign per street frontage, up to two signs per
property held in single and separate ownership.
(a) For permitted gas stations, one additional freestanding
sign per street frontage shall be permitted for the
advertising of gas prices and identification of the gas
station only, up to two additional signs per property.
(b) For permitted drive-through establishments, one
additional freestanding sign shall be permitted for the
advertising items for sale to users of the drive-through
lane only.
(2) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 50 square feet
plus an additional 10 square feet per tenant up to a maximum
of 100 square feet.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height of 20 feet.
(4) Illumination: The following illumination types shall be
permitted, subject to the regulations in § 106, Subsection 6,
Sign Illumination.
(a) Internal illumination.
§ 118 KINGSTON CODE § 118
Ch:532
(b) Message center sign.
(c) Digital display.
K. Optional: Upper-level building identification signs shall be
permitted, subject to the following regulations:
(1) Number: One sign per building.
(2) Area: Each sign shall have a maximum area of 200 square feet.
(3) Height: Signs shall have a maximum height of 10 feet and shall
not extend vertically beyond the eaveline.
(4) Location: Signs shall be limited to buildings at least three
stories in height and shall be located only on the top floor of
such buildings.
(5) Illumination: The following illumination types shall be
permitted subject to the regulations in § 106, Subsection 6,
Sign Illumination:
(a) Internal illumination.
L. Off-premises signs shall be permitted, subject to the regulations
detailed in § 108, Regulations by Sign Type: Off-Premises.
M. Summary Table for Signs in Commercial and Industrial Districts.
§ 118 HOME RULE CHARTER § 118
Ch:533
§ 119. Optional: Special Regulations for Signs in Historic Districts.
[Ord. No. 2018-5, 12/12/2018]
General Commercial and Industrial Districts
Wall and
Awning/
Canopy Projecting Window Marquee
Freestanding
Optional:
Upper-
Level
Building
Identification
Maximum
number
Wall: 1 per
tenant per
street
frontage
(up to 2 per
tenant)
Awning/
Canopy: N/
A (see
§ 107)
1 per groundfloor
establishment,
plus 1 per
building
entrance
serving
tenants
without a
ground-floor
entrance
N/A 1 per
building
1 per street
frontage,
up to 2 per
lot
(additional
signs
allowed for
gas stations
and drivethrough
establishments)
1 per
building (>
3 stories
high)
Maximum
area (total)
1.5 square feet per linear
foot of building frontage
facing a public street or
parking lot, subject to
maximum size limitations
based on sign type
N/A N/A N/A N/A
Maximum
area
(individual)
Wall: 32
square feet
Awning/
Canopy: N/
A (see
§ 107)
20 square
feet
25% total
window
area
(permanent
signs); 35%
(all signs)
200 square
feet
50 square
feet plus an
additional
10 square
feet per
tenant up
to 100
square feet
200 square
feet
Maximum
height
The eaveline N/A The
eaveline
20 feet The
eaveline
1. In addition to all other requirements of this Part, the following
regulations shall be applicable to any sign placed in a designated
historic district:
A. No sign shall be erected or altered until an application has been
reviewed and approved by the {Review Board} and after the
Township of Kingston has issued a certificate of appropriateness.
§ 118 KINGSTON CODE § 119
Ch:534
§ 120. Removal of Unsafe, Unlawful, or Abandoned Signs. [Ord. No.
2018-5, 12/12/2018]
B. Installation must not damage or require removal of historic
materials and must be done in a manner such that signs can be
removed without harm to the masonry or architectural detailing.
C. The {Review Board} shall ensure that the proposed sign is
appropriate compared:
(1) To the style, period, type, size, and scale of the building and
district for which it is proposed; and
(2) With other signs in the district.
D. Permit Requirements.
(1) All applications for a certificate of appropriateness must
contain the following information:
(a) A current color photograph of the property.
(b) An illustration of the building facade showing the
proposed sign.
(c) A scaled drawing showing the sign itself and including the
size, materials, colors, lighting, lettering, and method of
attachment. Material samples may be required.
(d) For ground signs, a site plan indicating the location of the
sign.
(e) The type of illumination.
1. Unsafe or Unlawful Signs.
A. Upon written notice by the Township of Kingston, the owner,
person, or firm maintaining a sign shall remove the sign when it
becomes unsafe, is in danger of falling, or it becomes so
deteriorated that it no longer serves a useful purpose of
communication, or it is determined by the Township of Kingston to
be a nuisance, or it is deemed unsafe by the Township of Kingston,
or it is unlawfully erected in violation of any of the provisions of this
Part.
B. The Township of Kingston may remove or cause to be removed the
sign at the expense of the owner and/or lessee in the event that the
owner or the person or firm maintaining the sign has not complied
with the terms of the notice within 30 days of the date of the notice.
In the event of immediate danger, the Township of Kingston may
remove the sign immediately upon the issuance of notice to the
owner, person, or firm maintaining the sign.
2. Abandoned Signs.
§ 119 HOME RULE CHARTER § 120
Ch:535
§ 121. Permits and Applications. [Ord. No. 2018-5, 12/12/2018]
A. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any property upon
which an abandoned sign is located to remove such sign within 180
days of the sign becoming abandoned as defined in this section.
Removal of an abandoned sign shall include the removal of the
entire sign, including the sign face, supporting structure, and
structural trim.
B. Where the owner of the property on which an abandoned sign is
located fails to remove such sign within 180 days, the Township of
Kingston may remove such sign. Any expense directly incurred in
the removal of such sign shall be charged to the owner of the
property. Where the owner fails to pay, the Township of Kingston
may file a lien upon the property for the purpose of recovering all
reasonable costs associated with the removal of the sign.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, alter,
repair, or relocate any sign within the Township of Kingston without
first obtaining a sign permit, unless the sign is specifically exempt from
the permit requirements as outlined in § 105, Exempt Signs.
2. In order to apply for sign permit, the applicant must provide the
following information, in writing, to the Township of Kingston:
A. Name of organization and location.
B. Name, address and telephone number of the property owner, and
the signature of the property owner or duly authorized agent for
the owner.
C. Contact person and contact information.
D. Description of the activities occurring on the site where the sign
will be installed.
E. Description of any existing signage that will remain on the site.
F. Identification of the type of signs(s) to be erected by the applicant.
G. Site plan depicting the locations of proposed signage and existing
remaining signage.
H. Two copies of a plan, drawn to scale, depicting:
(1) Lot dimensions, building frontage, and existing cartways,
rights-of-way and driveways.
(2) The design of each sign face and sign structure, including
dimensions, total area, sign height, depth, color scheme,
structural details, materials, lighting scheme and proposed
location.
§ 120 KINGSTON CODE § 121
Ch:536
(3) Building elevations, existing and proposed facades, parapet
walls, eaveline and the location and size of all proposed and
existing permanent signage.
(4) Current photographs showing existing signs on the premises
and certifying the date on which photographs were taken.
I. If the sign is located in an historic district, confirmation that an
application has been submitted to the Historic Architectural
Review Board (if applicable).
J. A permit fee, to be established from time to time by resolution of
the Township of Kingston, shall be paid.
3. The Township of Kingston shall have 10 business days from the receipt
of a complete application to review the application.
4. A permit shall be issued on or before the end of the ten-business-day
review period if the application for a new sign or renewal complies with
the regulations contained herein.
5. If the Township of Kingston does not issue a determination within the
ten-business-day period, the sign permit is deemed approved.
6. An application for a sign permit may be denied by the Township of
Kingston within the ten-business-day review period if the application
fails to comply with the standards contained herein. The Township of
Kingston shall inform the applicant of the reasons for denying the
application for a sign permit by certified mail.
7. Upon denial of an application for a sign permit, the applicant has 30
business days to revise and resubmit the application for review by the
Township of Kingston. In the alternative, the applicant may also appeal
the decision of the Township of Kingston to the governing body within
the thirty-business-day time period. The Township of Kingston, at its
next regularly scheduled meeting, shall review its denial of the
application.
8. With the exception of lighting permits for digital signs, these permits
shall not expire, provided that such signs are not abandoned or
destroyed. In the instance that substantial repair or replacement
becomes necessary (i.e., repairs that cost more than 50% of the
replacement cost of the damaged sign), the organization must apply for
a new sign permit and pay an additional fee, if required.
9. Optional: All illuminated signs shall require certification in order to
demonstrate continued compliance with the brightness requirements
set forth in § 106, Subsection 6, Sign Illumination. This certification
must be renewed every three years. This will allow the Township of
Kingston to adjust standards as needed based on changing technology
and evaluation of impacts. The Township of Kingston reserves the right
§ 121 HOME RULE CHARTER § 121
Ch:537
§ 122. Nonconforming Signs. [Ord. No. 2018-5, 12/12/2018]
§ 123. Signs on the Premises of Legally Nonconforming Uses. [Ord.
No. 2018-5, 12/12/2018]
to assess the brightness of any sign at any time to ensure compliance
with illumination requirements.
1. Signs legally in existence at the time of the adoption of this Part which
do not conform to the requirements of this Part shall be considered
nonconforming signs.
2. All permanent signs and sign structures shall be brought into
conformance with the sign regulations when and if the following
occurs:
A. The sign is removed, relocated, or significantly altered. Significant
alterations include changes in the size or dimension of the sign.
Changes to the sign copy or the replacement of a sign face on a
nonconforming sign shall not be considered a significant alteration.
B. If more than 50% of the sign area is damaged, it shall be repaired to
conform to this Part.
C. An alteration in the structure of a sign support.
D. A change in the mechanical facilities or type of illumination.
E. A change in the material of the sign face.
F. The property on which the nonconforming sign is located submits a
subdivision or land development application requiring municipal
review and approval.
G. The property on which the nonconforming sign is located
undergoes a change of land use requiring the issuance of either a
use and occupancy permit or a change of use and occupancy permit
by the Township of Kingston.
3. To determine the legal status of existing signs in each of the cases listed
in § 122, Subsection 2, the applicant shall submit the following
information to the Township of Kingston Zoning Officer:
A. Type(s) of existing sign(s) located on the property.
1. Signs on the premises of legally nonconforming uses (such as an office
in a residential area) may remain until the existing use of the premises
is discontinued.
2. If a sign wears out or is damaged (including rust, faded colors,
discoloration, holes, or missing parts or informational items), or is
changed for any other reason, the number, size, and area of all signs
relating to the premises shall not be increased beyond the
§ 121 KINGSTON CODE § 123
Ch:538
§ 124. Violations and Penalties; Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2018-5, 12/
12/2018]
characteristics of the sign or signs that existed on that property at the
time this Part was adopted.
1. Prosecution of Violation of Ordinance.
A. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order
served in accordance herewith shall be subject to a criminal action
brought by the Township of Kingston before a District Justice under
the provisions of the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure
relating to a summary offense. Further, if the notice of violation or
order is not complied with, the Township of Kingston may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or
abate such violation of the provisions of this Part.
B. The rights and remedies provided hereby are cumulative and are in
addition to any other remedies provided by law.
C. Nothing herein shall be interpreted to limit the authority of the
Township of Kingston to revoke any approval previously granted
due to any violations of this Part, which right is expressly reserved.
D. Any sign which is erected, altered or converted in violation of any
provision of this Part is declared to be a public nuisance per se, and
it may be abated by an order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
2. Penalties for Violations. Any person or entity who shall violate a
provision of this Part or fail to comply therewith or with any of the
requirements thereof shall be prosecuted for the commission of a
summary offense in the manner more particularly provided in
Subsection 1 hereof. The District Justice may levy criminal fines not to
exceed $1,000 per violation upon the conviction of the person or entity
of the summary offense so charged. Each day that a violation continues,
after due notice has been served, shall be deemed a separate offense.
3. Removal of Prohibited Advertising Devices. In addition to the penalties
prescribed in this Part, the Township may institute any appropriate
action or proceeding after 30 days' written notice of a violation of this
Part to the person or persons maintaining or allowing to be maintained
such sign, to prevent, restrain, correct or abate a violation or to cause
the removal of any sign erected or maintained in violation of the
provisions of this Part, or the Township may have any such sign
corrected or removed by its employees. In the event of such removal,
the person or persons responsible for the erection or maintenance of
such sign and the person or persons allowing such sign to be
maintained shall be liable to the Township for the cost of removal or
correction of such sign. Further, such cost of removal shall be collected,
if unpaid, by the imposition of a municipal claim or lien entered in favor
of the Township of Kingston against such person or persons.
§ 123 HOME RULE CHARTER § 125
Ch:539
§ 125. Effect on Prior Provisions or Actions. [Ord. No. 2018-5, 12/
12/2018]
The provisions of this Part shall not affect any suit or prosecution pending
or to be instituted to enforce any of the prior ordinances and regulations
except as otherwise provided by law.
§ 126. Severability. [Ord. No. 2018-5, 12/12/2018]
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Board of Supervisors of
the Township of Kingston that the chapters, parts, sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases of this Part are severable. If any section,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Part is declared
unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid by the judgment or decree
of a court of competent jurisdiction, that invalidity shall not affect any of
the remaining chapters, parts, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or
phrases of this codification.
§ 125 KINGSTON CODE § 126
Ch:540
Chapter 20
SOLID WASTE
§ 126 HOME RULE CHARTER § 126
Ch:541

Part 1
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
§ 101. Short Title. [Ord. 91-6, 5/29/1991, § I]
This Part shall be known as and may be cited as "The Solid Waste and
Recycling Collection and Disposal Ordinance of the Township of Kingston."
§ 102. Purpose. [Ord. 91-6, 5/29/1991, § II]
The purposes of this Part are to provide for the collection and disposal
of garbage, solid waste and recyclable materials produced and generated
within the Township of Kingston in the most efficient and economically
sound manner, to reduce the volume of garbage and solid waste disposed
of within the Township of Kingston; and, further to create and to implement
a general municipal waste management plan and project so as to conserve
natural resources and to support the right of the residents of Township of
Kingston to dwell in a clean and healthy environment.
§ 103. Definitions. [Ord. 91-6, 5/29/1991, § III]
As used in this Part, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the
following words and terms shall be construed as follows:
ALUMINUM CONTAINERS — All empty aluminum food and beverage
containers.
BIMETALLIC CONTAINERS — Empty food and beverage containers
consisting of aluminum, steel and tin coating. A can is bimetallic if a magnet
sticks to the sides but not the ends.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those premises used principally for
non-manufacturing or non-processing business, including but not limited to,
stores, offices, restaurants, shopping centers, gas stations, and churches.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — All events or activities which are sponsored
by public, private, nonprofit, and municipal agencies or individuals that
include, but are not limited to, fairs, bazaars, socials, and organized athletic
events attended by 200 or more people.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
DISPOSAL — The deposition, incineration, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of solid [waste] into or on the land or water in a manner
that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the
environment, is emitted into the air, or is discharged into the waters of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
GARBAGE — Solid waste resulting from the preparation, cooking, handling,
dealing, storing, sale, and consumption of all animal and vegetable wastes.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Empty bottles and jars made of clear, green and
brown glass.
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 103
Ch:543
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any premises within the Township upon which
there is erected a structure intended for habitation, occupancy, or use
by human beings or animals, and from which solid waste or recyclable
materials shall or may be generated or produced.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any entity engaged in manufacturing,
industry, trade or business process.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any facility that houses or serves
groups of people including, but not limited to, hospitals, schools, day care
centers and nursing homes.
LEAVES — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings, and
similar material, but not including grass clippings.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS — The public facilities operated by the
member municipalities and Dallas Area Municipal Authority.
MUNICIPALITY — This political subdivision of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
NEWSPRINT — Paper of the type commonly used for newspaper and
distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and opinions,
containing advertisements and other matters of public interest. Expressly
excluded are glossy advertising inserts often included with newspapers.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the Authority's service area.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, business organization,
association, society, corporation or other group or entity.
PLASTICS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers.
PRIVATE or COMMERCIAL COLLECTORS, HAULERS or TRANSPORTERS
— Any person or business organization which provides collection,
transportation, and disposal services of solid waste, who is not an agent or
contractor of the municipality.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials enumerated in Act 101 of 1988
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and materials identified by the
Township or its agent or contractor for recycling.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING — A single or multifamily dwelling including, but
not limited to, condominiums units, apartments, and mobile homes.
SOLID WASTE — Materials or substances, discharged or rejected as being
spent, useless, worthless, or in excess by a person and any garbage, refuse,
industrial, lunchroom or office waste and other material including solid,
liquid or semi-solid or contained gaseous material resulting from the
operation of residential, municipal, commercial, industrial or institutional
establishments. The term does not include recyclable materials or materials
approved for beneficial use by the Township, or its agent or contractor.
§ 103 KINGSTON CODE § 104
Ch:544
§ 104. Unlawful Activities and Liability of Owners and Occupants of
Real Property. [Ord. 91-6, 5/29/1991, § IV; as amended by Ord.
2000-2, 3/8/2000, §§ 1,2; and by Ord. 2003-9, 11/12/2003, §§ 1,2]
§ 105. Collection, Transportation, and Disposal of Solid Waste and
Recyclable Materials. [Ord. 91-6, 5/29/1991, § V; as amended by
Ord. 2003-9, 11/12/2003, § 3]
1. It shall be unlawful hereafter to accumulate, collect, transport, remove,
deposit, maintain or dispose of garbage, solid waste, and recyclable
materials upon any public or private property within the Township of
Kingston, except in accordance with the terms and provisions of this
Part.
2. An owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant of any unimproved premises or
any building, structure, or like improvement erected upon any real
property situated within the Township of Kingston and used for any
purpose whatsoever shall be liable for the collection and disposal of all
garbage, solid waste, and recyclable materials produced or generated
upon or within the premises, building or structure owned or occupied
by a person in accordance with the terms and provisions of this Part.
3. It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant of any
residential dwelling to place solid waste, recyclable materials, plastics,
newsprint, glass containers, aluminum containers, corrugated paper,
bimetallic containers, garbage, or any other item collected under this
Part, or as may be collected in the future, at the curbside for collection
by the designated contractor earlier than 24 hours in advance of the
scheduled pickup.
4. It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant of any
residential dwelling to place solid waste, recyclable materials, plastics,
newsprint, glass containers, aluminum containers, corrugated paper,
bimetallic containers, garbage or any other item collected under this
Part, or as may be collected in the future, at the curbside for more than
24 hours after the scheduled pickup or, the actual pickup, in the event
that the regularly scheduled pickup be missed for any reason whatever
by the designated collector of such items.
1. All residential solid waste and source separated recyclable materials, as
defined herein, as produced, generated, accumulated or deposited
within the Township shall be collected, transported, and disposed of
solely and exclusively by the Township or its designated agent. Disposal
of any other recyclable materials as determined by the Township or its
designated agent that are produced, generated, accumulated or
deposited within the Township and are not collected by the Township or
its designated agent shall be disposed of only at a location(s) as
specified by the Township or its designated agent.
2. All garbage and solid waste produced, generated, accumulated, or
maintained within the Township of Kingston by a commercial,
§ 104 HOME RULE CHARTER § 105
Ch:545
§ 106. Recycling of Materials. [Ord. 91-6, 5/29/1991, § VI]
institutional or industrial enterprise, organization or establishment, or
a sponsor of any community or public activity within the Township of
Kingston shall be collected, transported, and disposed of periodically in
a safe and sanitary manner by a private or commercial refuse collector
or hauler or a transporter for hire, or by the Township of Kingston, or
its agent or contractor, by contract.
3. No person including, but not limited to, an owner, occupant, lessee,
commercial collector, hauler or transporter of residential garbage, solid
waste and/or recyclable materials for hire, or otherwise, shall
accumulate, deposit, maintain or place or caused to be accumulated,
deposited, maintained or placed upon a lot or parcel of real property
used for a dwelling or residential purposes within or without a
residential district or zone of the Township of Kingston for the purpose
of the collection, transportation, or disposal of residential garbage,
solid waste or recyclable materials by any entity other than the
Township of Kingston, or its agent or contractor.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person, who is not a permanent resident of
the Township of Kingston, to transport or convey into the Township of
Kingston or to deposit, place, or dispose of upon or within any premises
or structure located in the Township of Kingston any garbage, solid
wastes or recyclable materials produced and generated elsewhere for
the purpose of the collection, transportation or permanent disposal of
any garbage, solid waste, or recyclable materials by anyone within the
Township of Kingston.
5. An owner, occupant, lessee, proprietor, operator, or supervisor of any
commercial, institutional, industrial or municipal enterprise,
organization or establishment and a sponsor of any community or
public activity within the Township of Kingston, shall provide for the
private or commercial collection, transportation, and disposal of the
recyclable materials of the kind and nature provided in this Part
hereafter, which are produced or generated by their use. Each
commercial, institutional, industrial or municipal enterprise,
organization or establishment and each sponsor of any community of
public activity subject to this provision shall account to the Township of
Kingston, or its agent or contractor, at least annually for the volume of
the recyclable materials caused to be recycled by it hereunder.
1. An owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of any structure used for a
dwelling or residential purposes within the Township of Kingston, shall
cause to be recycled the following materials produced or generated as
household waste therein: aluminum containers, plastics, and steel and
bimetallic containers.
2. As may be provided by resolution hereafter passed, the following may
be included in this provision for the recycling of household wastes;
clear glass, colored glass containers, high-grade office paper,
§ 105 KINGSTON CODE § 106
Ch:546
§ 107. Contracting of Collection, Transportation and Disposal of
Residential Solid Wastes and Recyclable Materials and the
Administration Thereof. [Ord. 91-6, 5/29/1991, § VII]
§ 108. Service Charges and Provision for Payment Thereof. [Ord.
91-6, 5/29/1991, § VIII]
The Township of Kingston is authorized to levy, charge, assess, adopt,
and collect from time to time service charges and fees for the collection,
transportation and disposal of garbage, solid waste and recyclable materials
within the Township of Kingston, as provided herein, to the extent and in
the manner provided by law.
newsprint, corrugated paper, and bimetallic containers, and such other
materials as may be included.
3. An owner, lessee, tenant, proprietor, operator or supervisor of any
commercial, institutional, industrial or municipal enterprise,
organization or establishment and a sponsor of any community or
public activity within the Township of Kingston shall cause to be
recycled the following materials: aluminum cans, high-grade office
paper, corrugated paper, leaves, clear and colored glass containers and
newsprint.
4. All recyclable materials collected as provided in Subsections 1 and 2 of
this section shall become absolute property of the Township of
Kingston, or its agent or contractor, and title thereto shall pass
irrevocably when the same are deposited or placed at curbside for
collection by the owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of the abutting
premises.
1. The Township of Kingston is authorized to contract with Dallas Area
Municipal Authority, a municipal authority organized and existing
under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and created
heretofore by the Borough of Dallas, the Township of Kingston, and the
Township of Dallas, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania, for general
purposes, for the collection, transportation and disposal of all
residential garbage, solid waste and recyclable materials produced and
generated within the Township of Kingston.
2. A contract for such services shall be set forth in a Service Agreement to
be entered into between the Township of Kingston and Dallas Area
Municipal Authority, which service agreement shall provide, among
other things, for the administration of the municipal residential solid
waste and recyclable materials collection, transportation and disposal
program as created hereunder, and it shall delegate to Dallas Area
Municipal Authority the duty to implement and to conduct in all
respects the operation of the aforesaid program to the extent and in a
manner provided by law.
§ 106 HOME RULE CHARTER § 109
Ch:547
§ 109. Inspection. [Ord. 91-6, 5/29/1991, § XI]
Any person who shall place at curbside garbage, solid waste or recyclable
materials for collection, transportation or disposal shall be deemed to have
given consent, whether express or implied, to the Township of Kingston,
or its agent or contractor, to open and inspect any container, receptacle
or enclosure containing or purporting to contain garbage, solid waste, or
recyclable materials.
§ 110. Penalties. [Ord. 91-6, 5/29/1991, § X; and by Ord. 97-3, 11/12/
1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 111. Enforcement. [Ord. 91-6, 5/29/1991; as added by Ord.
2003-9, 11/12/2003, § 4]
A Kingston Township Police Officer, Kingston Township Code Enforcement
Officer or person duly authorized by the Township of Kingston, shall have
the power and duty to enforce the provisions of this Part.
§ 109 KINGSTON CODE § 111
Ch:548
Part 2
YARD WASTE SUPPORT FACILITY SITE
§ 201. Title. [Ord. 2015-4, 2/10/2016]
This Chapter 20, Part 2, of the Code of Ordinances of the Township of
Kingston shall be designated as the "Township of Kingston Yard Waste
Support Facility Site Ordinance."
§ 202. Adoption of Department of Environmental Protection
Regulations. [Ord. 2015-4, 2/10/2016]
This Part adopts all of those certain general and operational requirements,
as applicable, of the Department of Environmental Protection Guidelines, as
provided in 25 Pa. Code § 271.103(h), in respect of the use, maintenance
and operation of the Township of Kingston yard waste support facility site.
§ 203. Definitions. [Ord. 2015-4, 2/10/2016]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL LANDSCAPING OR GROUNDSKEEPING CONTRACTOR —
A person or entity regularly and principally occupied or engaged in the
business of furnishing work and labor, and materials and/or equipment,
at a certain price or rate for profit or with a clear money-making
intention by the performance of tending or maintaining a particular
area of land for aesthetic or functional purposes, including, but not
limited to, mowing grass, trimming brush, hedges, or shrubbery, or
pulling and disposing of weeds or generally keeping or tending lawns
and yards or caring for a tract of land or the grounds of another person
or entity and motivated by profit to be earned therefrom, whether on a
seasonal basis or otherwise.
A.
An individual, an entity, or a family member ("third party") can be
designated in writing by any owner or tenant of land lying in the
Township of Kingston as the landowner's tenant's yard waste hauler.
Such third party so designated cannot derive annual total income in
excess of $1,000 from the activity of hauling yard waste. Upon such
written designation, the third party may use the Township of Kingston
yard waste support facility site, in accordance with the terms of this
Part, for the benefit of the Township of Kingston owner or tenant of land
lying in the Township, subject to the following condition:
A Township landowner or tenant must secure annually from the
Township a permit for use by a designated third-party waste hauler.
The designated third party must present the permit to the
Township site representative at any time that yard waste is
dropped off at the facility site. The permit shall state the Township
landowner or tenant's name and address. It must state the name
and address of the individual or entity designed as the yard waste
(1)
B.
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 203
Ch:549
YARD WASTE — Vegetative matter or material, including leaves, garden
residue, brush, hedge clippings, shrubbery, grass clippings, and tree
trimmings; provided, however, that tree trimmings shall be limited to a
maximum length of five feet and a maximum diameter of six inches. Holiday
and Christmas trees shall constitute yard waste.
§ 204. Control of Site. [Ord. 2015-4, 2/10/2016]
hauler for the applicant of the permit. The driver's license of the
designated individual or entity must be displayed at time of permit
application by the production of the actual license or a photocopy
thereof. No permanent record of the driver's license shall be
retained by Kingston Township. No permanent records containing
a driver's social security number will be retained by Kingston
Township. The permit shall be valid for the period from April 1
through November 1 annually. It is the responsibility of the
Township landowner or tenant to notify the Township of any change
in the designation of the third-party waste hauler and, if necessary
by reason of a change of third-party hauler designation, a new
facility site usage permit must be applied for and granted.
1. A gate or other barrier shall be maintained at all potential vehicular
access points to block unauthorized access to the site. The site shall be
surrounded by adequate fencing.
2. Access to the site shall be limited to those times only when an
authorized attendant is on duty.
3. The site shall be posted with signage clearly visible from any access
road. The signage shall be constructed of a durable, weather-resistant
material. The signage shall state the name, address and telephone
number of the office of the Township of Kingston.
4. Noncompostable material, residues, or solid waste, other than yard
waste, shall not be allowed to accumulate at the support facility site.
Proper disposal or processing of such material shall be provided by the
site user.
5. Yard waste and other municipal solid waste not suitable for composting
shall be removed from the support facility site no less frequently than
weekly.
6. Compostable materials or residue shall not be allowed to be carried by
any force or otherwise deposited off site.
7. The attraction, harborage or breeding of vectors shall be prohibited.
8. Conditions that are harmful to the environment or public health or
which cause safety hazards, odors, noise or other public nuisances are
strictly prohibited and shall be abated immediately upon the
identification of their existence.
§ 203 KINGSTON CODE § 204
Ch:550
§ 205. Commercial Use. [Ord. 2015-4, 2/10/2016]
No commercial landscaping or groundskeeping contractor shall use the
support facility site for any purpose whatever other than in relation to his
or its care and maintenance of his or its property owned or rented by
him or it situated in the Township of Kingston. Proof of such personally
owned property or the tenancy of such property situated in the Township
of Kingston must be produced upon demand and approval by the site
attendant before any use of the site for any purpose.
§ 206. Prohibited Items. [Ord. 2015-4, 2/10/2016]
The following items are specifically prohibited from being dumped,
delivered or deposited at the Township of Kingston's yard waste support
facility site:
§ 207. Operational Rules. [Ord. 2015-4, 2/10/2016]
9. The support facility site shall be under daily twenty-four-hour recorded
video surveillance.
10. No skateboarding, bicycling, recreational walking or similar activities
by anyone are permitted.
A. Tree stumps.
B. Construction materials of any nature of kind, including shingles, pipe
and lumber.
C. Stones, rocks, bricks, concrete, gravel or other similar materials.
D. Cans or any form of metal materials, including nails and staples.
E. Glass of any kind.
F. Plastic, including plastic bags.
G. Paper, cardboard and magazines.
H. Dog, cat or other animal waste.
I. Garden produce such as tomatoes, lettuce, apples, pumpkins, etc.
J. Ashes of any kind and any burning waste.
K. Garbage, hazardous waste, industrial waste, medical waste and
commercial waste.
L. Treated lumber, landscaping timber, cross ties, painted wood, wooden
furniture, or demolition debris.
M. Bulky items (appliances), tires or scrap metal.
N. Grass sod.
§ 204 HOME RULE CHARTER § 207
Ch:551
§ 208. Persons Entitled to Use Yard Waste Support Facility Site.
[Ord. 2015-4, 2/10/2016]
§ 209. Violations. [Ord. 2015-4, 2/10/2016]
The following circumstances shall constitute a violation of this Part:
§ 210. Penalties. [Ord. 2015-4, 2/10/2016]
Any person or entity violating any provision of this Part or part of any order
of the Township of Kingston issued pursuant hereto commits a summary
1. Hours of Operation.
A. The hours of operation shall be established annually by a resolution
of the Board of Supervisors, and public notice thereof shall be
given.
B. Hours are subject to change during holidays, winter months and
adverse weather conditions.
2. The yard waste support facility site may be closed at any time by the
Township for the purpose of operating equipment on the site, as well as
for the inspection of materials being deposited or the maintenance of
any equipment.
3. Yard waste shall be loosely deposited or deposited in biodegradable
bags. Any plastic bags containing leaves or grass clippings must be
dumped in an appropriate area, and the plastic bags must be removed
from the site.
1. Only residents and property owners of the Township of Kingston shall
be entitled to use the yard waste support facility site.
2. Only yard waste produced from property situated within the boundaries
of the Township of Kingston shall be deposited at the yard waste
support facility site.
A. The dumping or depositing of any material other than acceptable yard
waste, as defined in § 203 hereof.
B. The dumping or depositing of any material in an unauthorized section of
the yard waste composting site.
C. The deposit or dumping of any yard waste by a person or entity not
entitled hereunder to deposit or dump yard waste hereunder.
D. The deposit or dumping of any yard waste not originated from within
the boundaries of the Township of Kingston.
E. The deposit or dumping of any yard waste at any time other than the
hours, days and months when the yard waste composting site is open
for operational use.
§ 207 KINGSTON CODE § 210
Ch:552
criminal offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $2,500 for each separate
offense, and in default of the payment of such fine, may be sentenced
to imprisonment for 90 days in the Luzerne County Correctional Facility
to the extent allowed by law for the punishment of summary offenses.
Enforcement of any such violations shall be commenced by any employee
of the Township of Kingston, who is authorized by the Board of Supervisors
of the Township of Kingston, and who is hereby declared to be a law
enforcement officer authorized to issue or file citations for summary
criminal offenses under this Part, and the Solicitor of the Township of
Kingston is hereby authorized to prosecute these offenses before a District
Justice in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Each day on
which a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate offense,
which is punishable by a like fine or penalty.
§ 211. Savings Clause. [Ord. 2015-4, 2/10/2016]
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent with the terms of this
Part are hereby repealed; provided, however, that such repeal shall only be
to the extent of such inconsistencies, and in all other respects, this Part
shall be cumulative with the other ordinances regulating and governing the
subject matter covered by this Part.
§ 212. Severability. [Ord. 2015-4, 2/10/2016]
If any section or provision or parts thereof in this Part shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not
affect the validity of this Part as a whole or any other section or provision of
the part thereof.
§ 213. When Effective. [Ord. 2015-4, 2/10/2016]
This Part shall take effect in accordance with law.
§ 210 HOME RULE CHARTER § 213
Ch:553
Chapter 21
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 213 KINGSTON CODE § 213
Ch:554
Part 1
PAVE CUT
§ 101. Definitions. [Adoptedx Ord. 5/12/1982, Pt. 1; as amended by
Ord. 2004-7, 8/11/2004, § 1]
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this Part shall have
the same meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
Whenever in this Part, the words "directed", "required", "permitted",
"ordered", "designated", "prescribed" or words of like import are used,
it shall be understood that the direction, requirement, permission, order,
designation, or prescription of the Municipal Engineer is intended; and
similarly, the words "approved", "acceptable", "satisfactory" or words of
like import shall mean approved by, acceptable to or satisfactory to the
Municipal Engineer.
APPLICATION FOR A PAVE CUT PERMIT — A form provided the utility
by the Township noting pertinent data for the purposes of inspection and
control by the Township, and constituting a receipt for services performed
by the city.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — Preplanned to improve or upgrade an existing
system or to install a completely new system providing new or additional
service.
CITY — The Township of Kingston.
EMERGENCY REPAIR — Work necessitated by the rupture or sudden
malfuction of existing underground facilities.
FACILITIES — All the plant and equipment of a public utility including all
tangible and intangible, real and personal property without limitations, and
any and all means and instrumentalities in any manner owned, operated,
leased, licensed, controlled, furnished or supplied for by, or in connection
with the business of any public utility; provided, however, that no property
owned by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or the Township at the date
when this Part becomes effective shall be subject to any of the terms of this
Part, except as elsewhere expressly provided herein.
INSPECTION — A careful or critical investigation not necessarily confined
to optical observation but is understood to embrace tests and examination
for the purpose of ascertaining quality and compliance as prescribed in this
Part and discovering and correcting errors.
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION — All cities, boroughs, towns, townships or
counties of this Commonwealth, and also any public corporation, authority,
or body whatsoever created or organized under any law of this
Commonwealth for the purpose of rendering any service similar to that of
a public utility. The term municipality shall be and mean the same as the
Township of Kingston.
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 101
Ch:555
PAVE CUT LOG — A chronological record of pave cuts as reported to the
municipality containing permanent data as required by the municipality for
the purposes of inspection and control.
PAVEMENTS — Riding surfaces of machine laid asphalt over a base of
concrete, brick, belgiam block, crushed stone, bituminous concrete or oil
and stone.
PERMITTEE — A person or public utility to whom a permit has been granted
for the opening in any paved thoroughfare, cutaway or sidewalk in the
Township in accordance with the provisions of this Part.
PERSON — Individuals, partnerships or associations other than
corporations and includes their lessees, assignees, trustees, receivers,
executors, administrators or other successors in interest.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Persons or corporations now or hereafter owning or
operating in this Commonwealth equipment or facilities for:
SERVICE — Is used in this Part in its broadest and most inclusive sense,
and includes any and all acts done, rendered or performed, and any and
all things furnished or supplied, and any and all facilities used, furnished,
or supplied by public utilities, in the performance of their duties under this
Part to their patrons, employees, other public utilities, and the public, as
well as the interchange of facilities between two or more of them.
SPECIAL PAVEMENT — Riding surfaces of concrete, brick, belgiam block
or cobblestone.
STREET — Includes any street, highway, road, land, court, alley, public
square, or place of whatever nature, whether dedicated or not, open to the
use of the public as a matter or right for purposes of vehicular travel.
Producing, generating, transmitting, distributing or furnishing natural
or artificial gas, electricity, or steam for the production of light, heat or
power to or for the public for compensation.
1.
Diverting, developing, pumping, impounding, distributing, or
furnishing water to or for the public for compensation.
2.
Transporting, or conveying natural or artificial gas, crude oil, gasoline,
or petroleum products, by pipe lines or conduit, for the public for
compensation.
3.
Conveying or transmitting messages or communications by telephone
or telegraph to the public for compensation.
The term "public utility" shall not include:
1. Any person or corporation, not otherwise a public utility, who or
which furnishes services only to himself or itself; or
2. Any bona fide cooperative association which furnishes services
only to its stockholders or members on a nonprofit basis; or
3. Any producer of natural gas not engaged in distributing such has
directly to the public for compensation.
4.
§ 101 KINGSTON CODE § 101
Ch:556
UTILITY CORRIDOR — An area within any public right-of-way, usually
underground but not limited to same, reserved for and assigned to a
specified utility by the Township. The area to be used by the specified utility
for placing and operating its facilities for transmitting and distributing its
particular commodity or service.
UTILITY RELOCATION — Utility relocation shall mean and include the
adjustment, replacement or relocation of utility facilities as required by
street construction or repaving project, such as: removing or reinstalling
the facility, acquiring the necessary rights-of-way, moving or rearranging
existing facilities, changing the type of facility, and any necessary safety and
protective measures. It shall also mean the construction of a replacement
facility functionally equal to the existing facility, where necessary for the
continuous operation of the utility service, the project economy, or sequence
of street construction.
WORK — The furnishing of all materials, labor, equipment, and other
incidentals necessary or convenient to the successful completion of the
project and the fulfillment of all duties and obligations imposed by this Part.
§ 102. Pertaining to the public utilities and public improvements
contractors. [Adoptedx Ord. 5/12/1982, $2; as amended by Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985]
1. Permit Procedure. A permit must first be obtained before any opening
can be made in any paved thoroughfare, cartway or sidewalk in the
municipality.
2. Normal Permit Procedures. Applications for a pave cut permit shall be
available from the Township of Kingston, Township Manager at the
Municipal Building. An authorized agent of a utility or contractor may
complete said application at the Municipal Building. This shall be done
a minimum of 24 hours in advance of a planned excavation. A copy of
the completed application signed by the Engineer or his agent shall be
in the hands of a competent person at the worksite described in said
application and shall constitute a permit.
3. Alternate Permit Procedure. Notification by telephone to the Township
Office must be made a minimum of 15 minutes in advance of excavation,
but not more than 24 hours in advance of excavation. An entry in the
pave cut log (the record of notification of the municipality) together
with a completed application for pave cut permit shall constitute a
permit. The completion of an application form alone shall not constitute
a permit.
An application form, properly completed and including a location
sketch shall be collected from the utility on a monthly basis by the
municipality. Permit fees shall be billed on a monthly basis by the
Township of Kingston and shall be payable to the Treasurer of the
Township. Application forms shall be provided by the Township.
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 102
Ch:557
4. Emergency Permit Procedures. In the case where an emergency repair,
as hereinbefore defined, is found, the utility shall notify the Department
of Public Works, and inform it that an emergency existed and the day,
time and location of the pave cut. Emergency pave cuts shall be
recorded in the pave cut log at the start of the next business day
following the emergency.
5. Non-Fee Permits. Pave cuts necessitated by municipal sponsored public
improvements will be on a non-fee basis but limited to a specific
contract area. A list noting exact locations and dimensions of all such
cuts shall be submitted to the Township Office at the completion of
work. Notification will be required for any pave cuts made in State
highways located within the municipality for which a Highway
Occupancy Permit has been issued.
6. Penalty for Failure to Obtain a Permit. All work done without a permit
shall be subject to a penalty plus regular fees.
7. Insurance Protection. The applicant shall protect, defend, indemnify,
and save harmless the municipality, its officers, and/or agents thereof
from all claims, suits, actions and proceedings of every nature and
description which may be thereof for, or on account of any injuries or
damages to persons or public or private property, because of any
materials or appliances used in the work, or by or on account of
improper materials or workmanship, or for or on account of any
accident of any other act, negligence or omissions of said applicant, or
his agents, servants or employees, and the municipality shall not in any
way be liable therefore, during the period of the work progress and the
1 1/2 year guarantee period following the completion of the work.
Minimum insurance shall be:
A. Five hundred thousand dollars liability per individual with
$500,000 limit for each occurrence for bodily injury.
B. Five hundred thousand dollars liability for property damage.
C. Evidence of insurance in the form of a certificate or letter executed
by a duly authorized representative of the applicant's insurance
carrier shall be submitted to the Engineer each January 15th. Said
evidence of insurance must include the provision that the
municipality shall be given proper advance notice of at least 30
days of cancellation or any material alteration in the applicant's
policy.
8. Safety Precautions. During the progress of work the applicant shall
provide and maintain such barricades, warning signs and flagpersons
as may be deemed necessary by the municipality to prevent accidents
to the public and/or adjoining tenants. Minimum precautions must
include, but should not be limited to advance warning signs on all
approaches to the work, safe crossing for pedestrians each 300 feet,
barricades with flashers on each exposed side at fifty-foot intervals. All
precautions shall be in accordance with the "Manual of Uniform Traffic
§ 102 KINGSTON CODE § 102
Ch:558
Control Devices" as adopted by the U.S. Department of Transportation,
Federal Highway Administration, 1971, Part IV, "Traffic Controls for
Street and Highway Construction and Maintenance Operations".
9. Road Closing. No street in the Township of Kingston may be completely
closed to traffic at any time. One lane of traffic must be able to pass
unobstructed at all times. Flagpersons must be posted at the limits of
work at all times to direct traffic through the work area, and all
established traffic patterns must be maintained at all times. If all other
means of traffic control have been exhausted, the municipality may
permit a road to be completely closed temporarily only with the consent
of the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief. When an emergency exists the
Police and Fire Department shall be notified. An application form for a
permit to close a street will be available from the Municipal Office. The
completed application bearing the signatures of the before mentioned
officers shall be returned to the applicant and shall constitute a permit.
A penalty shall be imposed for failure to notify the Police Chief and Fire
Chief. (See Fee Schedule).
10. Time Periods. For small area pave cuts, the utility or contractor shall be
required to complete the temporary restoration within 48 consecutive
hours of the initial cut during the normal working week excluding
holidays and weekends. Extension time may be allowed upon appeal to
the Township Manager, provided the contractor substantiates sufficient
reasons for the extension required. Work on long cuts, those over 25
feet in length, shall proceed in a continuous manner. Permits for long
cuts or capital improvements will not be granted during the months of
November through March except by written permission from the
Township Manager. The utility or contractor shall coordinate planned
cuts in the municipal streets with the paving program of the
municipality. A construction schedule comprising planned cuts shall be
submitted to the Township Manager as they become available. The
municipality will provide a paving program for a one-year period to the
utilities prior to February 15th. Changes in the utilities schedule of
planned cuts shall require confirmation from the Township Manager.
Changes in the municipal paving program shall be submitted to all
utilities at the earliest possible date to permit the utilities to adjust their
respective schedule.
11. Scheduling. All excavations shall be commenced and completed by the
use of reasonable work force. In congested areas and the central
business district, the municipality may limit work to other than normal
daytime working hours. At the cessation of work adequate steel plates
or wooden planking shall be placed over the excavation while it is not
being worked to ensure full traffic flow. The maximum length of any
opening in the roadway shall be two 200 feet unless otherwise
permitted, in writing, by the Township Manager.
12. Excavated Material. In peak traffic areas all excavated material shall be
removed daily at the cessation of work. All gutters and drainage devices
shall be kept clean of all debris and excavated material. Fire hydrants
§ 102 HOME RULE CHARTER § 102
Ch:559
§ 103. Preparation of Streets for Paving, Repair, or Reconstruction.
[Adoptedx Ord. 5/12/1982, § 3; as amended by Ord. 1985-1. 2/13/
1985; and by Ord. 2004-7, 8/11/004, § 2]
The Kingston Township Board of Supervisors provides by this Part, for the
laying, renewing, and repairing of all gas, water, steam, or other pipes
or conduits, in any street, before the paving, repaving or repairing of the
same, and for making the necessary house connections with said pipes, and
also for the necessary house connections and branches with and leading
into main or lateral sewers; provided, that in no case, except as a sanitary
measure of which the Supervisors shall be the judge, shall the Supervisors
adjacent to the work shall at all times be readily accessible to fire
apparatus, and no material or obstruction shall be placed within 15 feet
of any hydrant.
13. Suitability of Materials. The suitability of material to be used as backfill
shall be determined by the Township Road Foreman. All materials not
conforming to the requirements of this Part whether in place or not,
shall be rejected. Such materials shall be removed promptly from the
work site.
14. Waste Material. Material which is unsuitable and any surplus of
excavated material shall be considered waste and shall be disposed of
by the utility or contractor beyond the project limits. In no case shall
waste material be left at the work site.
15. Wet Material. Material containing moisture in excess of that percentage
which will ensure satisfactory compaction shall not be used as backfill
material.
16. Dry Material. Material containing insufficient moisture to obtain
satisfactory compaction shall be moistened before compaction.
17. Opening of a Street. Power driven concrete saws or air hammers shall
be used on all cuts. The cuts must be of sufficient depth to provide a
smooth edge. Opening in brick or belgiam block based streets shall be
of sufficient width to expose 1/2 row of undisturbed interlocking stone.
No pavement busters, such as drop hammers, hoe rams and the like
shall be used without the written permission of the Township Manager.
18. Location of Shut-Off Valves. All shut-off valves for water mains and gas
mains, and branches, may be installed within the limits of the highway
right-of-way lines. All shut-off valves on service lines and other pipes
shall be installed outside the highway right-of-way lines. (1985-1)
19. Responsibility for Damages. In the event a cut is made, and upon
inspection, damage to another utility's underground facilities is
discovered, it shall be the responsibility of the party making the cut to
contact the Township Manager, and all concerned pertinent utilities to
instruct them (it) to have representatives inspect the condition before
any backfilling is begun.
§ 102 KINGSTON CODE § 103
Ch:560
require such house connections to be extended further from such sewers,
or from such gas, water, or other pipes, or conduits, than to the inner line
of the curbstone of such street. The Supervisors may, after notice to all
companies, corporations, persons, and owners affected, and in default of
compliance therewith, cause said pipes to be laid, renewed, or repaired,
and said connections made, and collect the cost of paving, and repairing all
pipes and pipe connections, from the companies, corporations, or persons
owning or operating the said gas, water, and other pipes or conduits, with
interest; and the cost of the sewer connections shall be a first lien against
the land for whose benefit such connections are made. A separate lien may
be filed therefor, or such sewer connection cost may be included in any
lien filed for the cost of such street improvement, and the lien and the
proceedings thereon shall be as in the case of other municipal liens. [1931,
June 23, P.L. 932, XXIX, 2941. Renumbered 2938., and amended 1951, June
28, P.O. 662.]
1. Restoration. Prior to the placement of the base course, the existing base
and surface must be exposed six inches on each side on any failures that
may have developed. Restoration of flexible base pavements shall
consist of binder for the full depth of four inches. The wearing course
ID2 shall be placed at a minimum depth of two inches and rolled to
conform with the existing road, and the edges sealed. Surface
treatments such as sand or chip seals are prohibited. On long cuts
surface finishing must be rolled with not less than a six ton roller. Small
cuts may be finished with a mechanical tamper or vibrator. All openings
regardless of size must be permanently restored.
A. Additional Requirements for Restoration.
(1) In all areas where cuts are made within 50 feet (center to
center) of each other, the permittee shall be required to neatly
cut and remove the area of pavement between these adjacent
openings and shall patch as one trench.
(2) For any two openings that are three feet or less in distance
from their closest cut edges, the permittee shall be required to
neatly cut and remove the area of pavement between these
adjacent openings and shall patch as one trench.
(3) For any longitudinal or transverse cut greater than 50 feet in
length, the permittee shall be required to neatly cut and
remove the area of pavement affected and resurface the full
road width for the entire length of the longitudinal or
transverse cut.
(4) For all restorations requiring resurfacing of one lane or
greater, the permittee is required to complete the following:
(a) Resurfacing must be a minimum thickness of one and 1.5
inches and include leveling course and tac where needed;
and
§ 103 HOME RULE CHARTER § 103
Ch:561
(b) Original slope and crown must be restored unless approval
is granted otherwise; and
(c) Surface must be milled along all limits of work to provide a
smooth transition into existing paved surfaces; and
(d) Surface must be milled a distance of three feet from
concrete gutters throughout the entire length of
restoration; and
(e) Manholes and catch basins must be raised to bring the top
surface to a level of 0.5 inches below top of the paved
surface once restored.
(f) All finished joints must be sealed with an approved
material (AC-20 or PG64-22).
2. Restoration-Special. The permanent restoration of special type
pavements, such as concrete, brick, belgiam block, cobblestone gutters,
or tiles, shall consist of relaying the original wearing course in
accordance with the original installation specifications in such a
manner as to prevent settlement or other deterioration.
3. Testing and Inspection. The Municipal Road Foreman may inspect all
cuts having an area of five square yards or more, and an inspection fee
shall be charged. Such inspection fees shall constitute acceptance and
approval of work performed by the utility or its contractor, but it is
understood that such acceptance and approval does not relieve the
utility of any responsibility under this Part throughout the guarantee
period.
Inspection of small cuts having an area of five square yards or less
shall not require visual observation when the work is in progress, but
may be approved or rejected through subsequent examinations and/or
testing.
4. Repaving and Reconstruction. Upon notification from the Office of the
Township Manager of a planned street resurfacing or reconstruction,
all utilities will be required to test their lines and services and to
schedule necessary capital improvements and service connections prior
to resurfacing or reconstruction. Thereafter cuts will be permitted in
the new pavement only in an emergency. Pave cuts made in new
pavement shall be subject to a penalty (see Fee Schedule). Essential
services for a new building construction shall not include the addition of
an alternate or secondary source of fuel, water, heat or other service
not included in the original construction or regarded as essential to the
original construction. Pavement shall be considered new for a period of
five years, from the date of placement.
5. Linestone and Monuments. No linestone or monument in the Township
of Kingston may be removed, altered or buried at any time. When pave
cuts or road construction require the temporary removal of a linestone
§ 103 KINGSTON CODE § 103
Ch:562
or monument it must be preserved at the site and reset at the direction
of the Engineer. All costs incident thereto, including surveys, shall be
charged to the utility or contractor. A penalty shall be imposed for
failure to report the removal or alteration of a linestone or monument.
Burial or paving over a linestone or monument shall carry a penalty
for each stone or monument covered. In addition, all cost incidental to
exposing and/or resetting a linestone or monument shall be charged to
the utility or contractor.
6. Test Borings. All test holes and borings shall require restoration.
Restoration of bore holes shall follow immediately after testing with the
application of asphalt or other water resistant plugs. A penalty will be
charged for each test hole found unplugged. (See Fee Schedule).
7. Replacement of Pavement Markings. The utility and/or its contractor
must replace in kind all pavement markings damaged or removed by
pave cuts and work incident thereto. All markings must be replaced
within five days after permanent restoration. The municipality shall
contract to have the necessary repairs made and bill the utility.
8. Backfilling. The Township Office must be notified in advance of all
backfilling. Backfilling will be done in such manner as to obtain
compaction throughout the entire length of backfill not less than that
which exists adjacent to the excavation. Type 2A modified subbase
material shall be used in all excavations. The method of backfill shall be
consistent with good engineering practice, i.e., the material shall be
placed in layers not to exceed six inches properly tamped using a
mechanical tamper or a mechanical vibrator up to the bottom elevation
of the pavement structure.
9. Temporary Restorations. All restoration made with cold patch shall be
considered temporary. The permittee is responsible for all costs and
expenses of making and maintaining temporary and permanent
restorations of disturbed areas. Temporary restoration consists of a
minimum of three inches of bituminous material and is maintained in
place until permanent restoration can be made.
10. Permanent Restoration. Only utilities or their contractors will be
permitted to make permanent restorations of openings in pavements.
The restored pavements shall be guaranteed from failure from the date
of completion through two winters. Permanent restoration must be
completed within 30 days of the initial cut. Any cuts made in the months
of November through March shall be permanently restored within 30
days after hot asphalt becomes available. Any failure of restoration will
be reported to the pertinent utility and repairs by the utility will be
begun within 24 hours after notification. Upon failure of the utility to
repair the cut in a satisfactory manner, the municipality shall have the
option to do the work or to contract to complete the work and bill the
utility.
§ 103 HOME RULE CHARTER § 103
Ch:563
11. Replacement of Electronic Traffic Control Devices and Ancillary
Equipment. Electronic traffic control devices and ancillary equipment
damaged or removed because of pavement excavations or work
incident thereto must be replaced by the utility or its contractor, in
kind, in whole or in part as required by the Township Manager or his
agent. The municipality shall contract to have the necessary repairs
made and bill the utility.
12. Determination of Lines and Grades by the Engineer. The Township
Engineer shall have the final decision for the determination of lines and
grades for street construction. This decision shall be based on good
engineering practice and municipal standards.
13. Utility Corridor. Vertical assignments for New Street Construction. The
following depths for pipes and conduits are assigned to the utilities
operating under this Part:
A. Gas lines shall be a minimum of 30 inches below subgrade.
B. Water lines shall be a minimum of 36 inches below subgrade — a
water main shall be a minimum of five feet below subgrade.
C. Electric lines and conduits shall be a minimum of 24 inches below
subgrade.
D. Telecommunication lines and conduits shall be a minimum of 36
inches below subgrade.
14. Horizontal and Aerial Utility Corridors. Aerial installations of electric
power transmissions and telecommunications lines suspended from
supporting poles having their base and/or support wires within the
public right-of-way and interfering with a roadway construction,
reconstruction or repair project shall be relocated upon written order
from the Township Manager to a point specified therein. The Engineer
may require the utility to place its aerial facilities underground where it
is deemed necessary or desirable. Hereafter, aerial installations shall be
placed subject to approval by the Engineer. The Engineer shall assign
horizontal corridors on a case by case basis for all new construction. All
gate boxes shut-off valves and other regulating devices underground
for individual customers for gas, water, steam, electric and
telecommunications lines shall be located inside the inner line of the
curbstone or, in the case where no curbing exists, to a point specified by
the Engineer or his agent.
15. Determination of reimbursement. The municipality may participate in
the actual costs less betterments of utility relocation when: An existing
utility right-of-way is owned by the utility and interferes with a
municipal construction project.
16. Commencement of Utility Relocation Activities. Upon receipt of a letter
from the Township Engineer authorizing the start of physical work, the
utility shall commence work within 30 days unless otherwise stated by
§ 103 KINGSTON CODE § 103
Ch:564
§ 104. Enforcement. [Adoptedx Ord. 5/12/1982, § 4]
the Township Engineer with reasonable cause shown in order to clear
the construction area. The utility shall perform the relocation work in
accordance with the approved plan of the Engineer.
Utility relocation shall be accomplished by the utility to assure its
completion prior to the commencement of roadway construction. Areas
of utility relocation of work which cannot be accomplished prior to the
start of construction but can be accomplished simultaneously without
restricting the roadway project contractor, may be done concurrently
with the contractors operations when approved by the Engineer and
the contractor.
It is acknowledged that field conditions occasionally necessitate
revision of the utility relocation plan. It shall be the responsibility of
the utility to report and justify such revisions, to correct any data
on file with the Engineer. The utilities are required to obtain the
contractors concurrence prior to such revisions within the right-ofway
of the project under construction. Minor modifications of the
relocation plan may be made without prior approval of the Engineer.
All such changes shall be brought to the attention of the project
engineer and shall be noted in the daily inspection report.
1. Delegation of Authority to the Township Manager. The Board of
Supervisors by this Part establish that the responsibility and authority
for the administration and enforcement of the Part shall rest in the
office of the Township Manager.
2. Street Inspectors. The Township Manager may appoint as his
representatives persons to enforce this Part. These agents shall have
the authority and responsibility for the enforcement of this Part as
vested in the Manager.
3. Non-Compliance. When work performed by a utility or contractor under
this Part is found in violation of same, the contractor or utility may be
given the opportunity to make corrections as required by the
municipality. If the corrections are not completed in the specified time
or not completed as specified, the municipality may suspend all work
whether completed or in progress in noncompliance with this Part, and
take appropriate safety precautions. All work performed or contracted
for by the Township of Kingston to attain compliance in this regard shall
be billed to the utility or contractor. In addition, a penalty for noncompliance
shall be imposed.
4. Resumption of Suspended Work. The utility shall actively resume work
upon order from the municipality after a suspension.
5. Penalties for Non-Compliance. If the utility or contractor fails to make
adequate corrections to work found in non-compliance with this Part in
the time specified, a penalty shall be imposed until said corrections are
completed to specifications.
§ 103 HOME RULE CHARTER § 104
Ch:565
§ 105. Fees. [Adoptedx Ord. 6/12/1982; as amended by Ord. 1985-1,
2/13/1985]
The costs of filing such application and permit to be issued thereon, and the
cost of inspection deemed necessary by the Supervisors shall be determined
according to a schedule of fees which will be adopted by the Supervisors by
resolution.
§ 106. Penalties. [Adoptedx Ord. 6/12/1982, § 5; as amended by Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985; and by Ord. 97-3, 11/12/1997]
6. Non-Issuance. The Township reserves the right to bar any contractor or
his employee from working within the municipal limits whose work is
found in non-compliance with this Part. The municipality reserves the
right to refuse issuance of a permit to any applicant who fails to
maintain pave cuts in accordance with this Part, or who fails to pay
sums due the municipality within 30 days from the date of billing.
The municipality reserves the right to refuse issuance of a permit to
cut new pavement.
7. Pertaining to General Contractors. At the discretion of the municipality,
licensed contractors, other than those under contract to a utility, may
be permitted to make an opening, cut or excavation in the
municipality's public streets. Sections pertaining to public utilities shall
be applicable to licensed contractors.
1. Acknowledgment of Guilt. Any person charged with violating any
provision of this Part may sign an acknowledgment of the offense
committed, either before or after the beginning of suit, and pay to any
duly authorized agent of the municipality, the maximum penalties
provided by the resolutions of the Board of Supervisors, together with
costs accruing to that date. Such person shall receive a printed receipt
therefor, which shall bear the imprint of the seal of the municipality and
the signature of its Chairman, which shall be evidence of full
satisfaction of the offense committed.
2. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and,
in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment
not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this Part continues or
each Section of this Part which shall be found to have been violated
shall constitute a separate offense.
3. Civil Action. In addition to the foregoing, the said Township may pursue
such other and additional remedies as may be authorized by the said
Act of July 10, 1947, P.L. 1481, as amended as aforesaid.
§ 104 KINGSTON CODE § 106
Ch:566
Part 2
INGRESS TO TOWNSHIP ROADS
§ 201. Short Title. [Adoptedx Ord. 1987-6, 12/19/1987, § 1]
This Part shall be known and hereafter referred to as the "Kingston
Township Driveway Ordinance."
§ 202. Definitions. [Adoptedx Ord. 1987-6, 12/19/1987, § 2]
For the purpose of this Part, the following terms shall have meanings
ascribed thereto, as follows:
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Kingston Township, Luzerne County,
Pennsylvania.
CONTRACTOR — The party, person, firm, partnership, and/or corporation
who or which installs a driveway, including all agents, officers, or employees
of said party, person, firm, partnership and/or corporation.
DRIVEWAY — Any area of land designated or to be used as a means of
ingress and/or egress for either vehicles and/or pedestrian traffic from a
public road to a piece, parcel, or tract of land.
OWNER — The owner of the land upon which the driveway is located.
PERMIT — A permit issued by the Board to signify approval of the driveway
connection.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
corporation or other group or entity.
PUBLIC ROAD — Any road, street, alley or public thoroughfare whether
actually maintained by Kingston Township as part of its road system, or
whether shown on a subdivision or land development plan and intended to
be offered or dedicated to Kingston Township in the future as part of its
road system.
§ 203. Permit Required. [Adoptedx Ord. 1987-6, 12/19/1987, § 3]
No person, owner and/or contractor shall hereafter install, initiate any
work, or allow the installation or initiation of any work toward the
installation of a driveway without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
Board.
§ 204. Application for Permit. [Adoptedx Ord. 1987-6, 12/19/1987,
§ 4]
Any person, owner and/or contractor shall, prior to obtaining a driveway
permit, file an application, on an application form supplied by the Board,
reflecting and showing the location of the driveway relative to the premises
and designating the course, grade, structure, materials, and drainage
facilities, if any, involved in the construction of the driveway. The application
shall be reviewed by the Engineer or Road Superintendent of the Township.
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 204
Ch:567
The Engineer or Road Superintendent shall determine if the proposed
method of constructing or making said connection, as reflected on the
application, is such that it will (1) minimize the adverse effect of stormwater
run-off resulting from said connection, (2) not cause damage to the road
to which the driveway is to be connected, and (3) not create or increase
hazardous driving conditions for those persons using the road on which the
driveway is to be connected. If found satisfactory by the Engineer or Road
Superintendent, he shall so advise the Board, and the Board will issue, or
cause to be issued, the permit. If the plan is found deficient, or if in the
opinion of the Township Engineer or Road Superintendent the plan could
be improved so as to (1) minimize the adverse effect of stormwater run-off,
(2) lessen drainage to the road to which the driveway is to be connected, or
(3) lessen hazardous driving conditions on the road to which the driveway
is to be connected, the Engineer or Road Superintendent shall, by written
communication to the owner, notify him of the changes to be made. The
applicant shall immediately make such changes and return the revised plan
to the Township. When such plan is in acceptable form, the Board shall
approve or cause the same to be approved and the permit issued.
§ 205. Fees. [Adoptedx Ord. 1987-6, 12/19/1987, § 5]
The application shall be accompanied by an application fee in the amount
of $25 to cover costs of processing the permit along with a preliminary
and final inspection to be conducted by the Township Engineer or Road
Superintendent. Resurfacing $10.51
§ 206. Strict Compliance with Plans. [Adoptedx Ord. 1987-6, 12/19/
1987, § 6]
All construction in any way incidental to the installation of the driveway
shall be performed in strict conformance with the approved plans and the
suggested design standards of the Township of Kingston.
§ 207. Individual Permits Required. [Adoptedx Ord. 1987-6, 12/19/
1987; § 7]
Each driveway, whether serving the same premises or not, shall require an
individual permit.
§ 208. Penalties. [Adoptedx Ord. 1987-6, 12/19/1987, § 8; as
amended by Ord. 97-3, 11/12/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
51."Resurfacing $10" hand written on Ord. 1987-6.
§ 204 KINGSTON CODE § 208
Ch:568
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 208 HOME RULE CHARTER § 208
Ch:569

Part 3
SIDEWALK CARE
§ 301. Sidewalks to be Kept in Good Repair, Clear of Snow, Ice,
Obstructions. [Adoptedx Ord. 84-3, 6/13/1984, § 1]
Pavements, footwalks, sidewalks, curbs, and gutters, which are52 not within
public roadways, being within the Township of Kingston, Luzerne County,
shall at all times be kept in good repair, free from snow, ice and other
obstructions interfering with the free and full use of the same, and shall be
maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. Snow and ice shall be removed
from said areas within 24 hours after the same shall have ceased to fall or
form.
§ 302. Penalties. [Adoptedx Ord. 84-3, 6/13/1984, § 2; as amended
by Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; and by Ord. 97-3, 11/12/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
52.Editorial Note: The words "within sidewalks and footwalks and . . ." have been deleted at
this point because they seemed unnecessary and confusing.
§ 301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 302
Ch:571

Part 4
BEFOULING OF STREETS
§ 401. Proper Operation of Vehicles. [Adoptedx Ord. 91-2, 2/13/
1991, § 1]
Any vehicle transporting or carrying soil, sand, stone, dirt, debris, refuse,
litter, paper, glass, metal, plastic, or other substance of any kind, including
liquids and chemicals, over streets, alleys and thoroughfares shall be so
operated as to prevent said materials from being scattered, spilled, dropped
or blown from the vehicle or from the wheels, tires, or undercarriage
thereof.
§ 402. Befouling of Streets Unlawful. [Adoptedx Ord. 91-2, 2/13/
1991, § 2]
It shall be unlawful to scatter, spill, dump or drop, or permit to be scattered,
spilled, dumped or dropped, any soil, sand, stone, dirt, debris, refuse, litter,
paper, glass, metal, plastic, or other substance of any kind, including liquids
and chemicals, from any vehicle or from the wheels, tires, or undercarriage
thereof upon the streets, alleys and thoroughfares.
§ 402A. Depositing of Snow and Ice Restricted. [Adoptedx Ord.
91-2, 2/13/1991, § 2.1; as added by Ord. 94-6, 4/13/1994, § 1]
No person, persons, firm or corporation owning or occupying any
residential or nonresidential property within the Township of Kingston shall
deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice on any sidewalk, street,
highway, or adjacent to any fire hydrant or adjacent to any public
transportation loading/unloading zone; provided, however, that snow and
ice may be piled by the Township on streets, highways or right-of-way areas
incidental to the cleaning or snow removal therefrom by the Township.
§ 403. Penalties. [Adoptedx Ord. 91-2, 2/13/1991, § 3; as amended
by Ord. 97-3, 11/12/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 401 HOME RULE CHARTER § 403
Ch:573
Chapter 22
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
§ 403 KINGSTON CODE § 403
Ch:574
Part 1
SHORT TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, APPLICATION AND
INTERPRETATION
§ 101. Short Title. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
This chapter shall be known as the "Township of Kingston Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance."
§ 102. Purpose. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
A. These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
1. To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the Township of Kingston.
2. To guide the future growth and development of Township of
Kingston, in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of the
Township of Kingston.
3. To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy; to secure safety
from fire, flood, and other danger; and to prevent overcrowding of
the land and undue congestion of population.
4. To protect the character and social and economic stability of the
Township of Kingston and to encourage the orderly and beneficial
development of the Township of Kingston.
5. To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the Township
of Kingston, and the value of buildings and improvements upon the
land and to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and
buildings.
6. To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide
adequate and efficient transportation, water supply, sewerage,
schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation, and other public
requirements and facilities.
7. To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of
land and buildings and the circulation of traffic within the Township
of Kingston, having particular regard to the avoidance of
congestion in the streets and highways, and the pedestrian traffic
movements appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings,
and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and
building lines.
8. To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for
subdivision and resubdivisions, in order to further the orderly
layout and use of land; and to insure proper legal descriptions and
monumenting of subdivided land.
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 102
Ch:575
§ 103. Authority. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
§ 104. Application of Regulations. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
9. To insure that public facilities are available and will have a
sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision.
10. To prevent the pollution of air, streams, and ponds; to assure the
adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to
encourage the wise use and management of natural resources in
order to preserve the community and value of the land.
11. To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the Township of
Kingston and to ensure appropriate development with regard to
these natural features.
12. To provide for open spaces through efficient design and layout of
the land.
13. And finally, to ensure that documents prepared as part of a land
ownership transfer fully and accurately describe the parcel of land
being subdivided, and the new parcels thus created.
A. Authority of the Board of Supervisors.
1. The Board of Supervisors of Township of Kingston is vested by law
with the control of the subdivision of land and land development
within the Township of Kingston by Act 247 of 1968, the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. The
Board of Supervisors shall retain the authority to approve all
subdivision plans and land development plans as required herein.
B. Authority of the Township Planning Commission.
1. The Planning Commission is hereby designated by the Board of
Supervisors as an agency which shall review and make
recommendations on preliminary and final subdivision and land
development plans as required herein, prior to action by the Board
of Supervisors, and, when provided by ordinance, make other
recommendations.
A. Subdivision Control.
1. No subdivision, as herein defined, of any lot, tract or parcel of land
shall be effected and no street, alley, sanitary sewer, sanitary sewer,
storm sewer, water main or other facilities in connection therewith,
shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or
travel, or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting or
to abut thereon, except in strict accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. No lot in any subdivision may be sold, and no permit to
erect, alter or repair any building upon land in a subdivision may be
issued; and no building may be erected in a subdivision, unless and
§ 102 KINGSTON CODE § 104
Ch:576
§ 105. Interpretation and Conflicts. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
until a subdivision plan has been approved and recorded; and
until the improvements required by the Board of Supervisors in
connection therewith have either been constructed or guaranteed
as herein provided in § 612.
B. Land Development Control.
1. Land development, as herein defined, must comply with the
regulations contained herein. Such compliance shall include, but
not be limited to: the filing of preliminary and final plats, the
dedication and improvement of rights-of-way, streets and roads,
and the payment of fees and charges as established by the Board of
Supervisors.
2. Land development plans shall indicate the location of each
structure and clearly define each unit and shall indicate public
easements, common areas, and improvements, all easements
appurtenant to each unit, and improvements to public rights-ofway.
Developments are subject to the zoning regulations as they
apply to use and density requirements, setbacks, parking and other
features, and shall be indicated on the land development plans.
A. Interpretation.
1. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they
shall be held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of
public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare.
2. Conflict with Public and Private Provisions.
(a) Public Provisions.
(1) Where any provision of this chapter imposes restriction
different from those imposed by any other provision of this
chapter or any other ordinance, rule, or regulation, or
other provision of law, whichever provisions are more
restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.
(b) Private Provisions.
(1) This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement,
covenant or any other private agreement or restriction,
provided that where the provisions of this chapter are
more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations
than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement
or restriction, the requirements of this chapter shall
govern. Where the provisions of the easement, covenant or
private agreement or restriction impose duties and
obligations more restrictive, or higher standards than the
requirements of these regulations, or the determinations
§ 104 HOME RULE CHARTER § 105
Ch:577
of the Board of Supervisors in approving a subdivision
or in enforcing this chapter, and such private provisions
are not inconsistent with this chapter or determinations
thereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative
and supplemental to these regulations and determinations
made thereunder.
§ 105 KINGSTON CODE § 105
Ch:578
Part 2
DEFINITIONS
§ 201. General Interpretation. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; as amended by
Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
A. It is not intended that these definitions include only words used or
referred to in this chapter. The words are included in order to facilitate
the interpretation of this chapter for administrative purposes and in
carrying out of duties by appropriate officers and by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
B. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following shall, for the purposes
of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated:
1. Words used in the present tense shall include the past and future
tense.
2. The word "person" shall include a for-profit or nonprofit firm,
association, organization, corporation, company, partnership, trust,
or individual or single proprietorship, or any other similar entity.
3. The words "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building,
shall include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used,
occupied or maintained."
4. The word "building" shall include "part thereof" and "structure."
5. The word "lot" shall include "plot," "parcel" or "tract."
6. The words "shall" and "must" are always mandatory; the words
"may" and "should" are permissive.
7. The singular number shall include the plural, and the plural
number shall include the singular.
8. Words of masculine gender shall include the feminine gender and
the neuter; words of feminine gender shall include the masculine
gender and the neuter.
9. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. If a word or term is not defined in this Part, but is defined in Chapter 22
(Subdivision and Land Development), the Chapter 22 definition shall
apply in all such cases. If a word or term is not defined by this Part or
Chapter 22, but is defined by Chapter 27 (Zoning), the Chapter 27
definition shall apply in all such cases. If a word or term is not defined in
this Part, but is defined by Chapter 8 (Floodplains), the Chapter 8
definition shall apply in all such cases. In each case, the most restrictive
definition shall apply. If a word or term is not defined by this Part,
Chapter 22, Chapter 27, or Chapter 8, the word or term shall have its
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 201
Ch:579
§ 202. Specific Words and Phrases. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; as
amended by Ord. 1989-4, 6/13/1989; by Ord. 1989-6, 11/8/1989; by
Ord. 2003-5, 5/14/2003; and by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
100-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once
every 100 years.
ALLEY — A narrow thoroughfare dedicated or uses for public passageway
up to 20 feet in width, upon which usually abut the rear of the premises, or
upon which service entrances or buildings abut, and is not generally used
as a thoroughfare by both pedestrians and vehicles, is not used for general
traffic, and is not otherwise officially designated as a street; a way which
affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
BLOCK — An area, divided into lots, and usually bounded by streets.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of Township of
Kingston, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof entirely separated from any other
structure by space or by walls in which there are no communicating doors
or windows or any similar opening and erected for the purpose of providing
support or shelter for persons, animals, things or property of any kind, and
anchored to its foundation.
CARTWAY or ROADWAY — The portion of a street or alley improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the sidewalk,
berm or shoulder.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of street center lines.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public
facilities.
plain and customary usage and meaning within the context of this
section. A standard reference dictionary should be consulted.
§ 201 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:580
CONDOMINIUM — Ownership in common with others of a parcel of land
and certain parts of a building thereon which would normally be used by all
the occupants, together with individual ownership in fee of a particular unit
or apartment in such building or on such parcel of land, and may include
dwellings, offices and other types of space in commercial and industrial
buildings or on real property.
COUNTY — The County of Luzerne, Pennsylvania.
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the
County of Luzerne.
CUL-DE-SAC — A local access street intersecting another street at one end
and terminated at the other by a vehicular turnaround.
CUT — An excavation; the difference between a point on the original ground
and designed point of lower elevation on the final grade; also, the material
removed in excavation.
DALLAS AREA MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY (DAMA) — The municipal
corporation responsible for the collection, conveyance and disposal of
sanitary wastewater at a designated treatment facility and the maintenance
of the sanitary wastewater collection and conveyance infrastructure located
within the corporate limits of the Township of Kingston.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, its
associated bureaus, and successor agencies.
DESIGNATED FLOODPLAIN AREAS — A relatively flat or low land area
adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse which is subject to partial or
complete inundation in a 100-year or greater flood as designated by FEMA.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment facility, structure or basin,
together with its appurtenant works, designed to retard, retain and/or
otherwise manage stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and
releasing it at a predetermined rate. A detention basin can be designated to
drain completely after a storm event or it can be designed to contain and
maintain a constant, permanent pool of water.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, person, partnership, association,
corporation or other for-profit or nonprofit entity, or any responsible person
therein or agent thereof, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision
of land or a land development, or undertakes any of the other regulated
activities identified in this chapter. See also "applicant."
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
filling; grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:581
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of
development plan," when used in this chapter, shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means, and includes control of runoff to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility
designed to transmit stormwater runoff, and shall include streams,
channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to an individual
or entity by which there is allowed (defined) the use of private land for
stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream
or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of
water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
DRIVEWAY — A vehicular passageway providing access between a street
and a private parking area or private garage.
DWELLING — A structure or portion thereof which is used exclusively for
human habitation.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling designed for
and occupied exclusively by one family and having no party wall in
common with an adjoining building, including mobile homes with
wheels and axle removed and placed on a permanent foundation.
A.
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING — A dwelling designed for
and occupied exclusively by one family and having no more than two
party walls in common with any other dwelling.
QUADRUPLEX — Four single-family attached dwellings in one
structure in which each dwelling has two open space exposures and
shares one or more party walls with adjoining units.
1.
TOWNHOUSE — A single-family attached dwelling in a row of at
least three such units, in which each unit has its own front and rear
access to the outside, no unit is located over another, and each unit
is separated from any other by one or more vertical party walls.
2.
B.
TWO-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling designed for and
occupied exclusively as a dwelling by two families.
TWIN — A two-family dwelling with one dwelling unit on each side
of the vertical party wall.
1.
DUPLEX — A two-family dwelling with one dwelling unit located
over the other and separated by an unpierced ceiling and floor
2.
C.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:582
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property
owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person
or entity.
ENGINEER — A registered professional engineer by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
extending from exterior wall to exterior wall except for a common
stairwell exterior to both units.
TWO-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling containing
two units with one dwelling unit being wholly or partly above the other,
which has a party wall in common with an adjacent building, and which
may or may not have a common entrance.
D.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling designed for and occupied
exclusively by more than two families.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A multifamily dwelling of three stories or
less in height, excluding residential conversions.
1.
MID-RISE APARTMENT — A multifamily dwelling of four full
stories or more in height, excluding residential conversions.
2.
E.
SEASONAL DWELLING — A single-family detached dwelling used for
seasonal and temporary living purposes during any season.
F.
DWELLING, TRANSIENT — Dwellings which are occupied as the more
or less temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or
without meals and in which, as a rule, the rooms are occupied singly
with a common entrance. This classification includes residential hotels,
lodging houses, tourist homes, boardinghouses, furnished rooming
houses, guest houses, fraternity houses and dormitories.
G.
DWELLING GROUP — One or more buildings, not more than 2 1/2
stories in height, containing dwelling units and constituting two or
three sides of a court which opens onto a street.
H.
DWELLING UNIT — Two or more rooms used exclusively for occupancy
by one person or family, containing living, sleeping, cooking, and bath
facilities for the use of and under the control of the occupants.
I.
DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY — A separate second dwelling unit
which may be located within a structure in which the principal use is
for a single-family dwelling, provided that such accessory dwelling shall
be permitted only if it conforms with the following conditions:
Shall not exceed three rooms or 800 square feet in total livable
area.
1.
2. Is not intended for occupancy by more than three persons.
J.
DWELLING UNIT, TEMPORARY — A dwelling unit providing complete
or partial housekeeping facilities for one family for short-term use.
K.
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:583
ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS — The engineering criteria of the
Township of Kingston regulating the installation of any improvement or
facility. In the absence of such Township engineering criteria, the applicable
standards of the Luzerne County Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance shall apply.
EROSION — The movement and/or removal of surface materials and/or soil
particles of the land by the action of natural elements such as water, wind
and ice, or by chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan
prepared in accordance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), Office of Water
Management, Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual,
as may be amended from time to time, indicating the necessary land
treatments and other methods of implementation designed to effectively
minimize accelerated soil erosion and sedimentation pollution and requiring
approval by the Luzerne Conservation District. "Erosion and sediment
control plan" shall have the same meaning.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed. It shall include the conditions resulting there from.
FENCE — An artificial barrier constructed with materials recognized by the
fencing industry to enclose and/or separate areas of land. Hedges or other
similar types of vegetative cover shall not be deemed to be a fence.
FILL —
FLOOD, 100-YEAR — A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also called "the 100-year flood" or "1% annual
chance flood"). The term "base flood" shall have the same meaning.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourses and adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new
location above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the
stripped surface. It shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
A.
The difference in elevation between a point on the original ground and
a designated point of higher elevation of the final grade.
B.
C. The material used to make fill.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:584
GRADING AND DRAINAGE PLAN — A plan showing all existing ground
features and proposed grading, including existing and proposed surface
and subsurface drainage facilities, described by grades, contours, and
topography.
IMPROVEMENTS — Man-made physical addition, alterations and/or
changes which become part of, placed upon or affixed to real estate and
which may otherwise be necessary to produce usable and desirable lots.
INTERIOR WALK — A right-of-way or easement for pedestrian use,
extending from a street into a block or across a block to another street.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively.
1.
A single nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure.
2.
Any nonresidential use of land, with or without structures, which
encompass two or more acres of land, including, but not limited
to, grading or the backfilling of land, earthmoving activities and
removal of vegetative cover. Agricultural uses of land and related
agricultural activities shall be specifically excluded.
3.
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants, by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
4.
An addition to an existing nonresidential building or structure,
excluding agricultural buildings and structures, that equals or
exceeds 500 square feet of gross floor area, whether proposed
initially or cumulatively.
5.
The development and/or expansion of a manufactured home park
or campground.
6.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the
Pennsylvania (PA) Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), as may be
amended from time to time.53
7.
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
C. "Land development" does not include development which involves:
53.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:585
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT LINE, FRONT — In the case of a lot abutting upon only one street, the
front lot line is the line separating such lot from such street. In the case of
any other lot, one such line shall be elected to be the front lot line for the
purpose of this chapter, provided it is so designated by the building plans
which meet the approval of the Zoning Officer.
LOT LINE, REAR — That boundary which is opposite and most distant from
the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, or any odd-shaped
lot, the rear lot line shall be determined by the Zoning Officer.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any boundary lines not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
A side lot line separating a lot from a street is an exterior side lot line. A
side lot line separating a lot from another lot, or lots, is an interior side lot
line.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot described in a deed or shown on a plan of lots
which has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Luzerne
County, Pennsylvania.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection.
LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE — An interior lot which abuts streets in both the
front and rear.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot having side lot lines which do not abut on a street.
LOT, MINIMUM WIDTH — The distance between the side lot lines
measured at a building setback line.
LOT, NONCONFORMING — A lot of record at the time of the adoption of
this Part, which, by reason of area or dimension, does not conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
1.
The addition of an accessory building, including a farm building, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
2.
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For the purposes of this subsection, an "amusement park" is
defined as a tract or area used principally as a location for
permanent amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not
apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial
plans for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
3.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:586
LOT, REVERSE-FRONTAGE — A lot extending between and having frontage
on an arterial street and a local access street, and with vehicular access
solely from the latter.
LOT, THROUGH — Any lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets or other thoroughfares.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security, other than cash, which may
be accepted by the Township of Kingston for the maintenance of any
improvements required by this chapter.
MAJOR RESUBDIVISION — Any subdivision or transfer of land, laid out
on a plan which has been approved by the Board of Supervisors, which
changes or proposes to change property lines to increase the number of
approved lots and/or public rights-of-way and/or improvements not in strict
accordance with approved plans.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — All subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivisions, including but not limited to subdivisions of five or more lots,
or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of Township
facilities or the creation of any public improvements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling
intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more
units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MANUFACTURED HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a manufactured home
park, improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single manufactured
home.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land
which has been so designated and improved that it contains two or more
manufactured home lots for the placement thereon of manufactured homes.
MARKER — A metal stake placed to designate the boundary and corners
of lots in the subdivision of land for the purpose of reference in land and
property surveys and to facilitate the sale of lots.
MINOR RESUBDIVISION — Any subdivision or transfer of land, laid out on
a plan which has been approved by the Board of Supervisors, which changes
or proposes to change property lines for lot additions not large enough to
support development.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision containing not more than four
lots fronting on an existing public street, not involving any new street
or road, or the extension of municipal facilities, or the creation of any
public improvements, not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel
or adjoining property, and not in conflict with any provision or portion of
the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, this chapter or these regulations,
excluding industrial and commercial subdivision, regardless of size. A
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:587
proposed subdivision of a lot of record which resulted from a minor
subdivision shall be classified as a major subdivision when the cumulative
number of lots, from the original lot of record and/or any resulting lot,
exceeds four lots within five years from the date of its approval. Information
stating the above requirement shall be included upon all deeds for lots
created under a minor subdivision.
MONUMENT — A concrete, stone or other permanent object placed to
designate boundary lines, corners of property, and rights-of-way of streets
and utilities, for the purpose of reference in land and property surveys.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant
to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the "Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945."54
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — Act of Assembly of July 31, 1968,
P.L. 805, as amended, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 through 11202.
OWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or
contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if authorized under the lease
to exercise the rights of the owner, or other persons having a propriety
interest in the land, shall be deemed to be an owner for the purpose of this
chapter.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be in lieu of
a requirement that certain improvements be made before the Board of
Supervisors approve a final subdivision or land development plan, including
performance bonds, escrow agreements, and other similar collateral or
surety agreements.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, or other legally
recognized entity.
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision plan or land development
plan, prepared for official recording as required by statute, to define
property rights and proposed streets and other improvements.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative subdivision plan or land development
plan, in lesser detail than a final plan, showing approximate proposed street
and lot layout as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of a final
plan.
PLAN, SKETCH — An informal plan, subdivision or land development plan,
not necessarily to scale, indicating salient existing features of a tract and its
surroundings and the general layout of the proposed subdivision.
PLAN, SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL — A plan for
controlling erosion and sediment during construction, which shall provide
all steps, including scheduling, to assure erosion and sediment control
during all phases of construction, including final stabilization.
54.Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed by 2001, June 19, P.L. 287, No. 22, § 3. See now 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:588
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Township of
Kingston.
PLAT — A map or plan of a subdivision or use indicating the location and
boundaries of individual properties.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the Board of Supervisors or Planning Commission, intended to inform
and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this
chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A public forum held pursuant to the Act of October
15, 1998 (P.L. 729, No. 93), known as the "Sunshine Act," 65 P.S. § 701 et
seq.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days, and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days, from the date of the hearing.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The 100-year flood elevation plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
RESERVE STRIP — A narrow parcel of ground having inadequate area
for building purposes separating a street or a proposed street from other
adjacent properties.
RESIDENT PROPERTY OWNER — Any individual maintaining a voting
address in the Township of Kingston, within 1,000 feet of the proposed
subdivision, owning real estate in his/her own or joint names.
RESUBDIVISION — Any subdivision or transfer of land, laid out on a plan
which has been approved by the Board of Supervisors, which changes or
proposes to change property lines and/or public rights-of-way not in strict
accordance with approved plan.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land legally dedicated for public purposes, including, but
not limited to, a street, alley or interior walk.
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs
off the surface of the land.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by moving wind, water, or gravity. Once this
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas;
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities; and
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:589
matter is deposited (or remains suspended in water) it is usually referred to
as "sediment."
SEPTIC TANK — A watertight tank in which raw sewage is broken down into
solid, liquid, and gaseous phases to facilitate further treatment and final
disposal.
SETBACK (BUILDING SETBACK LINE) — The line within a property
defining the required minimum distance between any structure and the
ultimate adjacent road right-of-way or front property line, and the line
defining side and rear yards where required.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, ON-SITE — A system of piping tanks or other
facilities serving a lot and collecting and disposing of sewage in whole or in
part into the soil.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, PUBLIC — A sanitary sewage collection
method in which sewage is carried from the site by a system of pipes to a
central treatment and disposal plant.
SHOULDER — The portion of a roadway (cartway) between the curb or
gutter and the travelway intended for emergency and parking use.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The extent of unobstructed vision, in a horizontal or
vertical plane, along a street, as defined in § 504 of this chapter.
SLOPE — The face of an embankment of cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100
feet of horizontal distance.
SOIL PERCOLATION TEST — A field test conducted to determine the
absorption capacity of soil to a specified depth in a given location for the
purpose of determining suitability of soil for on-site sewage disposal.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct or any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private.
Arterial streets are those serving large volumes of comparatively highspeed
and long-distance traffic, and include facilities classified as main
and secondary highways by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
A.
Collector streets are those streets which are defined and classified in
Chapter 22, § 504A1(b) hereof.
B.
Local access streets are those used primarily to provide access to
abutting properties.
C.
Marginal access streets are minor streets, parallel and adjacent to
arterial streets, providing access to abutting properties and control of
intersections with the arterial street.
D.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:590
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or resubdivision of a lot, tract or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the Township
Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements for
which financial security was posted pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter) of those improvements required as a condition for final approval
have been completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the
project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
SURVEYOR — A licensed surveyor registered with the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land characterized as a depression used to
carry surface water runoff.
TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which normally are fertile
soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter of humus debris.
Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called the "A Horizon."
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Kingston, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania,
also known as "Kingston Township."
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — A registered professional engineer by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Kingston Township, will designate the
Township Engineer.
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Any lot, tract or parcel of land which has not been
graded or in any other manner prepared for the construction of a building
or other improvement.
UNIT — A part of the property, structure or building designed or intended
for any type of independent use which has direct exit to a public street or
way, or to an easement or right-of-way leading to a public street or way, and
includes a proportionate undivided interest in the common elements, which
is assigned to the property, structure or building.
WATER FACILITY — Any water works, water supply works, water
distribution system or part thereof, designed, intended or constructed to
provide or distribute potable water.
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of
groundwater and surface water resources within the Township.
A half or partial street is a street generally parallel and adjacent to a
property line having a lesser right-of-way width than normally required
for satisfactory improvements and use of the street.
E.
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:591
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook, creek
or channel or ditch for collection and conveyance of stormwater runoff,
whether natural or man-made; a defined channel bed in which runoff flows
in a definite direction or course; includes millrace, canal, conduit, gully,
ravine or wash and any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by
reason of overflow of floodwaters.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:592
Part 3
PROCEDURES
§ 301. General Procedure. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; as amended by
Ord. 1989-4, 6/13/1989]
A. Classification of Subdivision.
1. Whenever any subdivision of land or land development is proposed,
before any contract is made for the sale of any part thereof, and
before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed
subdivision or land development shall be granted, the owner, or his
authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval of such
proposed subdivision or land development in accordance with the
following procedures for subdivision and land development.
B. Pre-Application Consultation.
1. Prior to filing an application for approval of a subdivision or land
development within Township of Kingston, the owner or his
authorized agent shall meet with the Zoning Officer for an official
classification of his proposed subdivision or land development. The
Zoning Officer shall determine whether the proposal shall be
classified as a minor subdivision, a major subdivision or a land
development. At this time, the Zoning Officer shall advise the
owner or his authorized agent as to which of the procedures
contained herein must be followed.
C. Official Filing Date.
1. For the purpose of these regulations, the official filing date shall be
the date of the regular meeting of the Planning Commission next
following the date the application and plans are received in the
Municipal Building. Provided that should said regular meeting
occur more than 30 days following the submission of the
application, the official filing date shall be the 30th day following
the day the application has been submitted.
2. Subdivision plans must be submitted at least three weeks in
advance of the Regularly Scheduled Planning Commission meeting.
3. Upon receipt of an application for subdivision or land development
approval the Zoning Officer shall affix to the application both the
date of submittal and the official filing date.
D. Luzerne County Planning Commission Review.
1. All plans shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Luzerne County
Planning Commission in accordance with its then prevailing rules
and regulations. The Township of Kingston shall forward to the
subdivider a copy of any report of the County Planning
Commission.
§ 301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 302
Ch:593
§ 302. Fee Schedule. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; as amended by Ord.
1989-6, 11/8/1989; and by Ord. 94-16, 11/9/1994]
§ 303. (Reserved)55
A. All filing, inspection and engineering fees shall be submitted to the
Township of Kingston.
B. Plan Filing Fee. A filing fee shall accompany the preliminary plan. No
application shall be accepted or acted upon unless payment is made to
the Township of Kingston. The Board of Supervisors shall create by
resolution a schedule of fees to be paid by the subdivider or land
developer to defray the cost of administering and processing of plans.
The schedule of fees may be changed from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors.
C. Review Fees.
1. Review fees shall include the reasonable and necessary charges by
the Township's professional consultants or engineer for review and
report to the Township, and shall be set by resolution. Such review
fees shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and
customary charges by the Township engineer or consultant for
similar service in the community, but in no event shall the fees
exceed the rate or cost charged by the engineer or consultant to
the Township when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed
on applicants.
2. In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review
fees, the applicant shall, within 10 days of the billing date, notify
the Township that such fees are disputed, in which case the
Township shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land
development application due to the applicant's request over
disputed fees.
3. In the event that the Township and the applicant cannot agree on
the amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary,
then the fees shall be recalculated and recertified by another
professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and
chosen mutually by the Township and the applicant or developer.
The estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair
and reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event that a
third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer
shall be paid equally by the Township and the applicant or
developer.
4. Expenses associated with enforcement of the Toby Creek
Watershed Stormwater Management Study and Ordinance
[Chapter 26] shall be assessed to applicable land development and
subdivision activities covered by this ordinance and referenced in
Appendix B, thereof [Chapter 26].
§ 302 KINGSTON CODE § 304
Ch:594
§ 304. Major Subdivision and Land Development Procedure. [Ord.
86-5, 1/14/1987; as amended by Ord. 2003-5, 5/14/2003]
A. Sketch Plan. Prospective subdividers and developers are strongly urged
to discuss possible development sites with the Planning Commission
prior to submission of a preliminary plan. A sketch plan shall be
presented for review not less than 10 days prior to the regular meeting
of the Planning Commission at which it is to be considered. Submission
of a sketch plan will not constitute a formal filing of a subdivision or
land development plan with the Board of Supervisors. Sketch plans
should include those items listed in Part 4, Plan Requirements.
B. Preliminary Plan.
1. Submission of Preliminary Plans.
(a) The preliminary plan and all information and procedures
relating thereto shall in all respects be in compliance with the
applicable provisions of this chapter. It is the responsibility of
the subdivider or developer to coordinate his plans with the
respective private and public service agencies.
(b) The application form shall be accompanied by the requisite fee
as set forth in § 302 of this chapter and by not less than three
copies of all required material and not less than nine prints of
the preliminary plan of the subdivision or development as
required by Township resolution from time to time. Plans must
be submitted at least three weeks in advance of meetings.
(c) The applicant shall forward two copies of the preliminary plans
and two copies of the required materials to the Luzerne County
Planning Commission and such other agencies as he deems
appropriate for review and comment. [Amended by Ord. No.
2018-3, 12/12/2018]
(d) The Zoning Officer shall forward the remaining copies of the
preliminary plan and required materials to the Planning
Commission. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
(e) When applicable, the application form shall be accompanied by
a Planning Module for Land Development, as required by the
Pennsylvania DEP. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/
2018]
(f) The application form shall be accompanied by one copy of the
current deed of record for each parcel of land being subdivided
or affected by the proposed land development.
55.Editor's Note: Former § 303, Minor Subdivision Procedure (Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987), was
repealed 12/12/2018 by Ord. No. 2018-3.
§ 304 HOME RULE CHARTER § 304
Ch:595
(g) The applicant shall submit one copy of the preliminary plan to
DAMA for review and request approval from DAMA. [Added
by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
2. Review of Preliminary Plans.
(a) In cases where the subdivision or land development adjoins an
existing or proposed state highway or has proposed streets
entering on to state highways, the developer shall submit the
plans to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for
review.
(b) The Planning Commission will consider the plan to determine if
it meets the standards set forth in this chapter and the
Township Zoning Ordinance.
(c) The Planning Commission shall act on the Preliminary Plan
within 60 days of the official filing date, but in any event shall
act on the plan in time for the Board of Supervisors to render
their decision within 90 days from the official filing date. In the
event that any variance from this chapter is requested by the
applicant or is deemed necessary for approval, the variance
and the reasons for its necessity shall be entered into the
records of the Board of Supervisors.
3. Planning Commission Recommendation.
(a) The Planning Commission shall recommend whether the
Preliminary Plan shall be approved, approved with
modifications, or disapproved, and shall notify the Board of
Supervisors in writing thereof, including, if disapproved, a
statement of reasons for such action.
(b) In making its recommendation, the Planning Commission shall
consider the recommendations of the Zoning Officer, Township
staff, DAMA, the Luzerne County Planning Commission,
interested residents, and the recommendations of any agency
or agencies from which a review was requested under
§ 304B1(c) of this chapter. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3,
12/12/2018]
4. Zoning Officer Review.
(a) All plans shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer, which
approval shall precede the transmission of such plans to the
Board of Supervisors.
5. Resubmission of Preliminary Plans.
(a) A revised plan submitted after disapproval shall be considered
and processed as a new plan submission.
6. Approval of Preliminary Plans.
§ 304 KINGSTON CODE § 304
Ch:596
(a) The Board of Supervisors shall act on the preliminary plan
within 90 days of the official filing date. Failure to do so shall
be deemed an approval. Before acting on a preliminary plan,
the Board of Supervisors may hold a hearing thereon after
public notice and deliberation. [Amended by Ord. No.
2018-3, 12/12/2018]
(b) The Board of Supervisors shall notify the applicant of its
decision to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove
the preliminary plan in writing. Such notice shall be given to
the applicant in person or mailed to him at his last known
address not later than 15 days following the decision. If the
plan is approved with conditions or disapproved, the Board of
Supervisors shall specify in their notice the conditions which
must be met and/or the defects found in the plan, and the
requirements which have not been met, including specific
reference to provisions of any statute or ordinance which have
not been fulfilled.
(c) Approval of the preliminary plan shall constitute approval of
the subdivision or land development as to the character and
intensity of development, the arrangement and approximate
dimensions of streets, lots, and other planned features. The
approval binds the subdivider or developer to the general
scheme of the subdivision shown, unless a revised preliminary
plan is submitted, and permits the subdivider to proceed with
final detailed design of improvements, to arrange for
guarantee to cover installation of the improvements, and to
prepare the final plan. Approval of the preliminary plan does
not authorize the sale of lots nor the recording of the
preliminary plan.
(d) No grading shall take place before preliminary approval is
given to the plans submitted to the Board of Supervisors.
C. Final Plan.
1. Submission of Final Plans.
(a) After the subdivider or developer has received official
notification from the Board of Supervisors that the preliminary
plan has been approved, he must submit a final plan in
accordance with the provisions of § 508 of the Municipalities
Planning Code.
(b) The final plan shall conform in all respects with the approved
preliminary plan. If it does not, the plan submitted shall be
considered as a revised preliminary plan and shall be
forwarded by the Zoning Officer to the Planning Commission
for review and recommendation as a preliminary plan.
§ 304 HOME RULE CHARTER § 304
Ch:597
(c) The subdivider or developer must submit with the final plan a
guarantee for the installation of improvements which meets
the requirements of Part 6.
(d) The application form shall be accompanied by the requisite
inspection and engineering fees as set forth in § 302C.
(e) Documented approval of the Planning Module for Land
Development by the Pennsylvania DEP shall be part of the
requisite materials accompanying the final plan submission.
[Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
(f) The subdivider or developer shall submit a reproducible
original of the plans, nine prints of the final subdivision or land
development plans and at least three copies of all other
required information.
(g) Upon receipt of the final plan, the Zoning Officer shall forward
the original plans and six copies of the plans and two copies of
all other material to the Luzerne County Planning Commission
for review and recommendation; two copies of the original plan
and two copies of all other materials to the Luzerne County
Conservation District for review and comments; two copies of
the original plans and two copies of all other material to the
Luzerne County Planning Commission; two copies of the
original plans to Dallas Area Municipal Authority; and two
copies of the original plans and all other materials to such
other agencies whose recommendations would be pertinent to
the processing of the plan. All copies of original plans and
other materials must be delivered to Luzerne County Planning
Commission and, if applicable, to the Luzerne County
Engineering Department by the applicant. All copies of the
original plans and other materials must be delivered to Dallas
Area Municipal Authority by the applicant. [Amended by Ord.
No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
2. Review of Final Plans.
(a) The Planning Commission will review the plan and requisite
materials for compliance with the approved preliminary plan
and for conformance to the requirements of this chapter.
(b) The Planning Commission shall act on the final plan within 60
days of the official filing date.
3. Planning Commission Recommendation.
(a) The Planning Commission shall recommend whether the final
plan shall be approved, approved with modifications, or
disapproved, and shall notify the Board of Supervisors in
writing thereof, including, if approved with modifications or
disapproved, a statement of reasons for such action.
§ 304 KINGSTON CODE § 304
Ch:598
(b) In making its recommendation, the Planning Commission shall
consider the recommendations of the Zoning Officer and staff,
DAMA, the Luzerne County Planning Commission, the Luzerne
County Conservation District, PennDOT, and the
recommendations of any agency or agencies from which a
review was requested under § 304C1(g) hereof. [Amended by
Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
4. Zoning Officer Review.
(a) All plans shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer, which
approval shall precede the transmission of such plans to the
Board of Supervisors.
5. Resubmission of Final Plans.
(a) A revised plan submitted after disapproval shall be considered
and processed as a new plan submission.
6. Approval of Final Plans.
(a) The Board of Supervisors will not take official action to
approve a final plan unless it is accompanied by a guarantee
for the installation of improvements which meet the
requirements of Part 6.
(b) A requirement that the land developer show a current
certificate of liability insurance for a minimum of $1,000,000
with Kingston Township named as co-insured, before any
construction work begins, and for the duration of the project.
(c) The Board of Supervisors shall take action within 90 calendar
days from the official filing date of the final plan. Failure to do
so shall be deemed an approval.
(d) The Board of Supervisors shall notify the applicant in writing of
its decision to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove,
the final plan. Such notice shall be given to the applicant in
person or mailed to him at his last known address not later
than 15 days following the decision. If the final plan is
disapproved, the Board of Supervisors shall specify the defects
found in the plan and the requirements which have not been
met, including specific reference to the provisions of any
statute or ordinance which have not been fulfilled.
(e) If the final plan is approved subject to conditions, the Board of
Supervisors shall not endorse the plan until all of the
conditions have been met.
(f) If the Board of Supervisors approves the final plan or grant a
conditional approval, they shall set the amount of bonding or
other security necessary to guarantee the construction of
§ 304 HOME RULE CHARTER § 304
Ch:599
improvements and community facilities and shall state such
amount in the notice to the applicant.
(g) When an application for approval of a plat, whether
preliminary or final has been approved without conditions or
approved by the applicant's acceptance of conditions, no
subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or
other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to affect
adversely the right of the applicant to commence and to
complete any aspect of the approved development in
accordance with the terms of such approval within five years
from such approval.
(h) Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the
aforesaid five-year period shall be counted from the date of the
preliminary approval. In the case of any doubt as to the terms
of a preliminary approval, the terms shall be construed in the
light of the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as
they stood at the time when the application for such approval
was duly filed.
7. Recording of Final Plans.
(a) Upon approval of the final plan, the subdivider or developer
shall prepare one transparent reproduction of the original final
plan on stable plastic base film and no less than four prints
thereof which shall be submitted to the Township of Kingston
not later than 30 days after approval. These plans, upon
satisfaction of all conditions attached to the approval, will be
signed by the Board of Supervisors. A copy of the signed final
plan shall be recorded in the office of the Luzerne County
Recorder of Deeds within 90 days after approval of the final
plan or the approval of the Board of Supervisors shall be null
and void. The final plan must be recorded before proceeding
with the sale of lots or construction of buildings.
(b) Recording the final plan shall be an irrevocable offer to
dedicate all streets and other public ways to public use, and to
dedicate or reserve all park reservations and other public
areas to public use unless reserved by the subdivider as
hereinafter provided. The approval of the final plan shall not
impose any duty upon the Board of Supervisors or Township of
Kingston concerning maintenance or improvements by
ordinance or resolution.
(c) The subdivider shall place a notation on the final plan if there is
no offer of dedication to the public of streets and certain
designated public areas, in which event the title to such areas
shall remain with the owner, and the Township of Kingston
shall assume no responsibility for improvement or
§ 304 KINGSTON CODE § 304
Ch:600
§ 305. Resubdivision Procedure. [Ord. 2003-5, 5/14/2003]
maintenance thereof; which fact shall be noted on the final
plan.
D. Lot Ownership Transfer. Upon initial transfer of land ownership from
the developer and or landowner to purchaser(s), a complete set of final
subdivision plans shall be provided to the purchaser(s).
1. Major Resubdivision. A major resubdivision shall be deemed to be a
major subdivision and shall follow the procedure applying thereto.
2. Minor Resubdivision. A minor resubdivision shall be deemed to be a
minor subdivision and shall follow the procedure applying thereto.
§ 304 HOME RULE CHARTER § 305
Ch:601

Part 4
PLAN REQUIREMENTS
§ 401. Sketch Plan. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
A. Submission; Discussion. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/
2018]
1. Prior to the filing of an application for review and approval of a
proposed subdivision or land development, it is recommended that
the developer submit a sketch plan to the Kingston Township
Planning Commission for advice on the requirements necessary to
achieve conformity with the standards and other provisions of this
chapter, as well as to alert the developer to other factors pertinent
to the design and effectuation of the subdivision or land
development. The submission of a sketch plan shall not constitute
the filing of an application for approval of a subdivision or land
development.
2. The developer or his agent or representative should be present to
discuss any such proposal with the Planning Commission. No
formal action will be taken on a sketch plan submission, but the
Commission shall, after review and evaluation of the proposal,
indicate to the developer or his agent its findings and
recommendations regarding the preparation of preliminary or final
plans. The Commission shall complete its review as promptly as
possible. One copy of the sketch plan shall be left with the
Commission for its files. The review of a sketch plan shall not
authorize the recording of the plan or the conveyance of lots.
B. Data furnished in a sketch plan shall be at the discretion of the
subdivider. For fullest usefulness, it is suggested that a sketch should
include the following information:
1. Tract boundaries.
2. Location within the Township of Kingston.
3. North point.
4. Streets on and adjacent to the tract.
5. Significant topographical physical features including floodplains if
any.
6. Proposed general street layout.
7. Proposed general lot layout, including location of proposed open
space and other preservation areas.
C. A subdivision sketch plan need not be to scale nor are precise
dimensions required.
§ 401 HOME RULE CHARTER § 402
Ch:603
§ 402. Preliminary Plan. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; as amended by Ord.
1989-6, 11/8/1989; by Ord. 90-9, 12/12/1990; and by Ord. 2003-5, 5/
14/2003]
A. The preliminary plan shall be at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the
inch. Plans shall be on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches or 22 inches by 36
inches.
B. The preliminary plan shall show or be accompanied by the following
information:
1. Proposed subdivision or land development name or identifying title.
2. Township name.
3. North point, scale and date of preparation.
4. Name and addresses of the owners of record of land included as
part of the subdivision or of land directly affected and of
subdividers or land developer, including references to deed book,
volume and page of current legal owners.
5. Name and address of the registered engineer or surveyor or
responsible for the preparation of the subdivision or land
development plan, including a certification of the accuracy of the
plan and its conformance and/or compliance with the provisions
and requirements of the Kingston Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
6. Tract boundaries, with bearings and distances.
7. Existing contours at vertical interval of two feet, if the general
slope of the site is less than 15% and vertical intervals of five feet, if
the general slope of the site is greater than 15%.
8. Datum to which contour elevations refer shall be United States
Coast and Geodetic Survey datum. [Amended by Ord. No.
2018-3, 12/12/2018]
9. All existing watercourses, floodplains or tree masses and other
significant natural features.
10. All existing buildings with postal address numbers, sewers, water
mains, culverts, petroleum or petroleum products lines, fire
hydrants and other significant man-made features.
11. All existing streets on or adjacent to the tract, including name,
right-of-way width and cartway width.
12. All existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way, and the
purpose for which the easements or rights-of-way have been
established.
§ 402 KINGSTON CODE § 402
Ch:604
13. Location and width of all proposed streets, alleys, rights-of-way and
easements; proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and
areas of all lots; proposed minimum setback line for each street;
playgrounds, public buildings, public areas and parcels of land
proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use; proposed
street names; proposed watercourses and detention ponds;
proposed phasing of land development; typical section of all
streets; preliminary profiles and specifications for street
improvements.
14. Total acreage, number of lots, average lot size, density, open space
and existing zoning classification.
15. Names of owners of all adjoining properties and the names of all
abutting subdivisions.
16. A location map, at a scale of minimum 400 feet to the inch
maximum 2,000 feet to the inch, showing the proposed
development and adjoining areas, will be required.
17. Where the preliminary plan covers only a part of the subdivider's
entire holding, a sketch shall be submitted of the prospective street
layout for the remainder.
18. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant where applicable as
required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537, as
amended), to prepare the application for sewage facilities planning
module mailer for exemptions or for sewage facilities planning
module components. The completed module forms shall accompany
the preliminary plan submission.
19. When on-lot water supply is proposed, the location of all well sites
shall be shown.
20. When required by § 512 of this chapter, a proposed soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall be submitted.
21. When required, the information required by § 513 of this chapter,
which may be a separate plan, shall be submitted.
22. Block for signatures of the reviewing agency membership and date
of recommendation, as per example in Appendix A.
23. Block for signatures of the Board of Supervisors and date of
approval, as per example in Appendix A.
24. Subdivisions and land development plans shall show building
locations, parking areas, location of pads for dumpsters, and
locations of LP gas tanks of 500 pounds or greater.
25. A letter from the subdivider specifically requesting any
modifications from the regulations herein established and citing
the reasons for same.
§ 402 HOME RULE CHARTER § 402
Ch:605
§ 403. Final Plan. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; as amended by Ord.
1989-6, 11/8/1989; by Ord. 90-9, 12/12/1990; by Ord. 1993-1, 3/10/
1993; and by Ord. 2003-5, 5/14/2003]
26. Preliminary profiles and other data concerning the installation of
sanitary and storm sewage systems and water distribution systems.
27. Proposed utilities, including sanitary and storm sewers, drainage
facilities, water lines, gas mains, electric utilities, and other
facilities. Size or capacity of each should be shown and the location
of or distance to each existing utility indicated.
28. Existing plotting of adjacent land, including all existing sewers,
water mains, culverts, gas lines, and fire hydrants, on the adjoining
roadways. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
29. Areas subject to periodic flooding including the 100-year
floodplain.
30. Other features or conditions which would affect the subdivision
favorably or adversely.
31. A copy of the protective covenants or private reconstruction to be
incorporated in the deeds.
32. One copy of the results and locations of percolation tests as
performed by the local sewage enforcement officer.
33. Water Supply. If water is to be provided by means other than
private wells owned and maintained by the individual owners of
lots within the subdivision or development, applicants shall present
evidence to the Board of Supervisors that the subdivision is to be
supplied by a certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative
association of lot owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority
or utility. A copy of a Certificate of Public Convenience from the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application for such
certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment or
agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate,
shall be acceptable.
34. One copy of each of the approved Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation highway occupancy permit, DEP encroachment/
obstruction permit, and the United States Army Corps of Engineers
wetland permits. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
35. Two copies of a wetlands delineation report prepared by an
approved wetlands consultant prepared in accordance with the
Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdiction
Wetlands. The report must include a field survey prepared by a
registered surveyor and a statement by the wetlands consultant
that the surveyor's map has been reviewed by the consultant and is
in general conformity with the wetland delineation.
§ 402 KINGSTON CODE § 403
Ch:606
A. Final plans shall be on sheets of 22 inches by 36 inches or 24 inches by
36 inches, printed in black and white. No color printing on final plans is
permitted. Where necessary to avoid sheets larger than the size
prescribed, final plans shall be drawn in two or more sections. The plan
shall be drawn and annotated in accordance with the "Subdivision Plan
Form" shown as Appendix A hereto.56 The final plan shall be at a scale of
not more than 100 feet to the inch. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3,
12/12/2018]
B. The final plan shall include or be accompanied by the following:
1. Subdivision name or identifying title.
2. Township of Kingston name.
3. North point, scale, date of preparation, and date of preliminary
plan approval.
4. Name and address of the owner(s) of record of land included as
part of the subdivision or of land directly affected and of subdivider
or land developer, including reference to deed book, volume and
page of current legal owner(s).
5. Name, address and embossed seal of the registered professional
engineer or surveyor responsible for the preparation of the
subdivision or land development plan, including a certification of
the accuracy of the plan and its conformance and/or compliance
with the provisions and requirements of this chapter.
6. Tract boundaries with bearings and distances, closing with an error
of not more than one foot per 5,000 feet.
7. All existing streets and driveways on or adjacent to the tract,
including name, right-of-way width, cartway width, street lines, lot
lines, rights-of-way, easements and areas dedicated or proposed to
be dedicated to public use.
8. Sufficient data, including bearing and length, to locate every street,
lot, easement, right-of-way and boundary line upon the ground.
9. The length of all straight lines, radii, lengths of curves and tangent
bearings for each street.
10. All dimensions and angles or bearings of the lines of each lot and of
each lot proposed to be dedicated to public use.
11. The proposed building setback line for each street and the
proposed placement of each building, except placement for singlefamily
dwellings. Setback lines shall be shown on plan including
dimensioning in relationship to property lines as well as listed
under site data.
56.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 403 HOME RULE CHARTER § 403
Ch:607
12. Location and width of all rights-of-way, easements, and the purpose
for which the rights-of-way and easements were established.
13. Location of all sanitary and storm sewer easements, and location of
all watercourses and detention ponds, whether public or private.
14. All dimensions shall be shown in feet and hundredths of a foot.
15. Lots within a subdivision shall be numbered and their area shown
within the lot boundaries; building postal address numbers, both
existing and proposed, as assigned by the United States Postal
Service and the Luzerne County 911 Center, shall also be shown
therein. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
16. Typical section for all proposed streets.
17. Permanent reference monuments shall be shown on the plan, thus "
", and designated existing or proposed. Not less than two
monuments shall be shown except as otherwise required by the
Planning Commission based on the total number of angle points
shown on the plan. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
18. Names of the adjoining subdivisions shall be shown.
19. Names of the owners of any adjoining unplotted land shall be
shown.
20. An approval block providing for the signatures of the reviewing
agency and the Board of Supervisors and the date of approval, as
per example in Appendix A.
21. An appropriate statement signed by owner unequivocally
indicating his intention either: (a) to dedicate for public use all
streets, roads, easements and rights-of-way so intended and
designated; or (b) to reserve as private any streets, roads,
easements or rights-of-way intended not to be dedicated for public
use.
22. A statement of acknowledgement in legal form, executed by a
Notary, stating that the subdivider is the owner or equitable owner
of the land proposed for subdivision, and that the subdivision as
shown on the final plan is the act and deed of the subdivider and
that it is desired to record the same.
23. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant where applicable as
required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537, as
amended) to prepare the application for sewage facilities planning
module mailer for exemptions or for the sewage facilities planning
module components. The complete module forms shall accompany
the preliminary plan submission.
24. The drainage plans shall include existing and proposed two feet
interval contours in accordance with the final roadway profiles.
§ 403 KINGSTON CODE § 403
Ch:608
25. A grading and drainage plan, including hydrologic and hydraulic
calculations as prepared and sealed by a licensed professional
Engineer.
26. A time schedule in accordance with § 610.
27. Subdivision and escrow agreement by the developer in a format
supplied by the Township.
C. Improvement and Construction Plan.
1. The improvement construction plan(s) shall be at any of the
following scales:
Horizontal Vertical
50'/inch 5'/inch or 10'/inch
40'/inch 4'/inch
100'/inch 10'/inch
2. It shall show the following:
(a) Subdivision name or identifying title.
(b) North point, scale and date.
(c) Name of the owner of record, the subdivider, and telephone
numbers.
(d) Name and seal of the registered professional engineer or
surveyor responsible for the plan.
(e) Center line of streets with bearings, distances, curve data,
sight distances and stations corresponding to the profile.
(f) Right-of-way and curblines of streets with radii at
intersections.
(g) Beginning and end of proposed construction of streets.
(h) Tie-ins by courses and distances to intersection of all public
roads with their names and widths.
(i) Location of all monuments with reference to them.
(j) Property lines and ownership of abutting properties.
(k) Location and size of all drainage structures, public utilities,
street name signs, and shade trees.
(l) Location and size of storm and/or sanitary sewer lines with
stations corresponding to the profile.
§ 403 HOME RULE CHARTER § 403
Ch:609
(m) Location of storm and/or sanitary sewer manholes or inlets
with grade between and elevation of flow line and top of each
manhole or inlet.
(n) Property lines and ownership, with details of easements where
required.
(o) Beginning and end of proposed construction of storm and/or
sanitary sewer.
(p) Location of storm and/or sanitary sewer laterals, Y's, etc.
(q) Location of all other drainage facilities and public utilities.
(r) Profile of existing ground surface along center line of street.
(s) Proposed center line grade of streets with percent of grade on
tangents and elevations at 50 feet intervals, including grades
at intersections, control points, etc.
(t) Vertical curve data of streets, including length and elevations
and sight distance as required by Engineer.
(u) Profile of existing ground surface with elevations at top of
manholes or inlets.
(v) Profile of storm drain or sewer, showing size of pipe, grade,
cradle (if any), manhole or inlet locations, elevations at flow
line.
D. Grading and Drainage Plan, prepared in accordance with §§ 506 and
507 of this chapter.
E. Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan when required by § 512 of
this chapter. Also, at the discretion of the Planning Commission, a plan
note stating that the owner of any lot is responsible for their Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan when earth moving activities
are begun.
F. When required, the information required by § 513 of this chapter, which
may be a separate plan, shall be submitted.
G. A copy of final deed restrictions or protective covenants.
H. A copy of metes and bounds description for any and all proposed
easements or deeds to be granted, including but not limited to, storm
drainage easements, recreation easements or dedication, or
agreements to pay a fee in lieu thereof, and sanitary sewer easement.
I. Written agreement of land developer or subdivider in a form approved
by the Board of Supervisors including: an agreement to construct in
form and substance agreeable to the Township of Kingston required
improvements including but not limited to streets, curbs, sidewalks,
and storm drainage facilities.
§ 403 KINGSTON CODE § 403
Ch:610
§ 404. As-Built Plans. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; as amended by Ord.
No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
J. An approved DEP Planning Module where on-lot sewage disposal
systems or community treatment systems are proposed, or written
proof of the DEP's approval for the extension of existing sanitary sewer
service. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
K. If required, a highway occupancy permit or review and written approval
by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
L. Approval by the United States Postal Service and Luzerne County 911
Center of street names. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
M. Plans of bridges and other improvements shall contain sufficient
information to provide complete working plans for the proposed
construction.
N. Typical cross-section of streets showing:
1. Right-of-way width and location and width of paving.
2. Type, thickness and crown of paving.
3. Type and size of curb.
4. Grading of sidewalk area.
5. Location, width, type, and thickness of sidewalks.
6. Typical location of sewers and utilities with sizes.
O. Water Supply. If water is to be provided by means other than private
wells owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the
subdivision or development, applicants shall present evidence to the
Board of Supervisors that the subdivision is to be supplied by a certified
public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners, or by a
municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a certificate of
public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or
an application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a
commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is
appropriate, shall be acceptable.
A. After final plan approval and upon completion of all required
improvements, the applicant shall submit an as-built plan prepared,
signed, and sealed by a registered professional engineer or surveyor.
B. The as-built plan shall be provided on a reproducible medium and
drawn to the same scale as the approved final plan and shall be
reviewed and approved by the Township Engineer.
C. Said plan shall indicate the actual location, dimensions, and/or
elevations of all completed improvements, including but not limited to:
§ 403 HOME RULE CHARTER § 404
Ch:611
1. Monuments and markers.
2. The location of the cartway and curb, for both sides of each street.
3. Sanitary sewer main, manholes, rim and invert elevations, and
laterals.
4. Storm sewers, inlets, rim and invert elevations, and culverts.
5. Water mains, service lines, valves, and fire hydrants.
6. Streetlights.
7. Landscaping and screen planting.
8. Berms.
9. Permanent sedimentation, erosion control, and stormwater
management structures with as-built storage volume and outlet
structure elevations and as-built elevations for all detention/
retention basins or other storage structures.
10. All easements and rights-of-way.
11. All buried utilities, gas, electric, cable, water, sewer, etc.
D. The as-built plan shall be submitted in complete and accurate form
prior to the final release of security funds being withheld, as provided in
this chapter.
E. Completion of as-built drawings in accordance with this chapter shall
not relieve the applicant from any responsibility as may be required by
any municipal authority having jurisdiction over the subject premises.
§ 404 KINGSTON CODE § 404
Ch:612
Part 5
GENERAL DESIGN PRINCIPLES
§ 501. Application. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
The following principles, standards and requirements will be applied by
the Board of Supervisors and Planning Commission to evaluating plans
for proposed subdivision or land developments. The standards and
requirements outlined herein shall be considered minimum standards and
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare. Where literal compliance with the standards herein
specified is clearly impractical, the Board of Supervisors may modify or
adjust the standards to permit reasonable utilization of property while
securing substantial conformance with the objectives of this chapter.
§ 502. Land Requirements. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
§ 503. Street System. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; as amended by Ord.
90-9, 12/12/1990]
A. Land shall be suited to the purposes for which it is to be subdivided or
developed.
B. Land which is unsuitable for development because of hazards to life,
safety, health, or property, shall not be subdivided or developed until
such hazards have been eliminated or unless adequate safeguards
against such hazards are provided for in the Subdivision or Land
Development Plan. Land included as having unsuitable characteristics
would be the following:
1. Land subject to flooding or which has a high ground water table.
2. Land which, if developed, will create or aggravate a flooding
condition upon other land.
3. Land subject to subsidence.
4. Land subject to underground fires.
5. Land containing significant areas of slopes greater than 10%.
6. Land which, because of topography or means of access, is
considered hazardous by the Board of Supervisors.
7. Land which is subject to ground pollution or contamination.
C. Proposed subdivisions of land developments shall be coordinated with
existing nearby neighborhoods so that the community as a whole may
develop harmoniously.
D. Proposed land uses shall conform to the Township Zoning Ordinance.
§ 501 HOME RULE CHARTER § 503
Ch:613
A. Proposed streets shall be properly related to such street plans or parts
thereof as have been officially prepared and adopted by the Township of
Kingston and shall be coordinated with existing or proposed streets in
adjoining subdivisions or land developments.
B. Proposed streets shall further conform to such county and state road
and highway plans as have been prepared, adopted or filed as
prescribed by law.
C. Streets shall be related to the topography so as to produce usable lots
and acceptable grades.
D. Access shall be given to all lots and portions of the tract in the
subdivisions or land development and to adjacent unsubdivided
territory unless the topography clearly indicates that such connection is
not feasible. Streets giving such access shall be improved to the limits
of the subdivision or land development and shall be improved to
Township specifications. Reserve strips and land-locked areas shall not
be created.
E. Streets shall be laid out to preserve the integrity of their design. Local
access streets shall be laid out to discourage their use by through traffic
and, where possible, arterial streets shall be designed for use by
through traffic.
F. Where the proposed subdivision or land development contains or is
adjacent to an existing or proposed arterial street or a highway
designated as a Limited Access Highway by the appropriate highway
authorities, provisions shall be made for marginal access streets at a
distance acceptable for the appropriate use of the land between the
arterial street or Limited Access Highway and the marginal access
streets. The Board of Supervisors may also require rear service areas,
double frontage lots, or such other treatment as will provide protection
for abutting properties, reduction in the number of intersections with
primary streets, and separation of local and through traffic.
G. Half or partial streets will not be permitted in new subdivisions or land
developments except where essential to reasonable subdivision or
development of a tract in conformance with the other requirements and
standards of this chapter and where, in addition, satisfactory assurance
for dedication of the remaining part of the street can be secured.
H. Wherever a tract to be subdivided or developed borders an existing half
or partial street, the entire street shall be shown on the plan.
I. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3,
12/12/2018]
J. New reserve strips, including those controlling access to streets, shall
be forbidden.
§ 503 KINGSTON CODE § 503
Ch:614
§ 504. Street Design. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; as amended by Ord.
1989-4, 6/13/1989; by Ord. 2003-5, 5/14/2003; by Ord. 2003-11, 2/
11/2004; by Ord. 2006-12, 12/13/2006; and by Ord. 2006-13, 12/13/
2006]
K. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets
in a proposed subdivision or land development shall be made to provide
for the proper projection of streets into the unsubdivided land.
L. Street names shall be coordinated with existing or platted street names,
and if a new street is a continuation of or is aligned with an existing or
platted street, it shall bear the same name as the existing or platted
street.
M. No street shall be laid out or opened which extends to or crosses any
boundary between the Township of Kingston and any other municipality
except with the specific approval of the Board of Supervisors and upon
such condition as the Board of Supervisors may impose. If the street is
proposed to serve a commercial area, an industrial area or a residential
area of 50 dwelling units or more, located in another municipality, the
street shall not be approved unless the area is also served by a street in
the other municipality and unless the relevant traffic facilities of the
Township of Kingston are adequate to handle the anticipated volume.
N. All streets shall have a uniform width throughout their respective
lengths except where otherwise required by the Board of Supervisors
pursuant to Subsection B3 of § 504.
O. Guide rail shall be installed when all of the following conditions exist:
[Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
1. The embankment slope exceeds 2 1/2:1.
2. The top of slope is within five feet of the right-of-way line.
3. The vertical height of the embankment, measured from the edge of
pave to the bottom.
P. Where guide rail is required, it shall be installed in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication 408.
A. Street Classification.
1. Three functional classifications are hereby established for the
streets and roads in Township of Kingston: [Amended by Ord. No.
2018-3, 12/12/2018]
(a) Arterial. This classification includes highways which provide
intracounty or intermunicipal traffic of substantial volumes
where the average trip lengths are usually five miles or
greater. Generally, these highways should accommodate
operating speeds of 35 to 55 miles per hour. (See: DWG No.
DD-04.57)
§ 503 HOME RULE CHARTER § 504
Ch:615
(b) Collector. This classification is intended to include those
highways which connect local access highways to arterial
highways. They may serve intracounty and intra-Township
traffic. They may serve as traffic corridors connecting
residential areas with industrial, shopping and other service.
They may penetrate residential areas. Generally, these
highways will accommodate operating speeds of 35 miles per
hour. (See: DWG No. DD-03.58)
(c) Local Access. This classification is intended to include streets
and roads that provide direct access to abutting land and
connections to higher classes of roadways. Traffic volumes will
be low and travel distances generally short. These streets and
roads should be designed for operating speeds of 25 miles per
hour or under. (See: DWG No. DD-02.59)
B. Right-of-Way Widths.
1. Minimum widths for each type of public street shall be as follows:
Type of Street
Right-of-Way
Width Cartway Width
Arterial 80' – 120' 46'
Collector 60' 34'
Local Access 50' 25'
2. Where a proposed subdivision abuts or contains an existing public
street or road having a right-of-way width less than would be
required if said street or road were created under this chapter,
sufficient additional width for right-of-way shall be provided and
dedicated to meet the foregoing standards.
3. Additional right-of-way and cartway widths may be required by the
Board of Supervisors to promote public safety and convenience
when special conditions require it and to provide parking space in
areas of intensive use.
C. Cul-de-sac Streets.
1. Cul-de-sac streets, whether permanent or temporary, shall be
provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a minimum
radius to the edge of the finished street or curbline of not less than
40 feet paved radius and a fifty-foot radius right-of-way. The cul-desac
shall have a paved diameter of 80 feet. The right-of-way
57.Editor's Note: The drawings are on file in the Township offices.
58.Editor's Note: The drawings are on file in the Township offices.
59.Editor's Note: The drawings are on file in the Township offices.
§ 504 KINGSTON CODE § 504
Ch:616
diameter shall be 100 feet. (See: DWG No. DD-01.60) [Amended by
Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
2. Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the
turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to a property line
and a right-of-way of the same width as the street shall be carried
to the property line in such a way as to permit future extension of
the street into the adjoining tract. At such time as such a street is
extended, the overage created by the turnaround outside the
boundaries of the extended street shall revert in ownership to the
property owners fronting on the cul-de-sac turnaround.
3. Commercial and industrial culs-de-sac shall be reviewed for
adequacy by the Township Engineer. His recommendations will be
given to the Board of Supervisors who shall have final authority in
this matter.
4. Permanent cul-de-sac streets shall be kept to a minimum and shall
not exceed 600 feet in length.
C.1. Public vehicular access required.
1. Public vehicular access ("access") to subdivision and/or land
development shall be provided by determining the number of
access points that shall be required, as follows:
(a) For subdivisions and/or land developments with 12 or fewer
lots, at least one point of access to the roadway shall be
provided.
(b) For subdivisions and/or land developments with between 13
and 45 lots, at least two points of access to the roadway shall
be provided.
(c) For subdivisions and/or land developments with 46 or more
lots, at least three points of access to the roadway shall be
provided.
2. A divided entrance shall equate to one point of access.
3. The Kingston Township Board of Supervisors may approve waivers
in respect to the requirements of this Subsection C1, when
additional public vehicular access points are precluded in the
following circumstances:
(a) If the only additional access points available would require
crossing floodplains, steep slopes, or other similar natural
features; or
60.Editor's Note: The drawings are on file in the Township offices.
§ 504 HOME RULE CHARTER § 504
Ch:617
(b) When the existing development pattern precludes additional
access points and fewer units than would otherwise be allowed
would be out of character with the surrounding development.
(c) When permitted by PennDOT or Luzerne County Road and
Bridge. [Added by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
D. Street Alignment.
1. Whenever street lines are deflected, connection shall be made by
horizontal curves.
2. The minimum radius at the center line for horizontal curves shall
conform to the requirements of "A Policy on Geometries Design of
Highways and Streets," latest edition by the American Association
of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
3. On local access streets, the minimum tangent between reverse
curves shall be at least 50 feet; on collector streets the minimum
tangent shall be at least 150 feet; and on arterial streets the
minimum tangent shall be at least 250 feet.
4. Minimum vertical sight distance shall conform to the requirements
of "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets," latest
edition, by the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials.
E. Street Grades.
1. The minimum grade on all streets shall be 1.0%. [Amended by
Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
2. The maximum street grades shall conform to the requirements of
"A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets," latest
edition by American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials, but in no case greater than 12%.
3. Vertical curves shall be used in changes of grade exceeding 1% and
shall provide proper sight distances as specified herein above.
4. Positive drainage shall be established with the construction of all
infrastructures improvements responsible for conveying
stormwater runoff to a stormwater collection facility (i.e., storm
inlets, catch basins, etc.), including but not limited to paved inverts
along curblines, paved gutters, swales and ditches, regardless of
type, and maintained until such time Kingston Township or another
responsible party accepts ownership of the same. [Added by Ord.
No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
F. Street Intersections.
§ 504 KINGSTON CODE § 504
Ch:618
1. Local streets shall not intersect with collector or arterial streets on
the same side at intervals of less than 800 feet as measured from
center line to center line.
2. The distance between center lines of streets opening onto the
opposite side of a proposed or existing street shall be not less than
150 feet unless the streets are directly opposite each other.
3. Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two
streets shall be avoided. Where this proves impossible, such
intersections shall be designed with extreme care for both
pedestrian and vehicular safety.
4. Streets shall be all laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. Local streets shall not intersect collector or arterial streets
at an angle of less than 75°. The intersection of two local streets
shall not be at an angle of less than 60°.
5. Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two local streets shall
be at least 20 feet; and minimum curb radius at an intersection of a
local street and a collector or arterial street shall be at least 25
feet. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
6. There shall be provided and maintained at all intersections clear
sight triangles of 75 feet in all directions measured along the
center line from the point of intersection. Nothing which obstructs
the vision of a motorist shall be permitted in this area.
7. Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever
practical. Where the grade of any street at the approach to an
intersection exceeds 7%, a leveling area shall be provided having a
grade of not greater than 4% for a distance of 25 feet measured
from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street.
G. Pavement Design.
1. All components of the street pavement structure shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation "Pavement Policy Manual Publication 242" and
"Specifications Form 408" (latest editions.)
2. The minimum street pavement requirements of Publication 242
shall not be applicable to street construction in the Township. The
following requirements are considered to be the minimum
standards for street construction in the Township:
(a) Local Streets. (See: DWG No. DD-02.61) [Amended by Ord.
No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
61.Editor's Note: The drawings are on file in the Township offices.
§ 504 HOME RULE CHARTER § 504
Ch:619
§ 505. Curbs and Sidewalks and Streetlights. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987;
as amended by Ord. 1989-4, 6/13/1989; by Ord. 90-9, 12/12/1990;
and by Ord. 2003-5, 5/14/2003]
Surface
course
1-1/2 inches (compacted thickness) Superpave
Asphalt Mixture Design, HMA Wearing Course, PG
64-22, 9.5 mm mix, SRL L
Base 4 inches (compacted thickness) Superpave Asphalt
Mixture Design, HMA Base Course, PG G4-22, 25.0
mm mix
Subbase 6 inches (compacted thickness) Crushed Stone
Aggregate (PennDOT 2A) Subbase
(b) Collector Streets. (See: DWG No. DD-03.62) [Amended by
Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
Surface
course
1 1/2 inches (compacted thickness) Superpave
asphalt mixture design, HMA wearing course, PG
64-22, 9.5 mm mix, SRL L
Base 5 1/2 inches (compacted thickness) Superpave
asphalt mixture design, HMA base course, PG
64-22, 25.0 mm mix
Subbase 8 inches (compacted thickness) crushed stone
aggregate (PennDOT 2A) subbase
(c) The design mixture and thickness may be modified by the
Township Engineer upon the basis of the proposed subdivision
use in accordance with PennDOT Specification Form No. 408
(latest edition).
3. No surface course shall be installed in any new development until
80% of all the new homes and driveways are completed with
certificate of occupancy. [Added by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/
2018]
H. Alleys and Driveways.
1. Alleys are prohibited in residential developments.
2. Driveways serving properties located adjacent to an intersection
shall be offset from the intersection of the curbline a distance not
less than the required setback dimension.
A. Curbs.
1. Curbs shall be provided on all streets and parking compounds
located within multifamily and apartment building developments.
Curbs shall also be required on new streets in subdivisions or land
62.Editor's Note: The drawings are on file in the Township Offices.
§ 504 KINGSTON CODE § 505
Ch:620
§ 506. Stormwater Drainage. [Ord. 1993-1, 3/10/1993; Ord. 86-5, 1/
14/1987; as amended by Ord. 1989-4, 6/13/1989; by Ord. 90-9, 12/
12/1990; by Ord. 1993-1, 3/10/1993; and by Ord. 94-16, 11/9/1994]
developments. The requirement of the curbs may be waived at the
discretion of the Board of Supervisors. When curb requirement is
waived, grass lined swales or rock lined ditches shall be required.
2. All curbs shall be depressed at intersections to sufficient width to
accommodate wheelchairs. Depression shall be in line with
sidewalks where provided.
3. Curbs shall be the vertical type, eight inches by 18 inches, in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
standards for roadway construction, and one coat of anti-spall shall
be applied between days 28 and 35. [Amended by Ord. No.
2018-3, 12/12/2018]
4. All curbs shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete with
expansion joints every 20 feet and shall follow PennDOT standards
where applicable.
B. Sidewalks. (See: DWG No. DD-05.63) [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3,
12/12/2018]
1. Sidewalks shall be provided on all streets and parking compounds
located within multifamily and apartment building developments.
Sidewalks shall also be required on new streets in subdivisions or
land developments in which average lot width of interior lots at the
required building setback line is 100 feet or less. The requirement
of sidewalks may be waived at the discretion of the Board of
Supervisors.
2. Minimum widths for sidewalks along each type of public street
shall be four feet, and shall follow PennDOT specifications and
meet ADA standards where applicable.
C. Streetlights.
1. A streetlight shall be provided at all newly created street
intersections and all new culs-de-sac.
2. Installation of streetlights shall comply with all applicable public
utility companies specifications.
3. Township Board of Supervisors may specify and require the style of
streetlight to be installed.
A. Lots shall be laid out and graded to provide positive drainage away
from buildings. The Board of Supervisors may require a Grading and
Drainage Plan for individual lots indicating a buildable area within each
63.Editor's Note: The drawings are on file in the Township offices.
§ 505 HOME RULE CHARTER § 506
Ch:621
lot, complying with the setback requirements, for which positive
drainage is assured.
B. No person, corporation, or other entity shall block, impede the flow of,
alter, construct any structure, or deposit any material or thing, or
commit any act which will affect normal or flood flow in any communal
stream or watercourse without having obtained prior approval from the
Township of Kingston or DEP, whichever is applicable. [Amended by
Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
C. Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by a natural
watercourse, there shall be provided a drainage easement or right-ofway
conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse and of
such width as will be adequate to preserve natural drainage.
D. The Township of Kingston will assure that all permanent streams, not
under the jurisdiction of other official agencies, are maintained open
and free flowing.
E. The subdivider or developer, and each person, corporation, or other
entity which makes any surface changes shall be required to:
1. Collect on-site surface runoff and dispose of it to the point of
discharge into the common natural watercourse of the drainage
area. When the proposed storm drainage plan proposes to
discharge concentrated flows of stormwater to existing man-made
watercourses such as, but not limited to, streets, pipes, culverts
and swales, hydraulic calculations shall be provided to insure the
capacity of such existing facilities.
2. Design drainage facilities to handle runoff from upstream areas,
assuming full development of those areas, based upon the
Comprehensive Plan for Township of Kingston.
3. Design, construct, and/or install such drainage structures and
facilities as are necessary to prevent erosion damage to the
subdivision or land development, adjacent property and
downstream property. Such structures and facilities shall
satisfactorily convey such surface waters to the nearest practical
street, storm drain, detention pond, or natural watercourse.
4. All stormwater control facilities for regulated activities, as defined
in the Stormwater Management Study prepared by the Luzerne
County Planning Commission, must be designated in accordance
with said study and the existing Stormwater Management
Ordinance of the Township of Kingston.64 [Amended by Ord. No.
2018-3, 12/12/2018]
F. Storm sewers, culverts, and related installations shall be provided to
permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses, to drain all low points
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 17, Stormwater Management.
§ 506 KINGSTON CODE § 506
Ch:622
along streets, and to intercept stormwater runoff along streets at
intervals reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area
drained.
G. Storm sewers, as required, shall be placed in front of the curb or
curbline when located in a street right-of-way. When located in
undedicated land, they shall be placed within an easement not less than
15 feet wide, as approved by the Township Engineer, who may require
additional width of easement as circumstances warrant.
H. Street drainage will not be permitted to cross intersections or the
crown of the road.
1. Maximum spacing of inlets shall not exceed 200 feet.
2. All street inlets shall be PennDOT Type C or M. Inlet tops shall be
cast in place reinforced concrete or precast concrete.
3. All culvert ends shall be provided with either reinforced concrete
headwalls or pipe end sections.
4. Minimum pipe size shall be fifteen-inch-diameter polyethylene
smooth inner wall. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
5. When material for storm drain systems is not specified, PennDOT
specifications will govern.
6. Where curbs are not required, grassed swales or rock-lined ditches
shall be designed to reduce velocities and prevent scour. Rock in
ditches shall be sized to prevent displacement.
7. Storm drains shall be constructed with rock-lined ditches or paved
gutters where swale or ditch velocities exceed four feet per second.
[Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
8. All storm pipes installed in any new subdivision or land
development will be polyethylene smooth inner wall. (See: DWG
No. DD-06.65) [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
I. All springs and sump pump discharges shall be collected so as not to
flow in the streets.
J. Stormwater roof drains shall not discharge water directly over a
sidewalk.
K. Stabilized outlets shall be provided for footer drains, floor drains, and
down-spouts.
L. The Soils Cover Complex Method of the Soil Conservation Service of the
U. S. Department of Agriculture shall be used as the primary means of
estimating stormwater runoff.
65.Editor's Note: The drawings are on file in the Township offices.
§ 506 HOME RULE CHARTER § 506
Ch:623
M. The Rational Method may be used for analysis of storm sewer systems
and for stormwater management facilities in minor subdivisions.
N. Where the estimated runoff based upon the above methods is doubtful,
several recognized methods should be studied and compared.
O. The minimum design criteria shall be a ten-year storm. Higher
frequency conditions shall be used in sensitive areas and where an
overflow would endanger public or private property.
P. Runoff calculations must include complete hydrologic and hydraulic
design and analysis of all control facilities.
Q. Control Facilities.
1. Permanent control measures/facilities shall be designed to assure
that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff is not greater after
development than prior to development for a two-, five-, and tenyear
storm frequency. More stringent criteria may be required in
sensitive areas where stormwater problems presently exist.
2. Control Facilities shall be designed to meet, as a minimum, the
design standards and specifications of the "Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Handbook for Luzerne County."
(a) Detention ponds may be waived by the Board of Supervisors on
the recommendation of the Township Engineer at sites in close
proximity to the major streams. This is to facilitate drainage
prior to stream flooding.
(b) In areas underlain with limestone geology, ponds shall be
limited to the detention (dry) type unless the developer can
show a special need for a retention pond, in which case it shall
have a lining. Detention ponds shall be prohibited in areas of
known sinkholes unless the pond is lined. If a sinkhole develops
in a pond or channel before acceptance by the municipality, a
lining shall be required.
(c) Any ponds with slopes steeper than 3:1 shall be fenced with a
six-foot fence with a type subject to the approval of the
municipality. (See: DWG Nos. DD-07 and 08.66) [Amended by
Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
(d) Detention ponds shall be provided with emergency spillways
capable of passing runoff produced by a fifty-year storm.
Higher frequency storm emergency spillways may be required
for areas where down-stream flooding will imperil life or
property or adversely affect the environment. The Township
Engineer shall determine if a higher frequency storm design is
required.
66.Editor's Note: The drawings are on file in the Township offices.
§ 506 KINGSTON CODE § 506
Ch:624
§ 507. Lot Grading for Subdivisions and Land Developments. [Ord.
86-5, 1/14/1987; as amended by Ord. 1993-1, 3/10/1993]
3. A maintenance program for control facilities must be included as
part of the Grading and Drainage Plan.
(a) Maintenance during development activities of a project shall
be the responsibility of the contractor, developer, and owner.
(b) Arrangement for maintenance of permanent control facilities
after completion of development activities shall be made
before approval of final plans is given by the Board of
Supervisors.
(1) In cases where permanent control facilities are owned by
an entity, it shall be the responsibility of that entity to
maintain control facilities (e.g., homeowners' association).
In such cases, a legally binding agreement between the
owner and the Township of Kingston shall be made
providing for maintenance of all permanent erosion
control facilities, including the inspection by the Township
of Kingston. The Township of Kingston will receive copies
of keys for the locks. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/
12/2018]
R. Stormwater Facility Discharges.
1. Stormwater discharges shall not be proposed at locations where
they will be creating concentrated flows to receiving facilities not
intended for this purpose. Level spreaders and multiple discharges
shall be provided where direct access to natural waterways is not
available.
2. All roof leaders from proposed structures on lots less than 2 1/2
acres in size shall discharge to subsurface drainage fields and all
roof leaders shall not discharge directly onto proposed streets or
proposed street right-of-way. Drainage fields shall provide a
minimum of 200 CF of storage for each 1,500 SF of horizontal roof
area. Protective covenants shall be provided to insure compliance.
Overflow pipes and cleanouts shall be provided on all subsurface
systems. A typical drainage field design shall be shown on the
grading and drainage plan.
A. Blocks and lots shall be graded to provide proper drainage away from
buildings and to prevent the collection of stormwater in pools.
Minimum 2% slopes away from structures shall be required.
B. Lot grading shall be of such design as to carry surface waters to the
nearest practical street, storm drain, or natural watercourse. Where
drainage swales are used to deliver surface waters away from
buildings, their grade shall not be less than 1% nor more than 4%. The
swales shall be sodded, planted or lined as required. A Grading and
§ 506 HOME RULE CHARTER § 507
Ch:625
Draining Plan shall be required for all subdivisions and land
developments, except minor subdivisions.
1. Grading and drainage plans shall show internal drainage patterns
for each lot, proposed drainage easements through lot clusters and
discharge points to natural or man-made drainage facilities.
2. Drainage swales designed to carry in excess of 0.5 cfs shall not
discharge over curbs, directly into public streets. Storm sewers and
drains shall be provided within drainage easements behind such
curb locations to prevent uncontrolled runoff to public and private
roadways.
C. No final grading shall be permitted with a cut face steeper in slope than
two horizontal to one vertical except under one or more of the following
conditions:
1. The material in which the excavation is made is sufficiently stable
to sustain a slope of steeper than two horizontal to one vertical, and
a written statement of a civil engineer, licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion
control, to that effect is submitted to the Township Engineer and
approved by him. The statement shall state that the site has been
inspected and that the deviation from the slope specified
hereinbefore will not result in injury to persons or damage to
property.
2. A concrete or stone masonry wall constructed according to sound
engineering standards for which plans are submitted to the
Township Engineer for review and approval is provided.
D. No final grading shall be permitted which creates any exposed surface
steeper in slope than two horizontal to one vertical except under one or
more of the following conditions:
1. The fill is located so that settlement, sliding or erosion will not
result in property damage or be hazardous to adjoining property,
streets, alley, or buildings.
2. A written statement from a civil engineer, licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion
control, certifying that he has inspected the site and that the
proposed deviation from the slope specified above will not
endanger any property or result in property damage, is submitted
to and approved by the Township Engineer.
3. A wall is constructed to support the face of the fill.
E. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be a minimum of three feet from
property or right-of-way lines of street or alleys in order to permit the
normal rounding of the edge without encroaching on the abutting
property. All property lines, where walls or slopes are steeper than one
§ 507 KINGSTON CODE § 507
Ch:626
§ 508. Blocks and Lots. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; as amended by Ord.
1989-4, 6/13/1989]
horizontal to one vertical and five feet or more in height shall be
protected by a protective fence no less than three feet in height
approved by the Township Engineer.
F. All lots must be kept free of any debris or nuisances whatsoever.
G. The United States Postal Service and Luzerne County 911 Center shall
assign house numbers to each lot within a subdivision. [Added by Ord.
No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
A. The length, width, shape, and design of blocks shall be determined with
due regard to the provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type
proposed, to the land use and/or zoning requirements of the Township
of Kingston, the topography of the land being subdivided, and the
requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation.
B. Unless the topography of the land being subdivided or the existing
pattern of development in the immediately adjacent area shall be
otherwise than herein required, the following minimum standards for
the design and size of blocks and lots shall prevail:
1. Blocks shall not exceed 1,600 feet in length, nor be less than 500
feet in length.
2. Residential blocks shall generally be of sufficient depth to
accommodate two tiers of lots, except where reverse frontage lots
bordering an arterial or collector street are used, or where due to
the contour of the land, or the necessary layout of the subdivision,
there is insufficient depth between intersecting streets for such
two tier design.
3. Crosswalks or interior pedestrian walks shall be required in blocks
exceeding 1,000 feet in length to provide for pedestrian circulation
or access to community facilities. Such walks shall be paved for
width of not less than four feet, shall be located in easements not
less than 10 feet in width, and shall, insofar as possible, be located
in the center of any such block.
4. Blocks for commercial and industrial areas may vary from the
elements of design contained in this section if the nature of the use
requires other treatment. In such cases, off-street parking for
employees and customers shall be provided along with safe and
convenient limited access to the street system. Space for off-street
loading shall also be provided with limited access to the street
system. Extension of streets, railroad access right-of-way, and
utilities shall be provided as necessary.
§ 507 HOME RULE CHARTER § 508
Ch:627
§ 509. Development on Private Streets Discouraged. [Ord. 86-5, 1/
14/1987]
§ 510. Open Space, Lot Siting, Planting and Beautification for
Subdivision and Land Developments. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
5. Lot lines intersecting street lines shall be substantially at right
angles or radial to street lines.
6. Lots shall, in general, front on a street which has already been
dedicated to the Township of Kingston, or which the subdivider or
developer proposes to dedicate to the Township of Kingston in
connection with approval of the final plan. In commercial or
industrial subdivisions or land developments where access is
proposed to be provided by private streets within the subdivision or
land development, this requirement may be waived by the Board of
Supervisors.
7. The Township of Kingston shall assign house numbers to each lot
within a subdivision.
8. Minimum lot sizes shall be in accordance with the Township Zoning
Ordinance.
9. Remnants of land, smaller than required for a lot, shall not be
permitted within any subdivision. Such remnants shall be
incorporated in existing or proposed lots, or dedicated to public use
if acceptable to the Board of Supervisors.
10. Double frontage lots are prohibited except in accordance with
§ 508B2 above.
A. It is the policy of this Township of Kingston that all subdivided lands
shall have immediate access to a public street. Because of unique
property configuration and location, this Township of Kingston
recognizes the need for limited exceptions to the foregoing general
policy.
B. No subdivision will be approved on a private street or road if more than
two lots already front on such street or road or if after subdivision more
than two lots will front on such private street or road.
A. In order to promote the highest environmental quality possible, the
degree to which the applicant of a subdivision or land development plan
has preserved existing salient natural features and land forms intrinsic
to the site, shall be assessed. Terms of approval of a plat may be subject
to the manner in which the layout or design of the plan has preserved
existing natural features, such as, but not limited to, trees, wooded
areas and watercourse.
B. Open Space. Where the applicant is offering for dedication, or is
required by ordinance to establish a reservation of open space or
§ 508 KINGSTON CODE § 510
Ch:628
§ 511. (Reserved)67
§ 512. Erosion and Sediment Control. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
preserve an area of scenic or historic importance, a "limit of work,"
which will confine excavation, earth moving procedures and other
changes to the landscape, may be required to ensure preservation and
prevent despoliation of the character of the area in open space.
C. Tree Preservation. Whenever possible, trees shall not be removed
unless they are located within the proposed street right-of-way, within
the proposed building area, or within utility locations and equipment
access areas. In areas where trees are retained, the original grade level
shall be maintained, if possible, so as not to disturb the trees.
D. Topsoil Preservation. All of the topsoil from areas where cuts and fills
have been made should be stockpiled and redistributed uniformly after
grading. All areas of the site shall be stabilized by seeding or planting
on slopes of less than 10% and shall be stabilized by sodding on slopes
10% or more and planted in ground cover on slopes 20% or greater.
E. Landscaping. For all multifamily, apartment, office, commercial, and
industrial subdivisions or land developments, a landscaping plan shall
be provided and shall include sufficient plantings for the required open
space, planting strips, screenings, formal gardens, shade trees and
natural barriers.
F. Buffer Planting Requirements. Buffer yard requirements should be as
specified in the Township Zoning Ordinance.
G. Preserved Landscaping. When there is a conscientious effort to
preserve the existing natural integrity and character of a site and where
such preservation effectuates areas of woodland and trees comparable
to required planting improvements, i.e., landscaping and buffer
screening, the plan may be received in lieu of additional landscaping
requirements.
H. Trees. The planting of trees within the street right-of-way line shall not
be permitted. The planting of any trees within the private property of
each residential lot shall be at the discretion of the property owner or
developer.
I. Watercourse Protection. Where a subdivision or land development is
traversed by a natural watercourse, there shall be provided a drainage
easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the line of such
watercourse and of such width as will be adequate to preserve natural
drainage. Such easement shall be in addition to the open space
required in § 510B.
67.Editor's Note: Former § 511, Contribution for Recreation Purposes (Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987,
as amended) was repealed 12/12/2018 by Ord. No. 2018-3.
§ 510 HOME RULE CHARTER § 512
Ch:629
A. General Purpose.
1. The Board of Supervisors finds that the minimization of erosion and
control of sedimentation in connection with land development and
subdivision are in the public interest, affecting public health, safety
and welfare, and therefore those regulations governing erosion
control and sedimentation control are necessary for the Township
of Kingston.
2. No changes shall be made in the contour of the land, no grading,
excavating, removal or destruction to the topsoil, trees or other
vegetative cover of the land shall be commenced until such time
that a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation has been
processed with and reviewed by the Township Engineer and/or
Luzerne County Soil and Water Conservation District, or there has
been a determination by the above entities that such plans are not
necessary.
3. No subdivision or land development plan shall be approved unless:
(1) there has been an Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan
approved by the Board of Supervisors that provides for minimizing
erosion and sedimentation consistent with this section, and an
improvement bond or other acceptable securities are deposited
with the Township of Kingston in the form of an escrow guarantee
which will ensure installation and completion of the required
improvements; or (2) there has been a determination by the Board
of Supervisors that a plan for minimizing erosion and
sedimentation is not necessary.
4. Where not specified in this chapter, measures used to control
erosion and reduce sedimentation shall as a minimum meet the
standards and specifications of the Luzerne County Soil and Water
Conservation District. The Township Engineer, or other officials as
designated, shall ensure compliance with the appropriate
specifications, copies of which are available from the Soil and
Water Conservation District.
B. Performance Principles. The following measures are effective in
minimizing erosion and sedimentation and shall be included where
applicable in the control plan:
1. Stripping of vegetation, regrading, or other development shall be
done in such a way that will prevent all but minor erosion.
2. Development plans shall preserve salient natural features, keep
cut-fill operations to a minimum, and ensure conformity with
topography so as to create the least erosion potential and
adequately handle the volume and velocity of surface water runoff.
3. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected,
and supplemented.
§ 512 KINGSTON CODE § 512
Ch:630
4. The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
5. Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
6. Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
exposed critical areas during development.
7. The permanent final vegetation and structural erosion control and
drainage measures shall be installed as soon as practical in the
development.
8. Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and
after development. Where necessary, the rate of surface water
runoff will be structurally retarded.
9. Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the disturbed
area is stabilized by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt
traps, or similar measures.
C. Grading for Erosion and Other Environmental Controls. In order to
provide suitable sites for building and other uses, improve surface
drainage, and control erosion, the following requirements shall be met:
1. Streets shall be improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently
passable condition as one of the first items of work done on a
subdivision or development. The wearing surface shall be installed
in accordance with § 504G and as approved in the final plan.
Provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from damaging
the cut face of excavations or the sloping surfaces of fills, by
installation of temporary or permanent drainage across or above
these areas.
2. Fill shall be placed and compacted so as to minimize sliding or
erosion of the soil.
3. Fills placed adjacent to watercourses shall have suitable protection
against erosion during periods of flooding.
4. During grading operations, necessary measures for dust control
will be exercised.
5. Grading equipment will not be allowed to enter into flowing
streams. Provisions will be made for the installation of temporary
or permanent culverts or bridges.
D. Responsibility.
1. Whenever sedimentation damage is caused by stripping vegetation,
grading or other development, it shall be the collective
responsibility of the land developer and subdivider, and of the
contractor, person, corporation and other entity causing such
§ 512 HOME RULE CHARTER § 512
Ch:631
§ 513. Floodplain Area Regulations. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
sedimentation to remove it from all adjoining surfaces, drainage
systems and watercourses and to repair any damage at his expense
as quickly as possible.
2. Maintenance of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities
during the construction and development period is the
responsibility of the land developer or subdivider.
3. It is the responsibility of any developer or subdivider, and any
person, corporation, or other entity doing any act on or across a
communal stream, watercourse or swale, or upon the floodplain or
right-of-way, to maintain as nearly as possible in its present state
the stream, watercourse, swale, floodplain or right-of-way during
the pendency of the activity to return it to its original or equal
condition after such activity is completed.
4. The subdivider or land developer shall provide and install, at his
expense, in accordance with Township requirements, all drainage
and erosion control improvements (temporary and permanent)
shown on the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
E. Compliance with Regulations and Procedures.
1. The Board of Supervisors, in their consideration of all preliminary
plans of subdivision and land development, shall condition its
approval upon the execution of erosion and sediment control
measures as contained in § 512B and C hereof.
2. The installation and design of the required erosion and sediment
control measures shall be in accordance with standards and
specifications of the Luzerne County Soil and Conservation District.
F. Stream Channel Construction. Stream channel construction on
watersheds with drainage areas in excess of 1/2 square mile, or in those
cases where downstream hazards exist, will conform to criteria
established by the Pennsylvania DEP. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3,
12/12/2018]
A. Purpose. The specific purposes of these special provisions are:
1. To regulate the subdivision or development of land within any
designated floodplain area in order to promote the general health,
welfare, and safety of the community.
2. To require that each subdivision lot in flood prone areas be
provided with a safe building site with adequate access; and that
public facilities which serve such uses be designed and installed to
preclude flood damage at the time of initial construction.
3. To prevent individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for
use because of flooding by prohibiting the improper subdivision or
§ 512 KINGSTON CODE § 513
Ch:632
development of unprotected lands within the designated floodplain
districts.
B. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. To the extent that this imposes
greater requirements or more complete disclosure than any other
provisions of this chapter, in any respect, or to the extent that the
provisions of this section are more restrictive than such other
provisions, it shall control such other provisions of this chapter.
C. Disclaimer of Municipal Liability. The grant of a permit or approval of a
plan for any proposed subdivision or land development to be located
within any designated floodplain area shall not constitute a
representation, guarantee, or warranty of any kind by the Township of
Kingston or by any official or employee thereof of the practicability or
safety of the proposed use, and shall create no liability upon the
Township of Kingston, its officials, employees or agents.
D. Application Procedures and Requirements.
1. Pre-Application Procedures.
(a) Prior to the preparation of any plans, it is suggested that
prospective developers consult with the Pennsylvania DEP.
[Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
(b) Prospective developers shall consult the County Conservation
District representative concerning erosion and sediment
control and the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed
development. At the same time, a determination should be
made as to whether or not any flood hazards either exist or will
be created as a result of the subdivision or development.
2. Preliminary Plan Requirements. The following information shall be
required as part of the preliminary plan and shall be prepared by a
registered engineer or surveyor:
(a) Name of engineer, surveyor, or other qualified person
responsible for providing the information required in this
section.
(b) A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision or land
development with respect to any designated floodplain area,
including information on, but not limited to, the 100-year flood
elevations, boundaries of the floodplain area or areas,
proposed lots and sites, fills, flood or erosion protective
facilities, and areas subject to special deed restrictions.
(c) Where the subdivision or land development lies partially or
completely within any designated floodplain area, or where the
subdivision of land development borders on a floodplain area,
the preliminary plan map shall include detailed information
giving the location and elevation of proposed roads, public
§ 513 HOME RULE CHARTER § 513
Ch:633
utilities, and building sites. All such maps shall also show
contours at intervals of five feet, and shall identify accurately
the boundaries of the floodplain areas.
(d) Such other information as is required by this Subdivision
Ordinance.
3. Final Plan Requirements. The following information shall be
required as part of the final plan and shall be prepared by a
registered engineer or surveyor:
(a) All information required for the submission of the preliminary
plan incorporating any changes requested by the Board of
Supervisors.
(b) A map showing the exact location and elevation of all proposed
buildings, structures, roads, and public utilities to be
constructed within any designated floodplain area. All such
maps shall show contours at intervals of five feet within the
floodplain area and shall identify accurately the boundaries of
the flood-prone areas.
(c) Submission of the final plan shall also be accompanied by all
required permits and related documentation from the DEP, and
any other commonwealth agency or local municipality where
any alteration or relocation of a stream or watercourse is
proposed. In addition, documentation shall be submitted
indicating that all affected adjacent municipalities have been
notified in advance of the proposed alteration or relocation.
The Department of Community Affairs and the Federal
Insurance Administration shall also be notified in advance of
any such proposed activity, and proof of such notification shall
be submitted in advance of the Planning Commission meeting
at which such plan is to be considered. [Amended by Ord. No.
2018-3, 12/12/2018]
E. Design Standards and Improvements in Designated Floodplain Areas.
1. General.
(a) Where not prohibited by this or any other laws or ordinances,
land located in any designated floodplain area may be platted
for development with the provision that the developer
construct all buildings and structures to preclude flood
damage in accordance with this and any other laws and
ordinances regulating such development.
(b) No subdivision or land development, or part thereof, shall be
approved if the proposed development or improvements will
individually or collectively, increase the 100-year flood
elevation more than one foot at any point.
§ 513 KINGSTON CODE § 513
Ch:634
(c) Building sites for residences or any other type of dwelling or
accommodation shall not be permitted in any floodway area.
Sites for these uses may be permitted outside the floodway
area in a floodplain area if the lowest floor (including
basement) is elevated to the regulatory flood elevation. If fill is
used to raise the elevation of a site, the fill area shall extend
laterally for a distance of at least 15 feet beyond the limits of
the proposed structures and access shall meet the
requirements of § 513E3 hereinbelow.
(d) Building sites for structures or buildings other than for
residential uses shall not be permitted in any floodway area.
Sites for such structures or buildings outside the floodway in a
floodplain area shall be protected as provided for in § 513E1(c)
above. However, the Board of Supervisors may allow the
subdivision or development of areas or sites for commercial
and industrial uses at an elevation below the regulatory flood
elevation if the developer otherwise protects the area to that
height or assures that the buildings or structures will be floodproofed
to the regulatory flood elevation.
(e) If the Board of Supervisors determines that only a part of a
proposed plat can be safely developed, it shall limit
development to that part and shall require that development
proceed consistent with this determination.
(f) When a developer does not intend to develop the plat himself
and the Board of Supervisors determines that additional
controls are required to insure safe development, they may
require the developer to improve appropriate deed restrictions
on the land. Such deed restrictions shall be inserted in every
deed and noted on every recorded plat.
2. Drainage Facilities.
(a) Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow
of surface waters without damage to persons or property. The
system shall insure drainage at all points along streets, and
provide positive drainage away from buildings and on-site
waste disposal sites.
(b) Plans shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors may require a primary
underground system to accommodate frequent floods and a
secondary surface system to accommodate larger, less
frequent floods. Drainage plans shall be consistent with local,
county and regional drainage plans. The facilities shall be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto
adjacent properties.
3. Streets and Driveways. The finished elevation of proposed streets
and driveways shall not be more than the one foot below the
§ 513 HOME RULE CHARTER § 513
Ch:635
regulatory flood elevation. Profiles and elevations of streets and
driveways to determine compliance with this requirement and as
required by other provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance shall be
submitted with the final plan. Drainage openings shall be sufficient
to discharge flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights.
4. Sewer Facilities. All sanitary sewer systems located in any
designated floodplain area, whether public or private, shall be flood
proofed up to the regulatory flood elevation.
5. Water Facilities. All water systems located in any designated
floodplain area, whether public or private, shall be flood proofed up
to the regulatory flood elevation.
6. Other Utilities and Facilities.
(a) All other public or private utilities and facilities, including gas
and electric, shall be elevated or flood proofed up to the
regulatory flood elevation.
§ 513 KINGSTON CODE § 513
Ch:636
Part 6
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
§ 601. General Requirements. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
The following improvements shall be installed by the subdivider. The final
plan shall not be approved until final detailed design of the improvements
is approved and the improvements are installed or security to the Board of
Supervisors is provided.
§ 602. Streets. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
Streets shall be brought to the grades and dimensions drawn on plans,
profiles, and cross-sections submitted by the subdivider and approved by
the Township Engineer. The subdivider must install the required utilities
and provide, where necessary, adequate subsurface drainage for the
streets. The streets shall be designed and constructed to the standards set
forth in §§ 503 and 504 of this chapter.
§ 603. Curbs and Sidewalks. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
Curbs and sidewalks shall be provided in accordance with the standards set
forth in § 505 of this chapter.
§ 604. Sewers. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
A. Public Sewer Systems. When the subdivision or land development is to
be provided with a complete sanitary sewer system connected to a
public sanitary sewer system, a statement of approval from the
engineer of the sewerage system to which it will be connected shall be
submitted to the Board of Supervisors. Where required, Pennsylvania
DEP Planning Module approval shall also be obtained for final plan
approval. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
B. Private Sewer Systems. When a complete private sanitary sewer system
using a treatment plant is to be provided, a statement shall be
submitted to the Board of Supervisors from the Pennsylvania DEP
certifying that a permit has been issued by the appropriate agency
approving the proposed facilities. Adequate security for the
maintenance of such plant shall be furnished to the Township of
Kingston. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
C. On-Lot Sewage Disposal. In subdivision where public sewers are not
available and a complete private sanitary sewer system is not required,
on-lot sewage disposal systems shall be provided.
D. Capped Sewer System. Where the sanitary sewer system is not yet
accessible, but is planned for extension to the subdivision or
development, the subdivider shall install sewer lines, including lateral
connections, in order to provide service to each lot. The sewer mains
shall be suitably capped at the limits of the subdivision and laterals
§ 601 HOME RULE CHARTER § 604
Ch:637
§ 605. Water. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; as amended by Ord. 1993-1, 3/
10/1993; and by Ord. 2003-8, 7/23/2003]
shall be capped at the street right-of-way line when not extended to
houses or other structures. When laterals are extended to houses or
other structures, the internal plumbing system shall be constructed to
accommodate them as well as any septic system required. At such time
as any planned construction of extensions to the existing sanitary sewer
system is under contract, the subdivider may reduce the size of any
required septic system drain fields or septic tank by 50%.
A. Provision of System. The subdivision or land development shall be
provided with a complete water main supply system which shall be one
of the following:
1. Connected to a municipal water supply.
2. Connected with a community water supply approved by the
engineer of the applicable water utility company and the
designated governmental agency with satisfactory provision for the
maintenance thereof.
3. Independent and self-sufficient system utilizing a (one) central well
that shall be required to be able to service each and all of the
properties established.
B. Plans. The plans for the installation of the mains of a water supply
system shall be prepared for the subdivision or land development with
the cooperation of the applicable water supply agency and approved by
its engineer. A statement of approval from the engineer of the water
supply agency to which the subdivision or land development will be
connected, shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors. Upon the
completion of the water supply system, one copy of each of the plans for
such system shall be filed with the Township of Kingston.
C. Fire Hydrants and Fire Hydrant Markers. Fire hydrants and fire
hydrant markers shall be provided as an integral part of any public
water supply system. The Fire Chief shall be consulted to determine the
location of proposed fire hydrants. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3,
12/12/2018]
D. Fire hydrants or other means of fire protection as approved by the
Township shall be provided as an integral part of any public or private
community water supply system or as a part of any water system to
serve an industrial use. The water system shall be of adequate supply
and shall be designed to provide pressure adequate for the use of fire
hydrants or other approved fire protection systems. Water supply shall
be adequate for fire flow demands. The following represents minimum
fire flow requirements: [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
§ 604 KINGSTON CODE § 605
Ch:638
District
Classification
Minimum Fire
Flow
(GPM)
Minimum
Duration
(hours)
Maximum
Hydrant
Spacing
(feet)
Residential
Includes 1- and
2-family
dwellings
600 1 500
Commercial
Includes: all
commercial
uses, hotels,
apartments,
multipleresidence
buildings and
schools
1,000 2 300
Industrial 1,500 4 300
The developer shall be required to prepare and submit all necessary
engineering studies to ensure that adequate water pressure and
volume will be available. A minimum residual pressure of 20 psi shall
be maintained at all times.
1. Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of the local fire authority. The applicant shall submit
proof that the couplings on said hydrants are of a design which is
compatible with local fire equipment. Fire hydrants shall conform
to the standards of the Township Municipal Authority and the
National Fire Protection Association.
2. Fire hydrants shall be placed at intervals of not more than 500 feet
and in locations acceptable to the Township and local fire authority.
3. Where deemed necessary, the Township may require submittal of
design information for fire protection systems for review and
approval. Standards for fire protection systems shall be as specified
by the Township.
4. The developer shall obtain written concurrence of the fire
protection system from the local fire authority having jurisdiction
over the area.
E. A finished water storage reservoir shall be provided to meet peak
hourly demands and one day's storage of domestic use plus fire flow
storage of 50,000 gallons, or the requirements of the Pennsylvania DEP,
§ 605 HOME RULE CHARTER § 605
Ch:639
§ 606. Storm Drainage. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
A storm drainage system shall be provided in accordance with the standards
as set forth in § 506 of this chapter.
§ 607. Utilities. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; as amended by Ord. 90-9, 12/
12/1990]
§ 608. Monuments and Markers. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; as amended
by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
Monuments and markers must be placed so that the scored or marked
point coincides exactly with the point of intersection of the lines to be
monumented by a professional land surveyor. They must be set so that
the top of the monument or marker is level with the finished grade of the
surrounding ground.
whichever is more stringent. [Added by Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/
2018]
A. Easements for utilities shall have a minimum width of 15 feet.
B. To the fullest extent possible, easements for public utilities shall be
centered on or adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
C. Telephone, electric, television, cable, natural gas lines, water lines, and
other such utilities shall be installed underground and shall be provided
within the street right-of-way or easements to be dedicated for such
utilities but they are not to be installed under the paved cartway width
of the street. Storm and sanitary sewers may be installed under the
cartway. All utilities shall be installed at a minimum depth of 30 inches
except for water which must be at least 48 inches deep.
D. Underground installation of utility distribution and service lines shall
be completed prior to street paving and gutter, curbing, and sidewalk
installation.
E. Conduits shall be installed under the roadway prior to paving to provide
utility access to lots on the opposite side of streets from where the
mains are installed. No pave cuts or under pavement boring will be
allowed for utility connections once the pavement has been installed.
F. All utility installations shall be in accordance with plans approved by
the Board of Supervisors and the applicable utility company.
G. Utility lines can be placed under cartways, but no maintenance
(manhole) holes or shutoffs shall be permitted in cartways. [Added by
Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/2018]
A. Monuments.
1. Monuments shall be set as follows:
§ 605 KINGSTON CODE § 608
Ch:640
§ 609. Other Improvements. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; as amended by
Ord. 1993-1, 3/10/1993]
§ 610. Time Limits. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; as amended by Ord.
1993-1, 3/10/1993]
(a) At one monument at every angle or curve.
(b) At the intersection of all rights-of-way.
(c) At the beginning and ending of curves along street property
lines.
(d) At such intermediate points as may be required by the
Township Engineer.
2. Monuments shall be six inches square or four inches in diameter,
36 inches depth, and constructed of concrete or stone, or by setting
a four-inch cast iron or steel pipe filled in with concrete.
B. Markers.
1. Markers shall be set:
(a) At all lot corners except those monumented.
(b) At angles in property lines of lots.
(c) At the intersection of lines forming angles in the boundaries of
the development.
2. Markers shall be 1/2 of an inch square, or 1/2 of an inch in
diameter, 24 inches long. Markers shall be made of iron pipes or
iron or steel bars.
C. Removal. Any monuments or markers that are removed shall be
replaced by a professional land surveyor at the expense of the person
removing them.
A. Shade trees shall be provided as specified in § 510H of this chapter.
B. Street name signs conforming to Township specifications shall be
provided and installed by the subdivider or developer at all street
intersections. The cost of street name signs and other street signs for
public safety purposes will be borne by the developer.
C. Open space shall be provided as specified in § 510B of this chapter.
D. Other improvements to promote public safety and health as required by
the Board of Supervisors as a condition of approval.
A. All improvements shall be installed according to a time schedule which
shall be approved by the Township Engineer and the Board of
Supervisors, prior to final subdivision plan approval.
§ 608 HOME RULE CHARTER § 610
Ch:641
§ 611. Inspection. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; as amended by Ord.
1993-1, 3/10/1993]
§ 612. Completion of Improvements or Guarantee Thereof
Prerequisite to Final Plat Approval. [Ord. 1989-6, 11/8/1989]
B. The schedule shall be a fully developed, horizontal bar-chart type
schedule with separate time bars for each significant activity, as
identified and approved by the Township Engineer.
C. The time schedule shall be updated as soon as revisions are recognized
by the owner or developer. A fully updated time schedule shall be
provided to the Township Engineer, Zoning Officer and Manager.
Revisions in scheduling shall be submitted at least two weeks prior to
work being performed on site.
A. All improvements shall be constructed in strict conformance with the
time schedule provided to the Township.
B. Inspections shall be made by the Township Engineer in accordance with
the time schedule for construction at times before and after each
identified significant activity or other major improvements are made.
C. All costs of undertaking inspections will be borne by the subdivider or
developer.
D. The Township Engineer shall schedule inspections in accordance with
the updated time schedule. Failure to notify the Engineer at least two
weeks prior to construction work may result in additional costs to the
subdivider for wasted inspections and/or post construction testing.
E. When improvements are completed prior to the date as shown on the
time schedule, the owner or subdivider shall be responsible for any and
all costs for testing which will be required to determine the adequacy of
improvements. These tests include, but are not limited to, subgrade
density, trench backfill density, TV inspection of pipelines and pavement
thickness.
1. No plat shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such plat
have been improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, or improved as may be otherwise required by this chapter
and any walkways, curbs, gutters, streetlights, fire hydrants, shade
trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and other
improvements as may be required by this chapter have been installed in
accordance with this chapter. In lieu of the completion of any
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plat,
including improvements or fees otherwise required by this chapter, the
developer may deposit with the Township financial security in an
amount sufficient to cover the costs of such improvements or common
amenities including basins and other related drainage facilities,
§ 610 KINGSTON CODE § 612
Ch:642
recreational facilities, open space improvements, or buffer or screen
plantings which may be required.
2. When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate financing, the
Board of Supervisors, shall furnish the developer with a signed copy of
a resolution indicating approval of the final plat contingent upon the
developer obtaining a satisfactory financial security. The final plat or
record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the financial
improvements agreement is executed. The resolution or letter of
contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the
financial security agreement is not executed within 90 days unless a
written extension is granted by the Board of Supervisors; such
extension shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in
writing at the request of the developer.
3. Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the
Township may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld, federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution
irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such
lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security for
the purposes of this section.
4. Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or
federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by the
party posting the financial security, provided said bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within the
commonwealth.
5. Such bond, or other security shall provide for, and secure to the public
the completion of any improvements which may be required on or
before the date fixed in the formal action of approval or accompanying
agreement for completion of the improvements.
6. The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the
required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion
estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for completion by
the developer. Annually, the Township may adjust the amount of the
financial security by comparing the actual cost of the improvements
which have been completed and the estimated cost for the completion
of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of the 90th day after
either the original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date
of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the Township may
require the developer to post additional security in order to assure that
the financial security equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be
posted by the developer in accordance with this subsection.
7. The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by the applicant or developer and prepared by a professional
engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and certified by such
engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The
§ 612 HOME RULE CHARTER § 612
Ch:643
Township, upon the recommendation of the Township engineer, may
refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant
or developer and the Township are unable to agree upon an estimate,
then the estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another
professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and
chosen mutually by the Township and the applicant or developer. The
estimate certified by the 3rd engineer shall be presumed fair and
reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event that a 3rd
engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be
paid equally by the Township and the applicant or developer.
8. If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year
from the date of posting of the financial security to complete the
required improvements, the amount of financial security may be
increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond the
first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount
not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above bidding procedure.
9. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the
Board of Supervisors may authorize submission of final plats by
sections or stages of development subject to such requirements or
guarantees as to improvements in future section or stages of
development as it finds essential for the protection of any finally
approved section of the development.
10. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Board of
Supervisors to release or authorize the release, from time to time, of
such portions of the financial security necessary for payment to the
contractor or contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall
be in writing addressed to the Board of Supervisors, and the Board of
Supervisors shall have 45 days from receipt of such request within
which to allow the Township engineer to certify, in writing, to the Board
of Supervisors that such portion of the work upon the improvements
has been completed in accordance with the approved plat. Upon such
certification the Board of Supervisors shall authorize release by the
bonding company or lending institution of an amount as estimated by
the Township engineer fairly representing the value of the
improvements completed or, if the Board of Supervisors fails to act
within said forty-five-day period, the Board of Supervisors shall be
deemed to have approved the release of funds as requested. The Board
of Supervisors may, prior to final release at the time of completion and
certification by its engineer, require retention of 10% of the estimated
cost of the aforesaid improvements.
11. Where the Board of Supervisors accepts dedication of all or some of the
required improvements following completion, the Board of Supervisors
may require the posting of financial security to secure structural
integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning of said
§ 612 KINGSTON CODE § 612
Ch:644
§ 613. Release from Improvement Bond. [Ord. 1989-6, 11/8/1989]
improvements in accordance with the design and specifications as
depicted on the final plat for a term not to exceed 18 months from
the date of acceptance of dedication. Said financial security shall be
of the same type as otherwise required in this section with regard
to installation of such improvements, and the amount of the financial
security shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation of said
improvements.
12. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or
facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction and
pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal
authority separate and distinct from the Township, financial security to
assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in
accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or
municipal authority and shall not be included within the financial
security as otherwise required by this section.
13. If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plat as
set forth in this section, the Township shall not condition the issuance of
building, grading or other permits relating to the erection or placement
of improvements, including buildings, upon the lots or land as depicted
upon the final plat upon actual completion of the improvements
depicted upon the approved final plat. Moreover, if said financial
security has been provided, occupancy permits for any building or
buildings to be erected shall not be withheld following the improvement
of the streets providing access to and from existing public roads to such
building or buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, as well as the completion of all other improvements as
depicted upon the approved plat, either upon the lot or lots or beyond
the lot or lots in question if such improvements are necessary for the
reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or buildings.
1. When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate
improvements, the developer shall notify the Board of Supervisors, in
writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the
aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Township
engineer. The Board of Supervisors shall, within 10 days after receipt of
such notice, direct and authorize the Township engineer to inspect all of
the aforesaid improvements. The Township engineer shall, thereupon,
file a report in writing, with the Board of Supervisors, and shall
promptly mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or
registered mail. The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days
after receipt by the Township engineer of the aforesaid authorization
from the Board of Supervisors; said report shall be detailed and shall
indicate approval or rejection of said improvements, either in whole or
in part, and if said improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not be
§ 612 HOME RULE CHARTER § 613
Ch:645
approved or shall be rejected by the Township engineer, said report
shall contain a statement of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
2. The Board of Supervisors shall notify the developer, within 15 days of
receipt of the engineer's report, in writing by certified or registered
mail of the action of said Board of Supervisors with relation thereto.
3. If the Board of Supervisors or the Township engineer fails to comply
with the time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements
will be deemed to have been approved and the developer shall be
released from all liability, pursuant to its performance guaranty bond or
other security agreement.
4. If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall
be rejected by the Board of Supervisors, the developer shall proceed to
complete the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
5. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
developer's right to contest or question by legal proceedings or
otherwise, any determination of the Board of Supervisors or the
Township engineer.
6. Where herein reference is made to the Township engineer, he shall be
as a consultant thereto.
7. The applicant or developer shall reimburse the Township for the
reasonable and necessary expense incurred for the inspection or
improvements according to a schedule of fees adopted by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors and as from time to time amended. Such
expense shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and
customary fees charged by the Township engineer or consultant for
work performed for similar services in the community, but in no event
shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the engineer or
consultant to the Township when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise
imposed on applicants.
A. In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such expense
in connection with the inspection of improvements, the applicant
shall, within 10 working days of the date of billing, notify the
Township that such expenses are disputed as unreasonable or
unnecessary, in which case the Township shall not delay or
disapprove a subdivision or land development application or any
approval or permit related to development due to the applicant's
request over disputed engineer expenses.
B. If, within 20 days from the date of billing, the Township and the
applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are
reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and the Township
shall jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another professional
engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
§ 613 KINGSTON CODE § 613
Ch:646
§ 614. Remedies to Effect Completion of Improvements. [Ord.
1989-6, 11/8/1989]
In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been
installed as provided in this chapter or in accord with the approved final
plat the Board of Supervisors is hereby granted the power to enforce
any corporate bond, or other security by appropriate legal and equitable
remedies. If the proceeds of such bond, or other security are insufficient
to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by said security, the Board of Supervisors may, at its
option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision
or land development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action
to recover the moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the
improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or
from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both,
shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such
security, and not for any other Township purpose.
review the said expenses and make a determination as to the
amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
C. The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence
and review such documentation as the professional engineer in his
or her sole opinion deems necessary and render a decision within
50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay
the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
D. In the event that the Township and applicant cannot agree upon the
professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days of the billing
date, then, upon application of either party, the President Judge of
the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial district in which the
Township is located (or if at the time there be no President Judge,
then the senior active judge then sitting) shall appoint such
engineer, who, in that case, shall be neither the Township engineer
nor any professional engineer who has been retained by, or
performed services for, the Township or the applicant within the
preceding five years.
E. The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if
the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or
greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in
the decision is less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the
Township shall pay the fee of the professional engineer, but
otherwise the Township and the applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the
fee of the appointed professional engineer.
§ 613 HOME RULE CHARTER § 614
Ch:647

Part 7
MOBILE HOME PARKS
§ 701. Grant of Power. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
Provisions regulating mobile home parks as set forth in this Part are those
pursuant to § 501 of the Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 702. Purpose, Authority and Jurisdiction. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
The purpose, authority and jurisdiction for land development as a mobile
home park are the same as contained in Part 1 of this chapter.
§ 703. General Procedure and Plan Requirements. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/
1987]
The General Procedure and Plan Requirements for land developments as a
mobile home park shall be in accordance with the requirements contained
in Parts 3 and 4 of this chapter.
§ 704. Design Standards. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
The arrangements and other design standards of streets, easements, blocks,
lots, stormwater management, erosion and sedimentation control, and
floodplain regulations shall be in accordance with the requirements
contained in Part 5 of this chapter, and the Township Zoning Ordinance.
§ 705. Improvements and Construction Requirements. [Ord. 86-5,
1/14/1987]
In a mobile home park all improvements, construction requirements, and
engineering specifications for the improvements required, shall be provided
in accordance with Part 4 and Part 6 of this chapter.
§ 706. Fees. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
The fee schedule for filing, inspection and engineering fees for land
development as a mobile home park shall be in accordance with the
requirements contained in Part 3, § 302, of this chapter.
§ 701 HOME RULE CHARTER § 706
Ch:649

Part 8
MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAN REQUIREMENTS
§ 801. Minor Subdivisions. [Ord. No. 2018-3, 12/12/201868]
Minor subdivision plans shall be prepared in accordance with the Act of
May 23, 1945 (P.L. 913, No. 367), known as the "Professional Engineers
and Professional Land Surveyors Registration Law" (as amended December
19, 1990),69 drawn in conformance with the following, contain all of the
information listed and be accompanied by all documents, plans and data as
follows:
A. Scale. Minor subdivision plans shall be drawn at a scale of one inch
equals 50 feet or one inch equals 100 feet, provided that all bearings,
distances and other information can be legibly and clearly presented on
the plan.
B. Sheet Size. The minor subdivision plan and all plans submitted
therewith shall be on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches.
C. Plan Information. The minor subdivision plan shall contain at least the
following information:
1. Name of the proposed minor subdivision.
2. A location map at a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet.
3. Existing property and lot layout immediately adjacent to the
subject property line.
4. Names of adjoining property owners and the names of all adjoining
subdivisions and land developments.
5. Existing features: existing man-made and natural features,
including but not limited to the following:
(a) Watercourses and lakes.
(b) Wetlands accurately shown. In all cases of wetlands containing
1/2 acre or more, a wetlands delineation shall be presented,
prepared by a trained professional, which shall be performed
within three years of the date of submittal of the plan.
(c) One-hundred-year floodplain areas.
(d) Buildings, structures and all other significant features within
the subdivision.
(e) Location and description of any certified historic site or
structure.
68.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Parts 8 and 9
as Parts 9 and 10, respectively.
69.Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 148 et seq.
§ 801 HOME RULE CHARTER § 801
Ch:651
6. Location and purpose of all existing and proposed rights-of-way and
easements.
7. Name, number, right-of-way width and location of all existing
public or private streets within or immediately adjoining the
property.
8. The total tract boundary lines of the area being subdivided. These
boundaries shall have an error of closure not to exceed one foot in
5,000 feet. (Proof of closure shall be submitted with the plan.)
9. Plan data: the full plan of the proposed subdivision, including but
not limited to the following data:
(a) Sufficient bearings, lengths of lines, radii, arc lengths of all
lots, street rights-of-way, easements, open space areas and
areas to be reserved to accurately and completely reproduce
each and every course on the ground.
(1) All dimensions shall be in feet and hundredths of a foot.
(2) All bearings shall be in degrees, minutes, seconds.
(b) Street names.
(c) Street widths.
(d) Rights-of-way and easements described.
(e) Clear sight triangles shall be shown at all street intersections.
(f) Lot numbers.
(g) Lot area (where applicable).
(h) Location and description of lot markers. Lot markers shall be
labeled as found or set in place.
(i) North arrow.
(j) Graphic and written scale.
(k) Contour lines sufficient to show slope of lot(s) or to show
direction and average percentage of slope.
(l) Building reserve (setback) lines set forth within each lot and in
the protective covenants.
(m) A statement relative to the type of water supply.
(n) A statement relative to the type of sewage disposal/planning
module component.
(o) A statement of the total area of the property being subdivided.
(p) A statement of the total number of lots being subdivided.
§ 801 KINGSTON CODE § 801
Ch:652
(q) Deed or record book volume and page number(s), as assigned
by the Luzerne County Recorder of Deeds, reference of the
latest source of title to the land being subdivided.
(r) Zoning district and all other zoning information pertaining to
the subdivision.
(s) Current Luzerne County property identification number(s)
[PIN(s)] for the subject property.
(t) A title block on the lower right corner of all plans, which shall
list the date the minor subdivision plan was completed and the
date of each revision.
D. Plan Certificates. The following certificates shall be labeled on the
minor subdivision plan using the following:
1. Certificate of accuracy and compliance dated, signed and sealed by
the registered professional land surveyor responsible for the minor
subdivision plan.
2. Certificate of review and recommendation by the Kingston
Township Planning Commission and Township Engineer, which
shall be located on the bottom edge of the plan.
3. Certificate of review and approval by the Township Board of
Supervisors, which shall be located on the bottom edge of the plan.
4. Certificate of ownership and acknowledgement of plan, which shall
be accurately completed and signed by the owner(s) of the property
with signatures dated and notarized.
5. Affidavit of plan submission, with the date the plan was accepted by
the Luzerne County Planning Commission.
E. Required Covenants.
1. The following covenants shall be set forth on all minor subdivision
plans in the form of protective or restrictive covenants:
(a) Building reserve (setback) lines.
(b) Drainage and slope easements.
(c) Clear sight line easements with maintenance responsibilities
when easement affects any lot area.
2. All lots shown on this plan are subject to the rules and regulations
as are set forth in the Kingston Township Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations and the Kingston Township Zoning
Ordinance,70 as both are amended.
70.Editor's Note: See Ch. 27, Zoning.
§ 801 HOME RULE CHARTER § 801
Ch:653
3. Wells and sewage disposal systems shall be constructed in
complete accordance with the standards of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (when applicable).
F. Plan Notes. The following general notes shall be on all minor
subdivision plans, when applicable:
1. Private Access Street. When the subdivision plan incorporates a
private access street as defined in this chapter: "The improvement
and maintenance of the private access street(s) shall be the sole
responsibility of those persons benefiting by the use thereof."
2. Private Access Street Serving Two Lots. When the subdivision plan
incorporates a private access street serving two lots: "The private
access street designated as parcel (parcel no. of street) shall be
conveyed as an undivided 1/2 interest each to lots (lot no.) and (lot
no.)."
3. By approval of this plan, the Township of Kingston has neither
confirmed nor denied the existence and/or the extent of any
wetland areas, whether or not delineated on the plan, and any
encroachment thereon for any reason whatsoever shall be the sole
responsibility of the subdivider and/or developer, his heirs and
assigns, and shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Army Corps
of Engineers and/or the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, and the encroachment shall conform to
the rules and regulations of the jurisdictional agencies.
4. State Highway Access. When any lot proposed on the subdivision
plan requires access to a highway under the jurisdiction of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, a highway occupancy
permit is required pursuant to § 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L.
1242, No. 428), known as the "State Highway Law,"71 before access
to a state highway is permitted.
5. Township Road Access. When any lot proposed on the subdivision
plan required access to a roadway under the jurisdiction of
Kingston Township, a driveway permit is required pursuant to the
Kingston Township Driveway Permit Ordinance before access to a
Township road is permitted.
71.Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-420.
§ 801 KINGSTON CODE § 801
Ch:654
Part 9
Administration
§ 901. Modifications. [Ord. 1989-6, 11/8/1989]
§ 902. Reconsideration. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
Any subdivider aggrieved by a finding, decision or recommendation of
the Board of Supervisors, may request and receive opportunity to appear,
present additional relevant information and request reconsideration of the
original finding, decision or recommendation.
§ 903. Records. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
§ 904. Subdivision Administration. [Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
The day to day administration of this chapter is hereby delegated to the
Zoning Officer.
§ 905. Preventive Remedies. [Ord. 1989-6, 11/8/1989]
1. The Board of Supervisors may grant a modification of the requirements
of one or more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will
exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to
the public interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter is
observed.
2. All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany
and be a part of the application for development. The request shall state
in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based, the provision or provisions of this chapter involved
and the minimum modification necessary.
3. The request for modification shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for advisory comments.
4. The Board of Supervisors shall keep a written record of all action on all
requests for modifications.
A. The Township of Kingston shall keep a record of its findings, decisions,
and recommendations relative to all subdivision plans filed with it for
review.
B. All such records shall be public records.
1. In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
§ 901 HOME RULE CHARTER § 905
Ch:655
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
2. The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has
been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of this chapter. This authority to deny such a
permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
A. The owner of record at the time of such violation.
B. The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
C. The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
D. The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
3. As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an
approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the Township may require
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the
property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real
property.
§ 905 KINGSTON CODE § 905
Ch:656
Part 10
Penalties
§ 1001. Enforcement Remedies. [Ord. 1989-6, 11/8/1989]
1. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the district justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the district justice determining that there has
been a violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for
the person, partnership, or corporation violating this chapter to have
believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be
deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the district
justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
2. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
3. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
4. District justices shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings brought
under this section.
§ 1001 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1001
Ch:657
Chapter 23
SWIMMING POOLS
Chapter 24
TAXATION, SPECIAL
§ 1001 KINGSTON CODE § 1001
Ch:658
Part 1
EARNED INCOME TAX
§ 101. Imposition of Tax. [Ord. 1977-46, 10/12/1977, § 1]
A tax for general revenue purposes in the amount of 1% is hereby imposed
on earned income and net profits earned by residents of the Township of
Kingston, and on earned income and net profits earned by nonresidents
of the Township of Kingston, who are not presently paying such a tax at
their present place of residency, for work done, or services performed or
rendered in the Township of Kingston, during the taxable period beginning
on the first day of January 1978 and continuing for each taxable year
thereafter.
§ 102. Declaration, Return and Payment of Tax. [Ord. 1977-46, 10/
12/1977, § 2]
§ 103. Collection at Source. [Ord. 1977-46, 10/12/1977, § 3]
§ 104. Powers and Duties of the Officer. [Ord. 1977-46, 10/12/1977,
§ 4; as amended by Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
1. Net Profits; Quarterly Payments.
A. Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15 of the
current year, make and file a declaration of his estimated net
profits for the current year and shall pay the tax due thereon in
quarterly installments and shall file a final return and pay to the
officer the balance of the tax due, all as set forth in § 107.
2. Earned Income.
A. Every taxpayer shall make and file returns and pay the taxes due,
all as set forth in § 107.
B. Quarterly Returns. Every taxpayer who is employed for a salary,
wage or other compensation and who received any earned income
not subject to the provisions relating to collection at source shall
make and file with the officer quarterly returns and shall pay
quarter-annually the amount of tax shown as due on such returns,
all as set forth in § 107.
1. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the corporate limits of the Township of
Kingston shall deduct the tax imposed by this Part on the earned
income due to his employee or employees and shall file quarterly
returns and final returns and pay quarterly to the officer the amount of
taxes deducted, all as set forth in § 107.
2. No employer shall be required to register, deduct taxes, file return or
pay taxes in the cases of domestic servants.
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 104
Ch:659
§ 105. Administration. [Ord. 1977-46, 10/12/1977, § 5]
The Income Tax Officer shall be selected from time to time by resolution
of and shall receive such compensation for his services and expenses as
determined from time to time by the Board of Supervisors of the Township
of Kingston. Such officer shall have the powers and duties and be subject to
the penalties provided and set forth in § 107.
§ 106. Applicability. [Ord. 1977-46, 10/12/1977, § 6]
The tax imposed in § 101 of this Part shall not be levied on the net profits
of any person, institution or organization as to whom it is beyond the power
of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Kingston to impose said tax
under the Constitution of the United States of America or the Constitution
and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 107. Addendum No. 1, Enabling Act Section. [Ord. 1977-46, 10/12/
1977, § 7; as amended by Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985]
Section 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of 1965, P.L. 1257, No. 511,
53 P.S. § 6901, and the Home Rule and Optional Plans Law, Act of 1972, P.L.
184, No. 64, 53 P.S. § 101, are hereby made a part of this Part by reference.
1. The Board of Supervisors of Kingston Township shall designate, by
appropriate resolution, the Income Tax Officer, who shall perform his
duties in accord with the rules and regulations as set forth in § 107 and
such rules and regulations relating to administration and enforcement
of this Part as may be approved by the Board of Supervisors of Kingston
Township.
2. The Income Tax Officer shall be bonded in accordance with provisions
as set forth in § 107, and the custodian of said bond shall be the
Township Manager of the Township of Kingston.
3. The Income Tax Officer shall turn over to the Township Manager of the
Township of Kingston, when the income has reached § 5,000 or at the
expiration of each respective quarter, those amounts duly collected by
him as revenues of the tax promulgated through the provisions of this
Part.
§ 104 KINGSTON CODE § 107
Ch:660
Part 2
REALTY TRANSFER TAX72
§ 201. Short Title. [Ord. 2007-4, 7/11/2007]
This Part shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the
Township of Kingston."
§ 202. Authority. [Ord. 2007-4, 7/11/2007]
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Township of Kingston, regardless of where the documents making the
transfer are made, executed or delivered or where the actual settlements
on such transfer took place, as authorized by Article XI-D (Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax), 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq. Furthermore, this Part is enacted
under authority of the Local Tax Reform Act of December 13, 1988, P.L.
1121, No. 145, as amended, and by the authority of Act 40 of 2005, pursuant
to Article XI-D of the Tax Revenue Code of 1971.
§ 203. Definitions. [Ord. 2007-4, 7/11/2007]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons,
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Kingston, Luzerne
County, Pennsylvania.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust,
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States, or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT —
Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers, demises,
vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title of real
estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds
or releases thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal
title does not pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified
in the contract has been paid or any cancellation thereof, unless the
consideration is payable over a period of time exceeding 30 years,
or instruments which solely grant, vest or confirm a public utility
easement.
A.
72.Editor's Note: Former Part 2, Realty Transfer Tax, Adopted By Ord. 86-8, 1/14/1987, Was
Repealed By Ord. 2007-5, 7/11/2007.
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 203
Ch:661
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The businesses of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of
the foregoing. Individuals related by half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they related by whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, or corporation. The term
person, as applied to associations, shall include the responsible members
or general partners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers
thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership in which is held by 35 or fewer persons, and which:
Document shall also include a declaration of acquisition required to be
presented for recording under this Part.
B.
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this Township, including,
without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees,
and other improvements, immovables or interest which, by custom,
usage or law, pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding
permanently attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in an cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
§ 203 KINGSTON CODE § 203
Ch:662
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Kingston, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania.
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings, exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and activity traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate,
or perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 35 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof, where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate; provided that, where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth for actual consideration for the contract of sale.
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common-level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations.
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest.
C.
§ 203 HOME RULE CHARTER § 203
Ch:663
§ 204. Imposition of Tax. [Ord. 2007-4, 7/11/2007]
§ 205. Exempt Parties. [Ord. 2007-4, 7/11/2007]
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this Part. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall not,
however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the tax.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
1. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction, or any part hereof, a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
2. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds
whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the
signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
3. It is the intent of this Part that the entire burden of the tax imposed on a
person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations imposed by the laws
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; so that if any other political
subdivision or school district shall have imposed or hereafter shall
impose such tax on the same person or transfer, then the tax levied by
the Township of Kingston under the authority of the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall, during the time such duplication
of the tax exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the
rate, and such 1/2 rate shall become effective without any action on the
part of the Township of Kingston; provided, however, that the Township
of Kingston and any other political subdivision which impose such tax
on the same person or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their
respective rates to 1/2 of the rate herein provided, they will impose
respectively different rates, the total of which shall not exceed the
maximum rate permitted by law.
4. If, for any reason, the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected, as
provided in § 212 hereof.
§ 203 KINGSTON CODE § 206
Ch:664
§ 206. Excluded Transactions. [Ord. 2007-4, 7/11/2007]
1. The tax imposed by this Part shall not be imposed upon:
A. A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation, or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned by the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made with one
year from the date of condemnation.
B. A document which the Township of Kingston is prohibited from
taxing under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
C. The conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or
county pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township,
school district or county of a tax delinquent property at Sheriff's
sale or Tax Claim Bureau sale.
D. A transfer, for no nominal actual consideration, which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
E. A transfer or division in kind, for no or nominal actual
consideration, of property passed by testate or intestate succession
and held by co-tenants; however, if any of the parties take shares
greater in value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the
excess.
F. A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister, and between a grandparent and
grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a
subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject
to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
G. A transfer, for no or nominal actual consideration, of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
H. A transfer, for no or nominal consideration, to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
§ 206 HOME RULE CHARTER § 206
Ch:665
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
I. A transfer, for no or nominal actual consideration, from a trustee to
a beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
J. A transfer, for no or nominal actual consideration, from trustee to
successor trustee.
K. A transfer, for no or nominal actual consideration, between
principal and agent or straw party or from or to an agent or straw
party where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax
would be imposed under this Part. Where the document by which
title is acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth
that the property acquired by the grantee is from or the benefit of
his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is
the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee
claims an exemption from taxation under this subsection.
L. A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation of division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this Part.
M. A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
N. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
O. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(1) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(2) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
P. A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
§ 206 KINGSTON CODE § 206
Ch:666
§ 207. Documents Relating to Associations or Corporations. [Ord.
2007-4, 7/11/2007]
Except as otherwise provided in § 206, documents which make, confirm or
evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between associations
or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or stockholders
thereof are fully taxable. For the purpose of this Part, corporations and
associations are entities separate from their members, partners,
stockholders or shareholders.
§ 208. Acquired Companies. [Ord. 2007-4, 7/11/2007]
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
Q. Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
R. A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
S. A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
T. A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
U. A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
V. Lease for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
2. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of value
may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the
reason such document is not subject to tax under this Part.
1. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company and, of itself or together
with prior changes, has the effect or transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
§ 206 HOME RULE CHARTER § 208
Ch:667
§ 209. Credits Against Tax. [Ord. 2007-4, 7/11/2007]
§ 210. Extension of Lease. [Ord. 2007-4, 7/11/2007]
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
2. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of family farm corporation
under this Part.
3. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
1. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
2. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of a new previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
3. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
4. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
5. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
§ 208 KINGSTON CODE § 210
Ch:668
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 211. Proceeds of Judicial Sale. [Ord. 2007-4, 7/11/2007]
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, except the State realty transfer tax; and the Sheriff or
other officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first monies paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 212. Administration. [Ord. 2007-4, 7/11/2007]
1. The tax imposed hereunder and all applicable interest and penalties
shall be administered, collected and enforced under the Act of
December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), as amended, known as the
"Local Tax Enabling Act," provided that, if the correct amount of the tax
is not paid by the last date prescribed for timely payment, the Township
of Kingston, pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971
(72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce
the tax, interest and penalties.
2. Pursuant to the applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
the Recorder of Deeds of Luzerne County, Pennsylvania, shall be the
primary collection agent for the local realty transfer tax due to the
Township of Kingston, hereunder.
3. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
4. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder of Deeds of Luzerne
County, Pennsylvania, shall pay over to the Township of Kingston all
local realty transfer taxes collected hereunder, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collection of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent commission shall be
paid to the county.
5. Any tax imposed hereunder that is not paid by the date the tax is due
shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal
claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53 P.S. § 7101
et seq.), as amended, known as the "Municipal Claims and Tax Liens
Act." The interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed
upon delinquent commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the
Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended,
§ 210 HOME RULE CHARTER § 212
Ch:669
§ 213. Statement of Value. [Ord. 2007-4, 7/11/2007]
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or it shall be accompanied by a statement of
value executed by a responsible person in connection with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax
under this Part. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented for
recording shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the document and
a statement of value executed by a responsible person in connection with
the transaction showing such connection and setting forth the true, full
and complete value thereof of the reason, if any, why such document is not
subject to tax under this Part.
§ 214. Civil Penalties. [Ord. 2007-4, 7/11/2007]
§ 215. Lien. [Ord. 2007-4, 7/11/2007]
The tax imposed by this Part shall become a lien upon the lands, tenements
or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying or being situated, wholly
or in part, within the boundaries of the Township of Kingston, which lands,
tenements, hereditaments, or interest therein are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this Part. The lien is to begin at the time when the tax
under this Part is due and payable and continue until discharge by payment
known as the "Fiscal Code," or the maximum interest rate permitted
under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act, as amended, for tax
claims.
6. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder of Deeds of Luzerne
County, Pennsylvania, shall re-record the deed or record the additional
realty transfer tax form only when both the State and local amounts and
re-recording or recording fee have been tendered.
1. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this Part is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
2. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this Part at
the time of the presentation of the document for recording, unless it is
shown that such failure is due to reasonable cause, there shall be added
to the tax 5% of the amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than
one month, with an additional 5% for each additional month or fraction
thereof during which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the
aggregate.
§ 212 KINGSTON CODE § 215
Ch:670
or in accordance with the law. The Solicitor is authorized hereby to file a
municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Luzerne County in
accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act,
53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 216. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this Part, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character
are recovered in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 215 HOME RULE CHARTER § 216
Ch:671

Part 3
PER CAPITA TAX
§ 301. Tax Imposed. [Ord. 4/13/1960, § 1; as amended by Ord. 2/9/
1966]
There is hereby imposed, assessed and levied, for general revenue
purposes, for the calendar year 1960 and thereafter, upon every adult
resident of the Township of Kingston of the age of 18 years or over, a per
capita tax of $5 per annum.
§ 302. Tax Collector to Collect. [Ord. 4/13/1960, § 2]
Said tax shall be collected by the Tax Collector of Kingston Township as
other taxes imposed by law are now collected.
§ 303. Authority for Tax. [Ord. 4/13/1960, § 3; as amended by Ord.
1985-1, 2/13/1985]
This Part is enacted under the authority of the Act of Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257.
§ 304. Exemptions. [Res. 1983-1, 1/13/1983]
All individuals subject to the per capita tax as ordained and levied by the
Township of Kingston who have attained the age of 65 years are hereby
exonerated from the collection of said per capita tax levied by the Township
of Kingston during the year 1983 and thereafter.
§ 301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 304
Ch:673

Part 4
LOCAL SERVICES TAX
§ 401. Definitions. [Ord. 2011-8, 11/9/2011]
The following words and phrases, when used herein, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation, as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act
of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1251, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received; whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
Township of Kingston, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 402 of this Part 4.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 402. Levy of Tax. [Ord. 2011-8, 11/9/2011]
1. For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing on January 1, 2012, upon the privilege of
engaging in an occupation with a primary place of employment within
§ 401 HOME RULE CHARTER § 402
Ch:675
§ 403. Exemption and Refunds. [Ord. 2011-8, 11/9/2011]
the Township of Kingston during the tax year. Each natural person who
exercises such privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall
pay the tax for that year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata
basis, in accordance with the provisions of this Part 4.
2. This tax may be used solely for the following purposes, as the same may
be allocated by the Township of Kingston from time to time:
A. Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services;
B. Road construction and/or maintenance;
C. Reduction of property taxes; or
D. Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85,
Subchapter F (relating to homestead property exclusion).
3. The political subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived
from the tax for emergency services.
4. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore
levied by the political subdivision.
5. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person maybe employed.
1. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
A. Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total 100% disability.
B. Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the Unites States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
§ 402 KINGSTON CODE § 403
Ch:676
2. Procedure to Claim Exemption.
A. A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event that the political subdivision utilizes a tax
collection officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate
to that officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a
copy of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from
employment within the political subdivision for the year prior to the
fiscal year for which the employee is requesting to be exempted
from the tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until
otherwise instructed by the political subdivision or except as
required by Subsection 2B, the employer shall not withhold the tax
from the person during the calendar year or the remainder of the
calendar year for which the exemption certificate applies.
Employers shall ensure that the exemption certificate forms are
readily available to employees at all times and shall furnish each
new employee with a form at the time of hiring. The exemption
certificate form shall be the uniform form provided by the political
subdivision.
B. With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000, in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection 2C.
C. If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection 2B, the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection 2B, a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event that the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
§ 403 HOME RULE CHARTER § 403
Ch:677
§ 404. Duty of Employers to Collect. [Ord. 2011-8, 11/9/2011]
outstanding balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may
pursue collection under this Part 4.
D. Except as provided in Subsection 2B, it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
3. Refunds. The Township of Kingston, in consultation with the collector
and DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund
claims for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption,
which procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general
municipal law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on
overpayments. Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75
days after the last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the
last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject
to interest. No refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a
calendar year that do not exceed $1. The Township of Kingston or the
collector shall determine eligibility for exemption and provide refunds
to exempt persons.
1. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
2. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest onehundredth
of a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payrollperiod
basis for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in
an occupation, except as provided in Subsection 4 of this section. For
purposes of this subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate
annual rate of the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
3. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
§ 403 KINGSTON CODE § 404
Ch:678
§ 405. Returns. [Ord. 2011-8, 11/9/2011]
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this Part 4, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 406. Dates for Determining Tax Liability and payment. [Ord.
2011-8, 11/9/2011]
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the collector on or before the 30th day following the end of
each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 407. Self-Employed Individuals. [Ord. 2011-8, 11/9/2011]
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
4. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by the DCED.
5. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person maybe employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer with a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
6. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 404,
Subsection 2, of this Part 4 and this section and remits the amount so
withheld in accordance with this Part 4.
7. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 404 HOME RULE CHARTER § 407
Ch:679
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this Part 4 and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 408. Individuals Engaged in More Than One Occupation or
Employed in More Than One Political Subdivision. [Ord. 2011-8, 11/
9/2011]
§ 409. Nonresidents Subject to Tax. [Ord. 2011-8, 11/9/2011]
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this Part 4 with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this Part 4, be considered a self-employed
person; and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 410. Administration of Tax. [Ord. 2011-8, 11/9/2011]
1. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
A. First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
B. Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
C. Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
2. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
1. The collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer of self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
§ 407 KINGSTON CODE § 410
Ch:680
§ 411. Suits for Collection. [Ord. 2011-8, 11/9/2011]
§ 412. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 2011-8, 11/9/2011]
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this Part 4, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this Part 4 shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this Part 4.
§ 413. Interpretation. [Ord. 2011-8, 11/9/2011]
2. The collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this Part 4 and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this Part 4, including provisions for the examination
of payroll records of any employer subject to this Part 4, the
examination and correction of any return made in compliance with this
Part 4, and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which
overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the collector shall have the right to appeal
to the Court of Common Pleas of Luzerne County as in other cases
provided.
3. The collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by any employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
1. In the event that any tax under this Part 4 remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due date above set forth, the collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this Part 4, together with
interest and penalty.
2. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
§ 410 HOME RULE CHARTER § 413
Ch:681
1. Nothing contained in this Part 4 shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
2. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this Part 4 shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
3. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this Part 4 are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
4. The provisions of this Part 4 are declared to be severable. If any
provision of this Part 4 is declared to be invalid or unconstitutional by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall have no effect
on the remaining provisions of this Part 4 or any other ordinance of the
Township of Kingston.
5. This Part 4 shall become effective on January 1, 2012, and all calendar
years thereafter, unless repealed or modified by ordinance of the
Township of Kingston.
§ 413 KINGSTON CODE § 413
Ch:682
Part 5
DISCOUNTS AND PENALTIES
§ 501. Discounts. [Ord. 3/20/1963]
The discounts on real estate and per capita taxes levied by the Township are
to be uniform in percentage.
§ 502. Penalties. [Ord. 1977-43, 5/11/1977]
A charge of 10% shall be levied upon all municipal taxes imposed and
assessed upon real property by the Township of Kingston, Luzerne County,
Pennsylvania, which shall not have been paid in full within 120 days of the
issuance of the notice that said taxes are due and payable.
§ 501 HOME RULE CHARTER § 502
Ch:683

Part 6
LOCAL TAXPAYERS BILL OF RIGHTS
§ 601. Taxpayers Bill of Rights Notice. [Res. 1999-3,//]
1. The Taxpayers Bill of Rights Notice presented to the Board of
Supervisors is approved and adopted.
2. The Information Request Extension Procedure Notice presented to the
Board of Supervisors is approved and adopted.
3. The Taxpayers Bill of Rights Disclosure Statement presented to the
Board of Supervisors is approved and adopted.
4. Don Wilkinson Agency is appointed to receive and make determinations
on petitions from taxpayers relating to the assessment, determination
or refund of taxes covered by the disclosure statement and as stated
more particularly in the disclosure statement and to act as hearing
officer. Don Wilkinson Agency shall serve in this regard as part of its
regular duties and will receive no additional compensation for
performing such duties.
5. The Tax Appeal Information and Regulations presented to the Board of
Supervisors are approved and adopted.
6. The Township Manager or another person designated by the Township
Manager is appointed as the Board of Supervisor's representative to
receive and resolve taxpayer complaints.
7. The Township Manager shall take all steps necessary or appropriate to
ensure the Township of Kingston's compliance with the requirements of
the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights.
§ 601 HOME RULE CHARTER § 601
Ch:685
Chapter 25
TREES
§ 601 KINGSTON CODE § 601
Ch:686
Part 1
TREES AND VEGETATION ALONG OR IN ROADS OR STREETS
§ 101. Authority of Board of Supervisors. [Ord. 2017-9, 10/11/2017]
The Board of Supervisors shall be vested hereafter with the authority to
declare, after due investigation, as a hazardous or dangerous condition to
the use of any public road or street of the Township, or the impairment
of the use or maintenance of the public road or street, any tree, shrub,
brush, and vegetation growing or being within the right-of-way of any
Township road or street. Such declaration by the Board of Supervisors must
be based upon clear evidence that such tree, shrub, brush, and vegetation,
or any part thereof, growing or being in the right-of-way of the public way
constitutes a menace to public travel or, by reason of any cause whatever,
may become an imminent source of danger to the public.
§ 102. Notice to Property Owner and Possible Township Action.
[Ord. 2017-9, 10/11/2017]
The Township Manager shall give written notice, delivered by the United
States Postal Service, certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt
requested, to the owner of the property abutting any Township road or
street on which any tree, shrub, brush, and vegetation is growing or exists
within the right-of-way of a Township road or street and which the Board
of Supervisors has found to constitute a hazardous or dangerous condition
to the use of the Township road or street or which impairs the use or
maintenance of the public road or street, that the property owner must
remove the tree, shrub, brush, and vegetation constituting such menace to
public travel, or which is a source of danger to the public or causes an
impairment to the use or maintenance of the public road or street, and
it must be removed by the owner of abutting property from said right-ofway
or the public way to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors, or
its designees, at the sole expense of the abutting property owner within
30 days from the receipt of such notice. Upon the failure of the abutting
property owner to remove the dangerous tree, shrub, brush, and vegetation
within the time designated in such written notice, the Township may
contract with a private tree or shrub removal company, as an independent
contractor, for the removal by it of the dangerous tree, shrub, brush, and
vegetation condition within its public road right-of-way. In such case, the
Township may commence civil legal proceedings for the collection from
the abutting property owner of all lawful costs for the removal of the
tree, shrub, brush, and vegetation, or the Township may impose upon the
property of the abutting property owner a municipal claim and lien for all
costs incurred by the Township in the removal of the dangerous tree, shrub,
brush, and vegetation from the Township road right-of-way, pursuant to the
Municipal Claims and Tax Lien Act, Act of May 16, 1923, P.L. 207, No. 24,
as amended and supplemented, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 103
Ch:687
§ 103. Rights of Abutting Property Owners. [Ord. 2017-9, 10/11/
2017]
All property rights vested by existing Pennsylvania law in the abutting
property owner for all logs, cordwood, branch wood or other forms of wood
derived from the destruction or removal of any tree growing along the
public road or street and constituting a public nuisance to public travel
or the public street or an impairment to the use or maintenance of the
public way shall remain so vested in the abutting property owner, pursuant
to Article XXIII, Chapter 141, of the Second Class Township Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Section 67325(b).
§ 104. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 2017-9, 10/11/2017]
§ 105. Effect on Existing Provisions. [Ord. 2017-9, 10/11/2017]
The provisions of this Part of the Township of Kingston Code of Ordinances,
so far as they are the same as those ordinances and regulations in force
immediately prior to the adoption of this Part, are intended as a
continuation of such ordinances and regulations and not as a new
enactment. The provisions of this Part shall not affect any suit or
prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any of the prior
ordinances or regulations except as provided by law.
1. A violation of any provision of this Part shall constitute a summary
offense and shall be enforced by the commencement of an action before
a District Justice by the Kingston Township Police Department or other
authorized representative of the Township of Kingston in the manner
provided for enforcement of summary offenses under the applicable
provisions of the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure and the
Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 66601(c.1)(2), or any
amendment thereof. If so designated by the Board of Supervisors, the
Solicitor of the Township of Kingston may assume charge of the
prosecution of such violation(s) in a manner consistent with the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure relating to trial of summary
cases, as the same may be amended from time to time.
2. Any person who shall be found to have violated any provision of this
Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 and all costs of prosecution. Each day that a violation
of this Part continues shall constitute a separate offense.
3. In addition to all other remedies provided herein for violations of this
Part, the Township of Kingston shall have the right to proceed in any
court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of obtaining an
injunction, restraining order, or other appropriate remedy to compel
compliance with the provisions of this Part. The remedies provided
herein for the enforcement of this Part, or any remedy provided by law,
shall not be deemed mutually exclusive; rather, they may be employed
simultaneously or consecutively, at the option of the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 103 KINGSTON CODE § 106
Ch:688
§ 106. Severability. [Ord. 2017-9, 10/11/2017]
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Board of Supervisors of
the Township of Kingston that if any chapters, parts, sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrase(s) of this Part are declared unconstitutional,
illegal or otherwise invalid by the judgment or decree of a court of
competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining
chapters, parts, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this
Part or the codification of the ordinances of the Township of Kingston.
§ 106 HOME RULE CHARTER § 106
Ch:689
Chapter 26
WATER
§ 106 KINGSTON CODE § 106
Ch:690
Part 1
WATER SHORTAGES
§ 101. Township May Impose Restrictions. [Ord. 1972-3, 9/13/1972,
§ 1]
During periods of water shortage, the Supervisors of Kingston Township,
through their duly appointed representative, may impose such restrictions,
as in their sole discretion, may be necessary in order to provide for a
sufficient supply of water for reasons of health and safety, upon the use of
water in swimming pools, the washing of automobiles, the use of watering
devices for lawns and gardens and other uses not directly relating to the
preparation of food, household cleaning and other domestic uses. Such
regulations shall not be inconsistent with any state law or regulation as
may be necessary for the promotion of the health, cleanliness, comfort and
safety of the citizens of the Township of Kingston.
§ 102. Penalties. [Ord. 1985-1, 2/13/1985; as amended by Ord. 97-3,
11/12/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a District Justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 102
Ch:691

Part 2
REGULATING CONNECTIONS TO WATER SYSTEM
§ 201. Definitions. [Ord. 1988-11, 9/14/1988, § 1]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context.
BUILDING MAIN — Extension from the water system of any structure to the
lateral of a main.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the
placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling operations, and the
subdivision of land.
DWELLING — Any building which is designed for human living quarters,
but not including hotels, boardinghouses, tourist cabins, motels and other
accommodations used for transient occupancy.
LATERAL —
MAIN — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the water system used or
usable for water distribution purposes.
OWNER — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation, municipality, municipal authority, or other group or entity.
PUBLIC WATER FACILITY — Any waterworks, water supply works, water
distribution system or part thereof, designed, intended or constructed to
provide or distribute potable water.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Kingston, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania.
WATER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for production,
transmission, storage and distribution of water in the Township.
§ 202. Use of Public Water System Required. [Ord. 1988-11, 9/14/
1988, § 2]
Part of the water system extending from a main to the curbline or, if
there shall be no curbline, extending to the property line; or
A.
If no such lateral shall be provided, lateral shall mean that portion of, or
place in, a main which is provided for connection of any building main.
B.
1. The owner of any improved property abutting upon the water system,
except any improved property which shall constitute an industrial
establishment or a farm which has its own supply of water for uses
other than human consumption, shall connect such improved property
with and shall use such water system in such a manner as the Township
may require, within 90 days after notice to such owner from the
Township to make such connection, subject to such limitations and
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:693
§ 203. Building Mains and Connections. [Ord. 1988-11, 9/14/1988,
§ 3]
restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise shall be
established by the Township.
2. The notice by the Township to make connection to a main, referenced to
in § 202, Subsection 1, shall consist of a copy of this Part, including any
amendments and/or supplements at the time in effect, or a summary of
each section thereof, and a written or printed document requiring the
connection in accordance with the provisions of this Part and specifying
that such connection shall be made within 90 days after the date such
notice is given or served. Such notice may be given or served at any
time after a main is in place which can deliver water to the particular
improved property. Such notice shall be given or served upon the owner
in accordance with the law.
1. No person shall uncover, connect with, make any opening into, use,
alter or disturb, in any manner, any main or any part of the water
system without first obtaining a permit in writing from the Township.
2. Application for a permit required under § 203, Subsection 1, shall be
made by the owner of the improved property served or to be served
with notice as provided in § 202, Subsection 1, or by the duly authorized
agent of such owner.
3. No person shall make or shall cause to be made a connection of any
improved property to a main until such a person fulfills each of the
following conditions:
A. Notify the Township of the desire and intention to connect such
improved property to a main;
B. Apply for and obtain a permit as required by § 203, Subsection 1;
C. Give the Township at least 24 hours' notice before such connection
will be made in order that the Township may supervise and inspect,
or may cause to be supervised and inspected, the work of
connection and necessary testing; and
D. If applicable, furnish satisfactory evidence to the Township that any
tapping or connection fee which may be charged and imposed by
the Township against the owner of each improved property who
connects such improved property to a main has been paid.
4. Except as otherwise provided in this Subsection 4, each improved
property shall be connected separately and independently with a main,
through a building main. Grouping of more than one improved property
on one building main shall not be permitted, except under special
circumstances and for good cause shown, but then only after special
permission of the Township, in writing, shall have been secured and
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 203
Ch:694
§ 204. Regulations Governing Building Mains and Connection to
Mains. [Ord. 1988-11, 9/14/1988, § 4]
only subject to such rules, regulations and conditions as may be
prescribed by the Township.
5. All costs and expenses of construction of a building main, and all costs
and expenses of connection of a building main to a main, shall be borne
by the owner of the improved property to be connected; and such owner
shall indemnify and shall save harmless the Township from all loss or
damage that may be occasioned, directly or indirectly, as a result of
construction of a building main or of connection of a building main to a
main.
6. A building main shall be connected to a main at the place designated by
the Township and where, if applicable, the lateral is provided. A smooth,
neat joint shall be made, and the connection of a building main to the
lateral shall be made secure and watertight.
7. If the owner of any improved property located within the Township and
abutting upon the water system, subject to the exception provided for in
§ 202, Subsection 1, after 90 days' notice from the Township, in
accordance with § 202, Subsection 1, shall fail to connect such
improved property, the municipality may construct such connection and
collect from such owner the costs and expenses thereof, in any manner
permitted by law.
1. No building main shall be covered until it has been inspected and
approved by the Township. If any part of a building main is covered
before so being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered for
inspection, at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved
property to be connected to a main.
2. Every building main of any improved property shall be maintained in a
sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such improved
property.
3. Every excavation for a building main shall be guarded adequately with
barricades and lighted to protect all persons from damage and injury.
Any street, sidewalk or other public property disturbed in the course of
installation of a building main shall be restored, at the cost and expense
of the owner of the improved property being connected, in a manner
satisfactory to the Township.
4. If any person shall fail or shall refuse, upon receipt of a notice in writing
of the Township, to remedy any unsatisfactory condition with respect to
a building main within 60 days of receipt of such notice, the Township
may refuse to permit such person to be served by the water system until
such unsatisfactory condition shall have been remedied to the
satisfaction of the Township.
§ 203 HOME RULE CHARTER § 204
Ch:695
§ 205. Environmental Impact Study. [Ord. 1988-11, 9/14/1988, § 5]
In the event it is deemed appropriate, the Township may require the owner,
at his cost, to conduct an environmental impart study of connection to
an existing water system. Criteria for said study shall be provided by the
Township Engineer in accordance with existing principals of engineering
and design and any regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources and the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission.
§ 206. Appeals; Hardship. [Ord. 1988-11, 9/14/1988, § 6]
In the event any person shall deem the requirement to connect as provided
in this Part a hardship, such person may appeal to the Township for relief
from such connection requirement, which appeal shall be heard in
accordance with provisions of the Pennsylvania Local Agency Law.
§ 207. Penalties. [Ord. 1988-11, 9/14/1988, § 7; as amended by Ord.
97-3, 11/12/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a District Justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
5. The Township reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional
rules and regulations it shall deem necessary and proper relating to
connections with a main and with the water system, which additional
rules and regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be construed as
part of this Part.
§ 204 KINGSTON CODE § 207
Ch:696
Part 3
(RESERVED)73
§ 301. through § 370. (Reserved)
73.Editor’s Note: Former Part 3, Stormwater Management (Ord. 94-14, 11/9/1994) Was
Repealed By Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015. See Now Ch. 17.
§ 301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 301
Ch:697

Part 4
(RESERVED)74
§ 401. through § 410. (Reserved)
74.Editor’s Note: Former Part 4, Additional Stormwater Management Regulations (Ord.
2011-3, 5/11/2011) Was Repealed By Ord. 2015-1, 6/10/2015. See Now Ch. 17.
§ 401 HOME RULE CHARTER § 401
Ch:699
Chapter 27
ZONING
§ 401 KINGSTON CODE § 401
Ch:700
Part 1
INTRODUCTION AND ENACTMENT
§ 101. Title. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, § 1]
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the Zoning Ordinance
of Kingston Township, Pennsylvania.
§ 102. Enactment. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, § 2; as amended by Ord. 86-5,
1/14/1987; and by Ord. No. 2018-4, 12/12/2018]
Whereas, as the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Kingston has
acted, pursuant to the authority granted to it by Act 247, the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code of July 1968, as amended by Act 93 of 1972
and the Comprehensive Land Use Plan of Kingston Township, the following
ordinance, to be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of Kingston Township,
Pennsylvania," is hereby adopted and ordained effective the 14th day of
January 1987. As part of this chapter so enacted into law is the "Official
Zoning Map of the Township of Kingston," said map being identified by the
inscription "Zoning Map of Kingston Township, Pennsylvania," adopted on
the 14th day of January 1987, as amended.
§ 103. Purposes. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, § 3]
The zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth are made in
accordance with the Comprehensive Land Use Plan of Kingston Township,
with consideration for the character of the Township, its various parts and
the suitability of the various parts for particular uses and structures, and
in order to promote, protect and facilitate the public health, safety and
welfare of the inhabitants of Kingston Township and of the public generally.
The provisions are designed to prevent overcrowding of land, danger and
congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life or property
or other dangers. The chapter is also intended to support the following
community development objectives:
A. Appearance. To improve the appearance of the land and structures in
Kingston Township and to improve the utility of land, especially leveling
the stripping areas and banks, controlling signs, and screening
junkyards and other areas of bad appearance.
B. Education. To help maintain public and private school systems, capable
of maximizing a student's potential, including large administrative
districts with diversified educational opportunities. To better educate
people of all ages, races, incomes, mental capacities and physical
handicaps.
C. Transportation. To create an integrated transportation system, of using
public transportation to its maximum effectiveness, and integrating it
with private transportation, and to prepare and obtain acceptance of a
continuing transportation system for Kingston Township, as related to
Luzerne County, and its Transportation Authority and particularly to
§ 101 HOME RULE CHARTER § 103
Ch:701
§ 104. Compliance. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, § 4]
Except as hereinafter provided, no land, building, structure or premises
shall hereafter be used, and no building or part thereof or other structure
shall be located, erected, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted,
altered or moved except in conformity with the regulations herein specified
for the district in which it is located, and in conformity with all duly
ordained ordinances, resolutions and subdivision regulations of Kingston
Township except for provisions as stated in the Planned Residential
Development Ordinance in effect or hereafter adopted. No yard space or
minimum area required for a building or use shall be considered as any part
of the yard space or minimum area for another building or use.
assist low income groups and elderly citizens in obtaining better
transportation to jobs and shopping areas.
D. Recreation and Tourism. Provide sufficient recreation facilities,
particularly at the Township level, to meet national standards, and
promote tourism to the greatest extent possible.
E. Pollution. Eliminate or reduce major sources of pollution.
F. Flooding. To provide additional flood protection for critical areas, and
to discourage development in floodplains that would be damaged by
flooding.
G. Housing. To provide an adequate supply of sanitary and safe housing in
a decent environment in Kingston Township for all income groups,
regardless of race, color or background, including the rehabilitation of
existing structures.
H. Crime Prevention. To reduce the incidence of crime to the extent
possible, within Kingston Township.
I. Economics. To increase the tax base by providing land for commercial
growth, and industrial growth where feasible, in the foreseeable future,
so that it does not conflict with residential or public development.
J. Utilities. To promote the provision of public and private utilities in
Kingston Township.
K. Land Use and Comprehensive Plans. To use the Zoning Ordinance as a
tool to help implement the Land Use and Comprehensive Plans of
Kingston Township.
L. Health. To improve the health of the residents of Kingston Township by
controlling pollution, separating new residences for adequate light, sun
and air, and the provision of adequate treatment facilities at the lowest
possible cost. To reduce pollution to the lowest level which is
economically feasible. To limit densities of population to reasonable
standards, depending on location, to provide attractive surroundings,
have sufficient parking and avoid congestion.
§ 103 KINGSTON CODE § 104
Ch:702
Part 2
DEFINITIONS OF WORDS
§ 201. Application and Interpretation. [Ord. No. 2018-4, 12/12/
2018]
§ 202. Specific Definitions. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. II; as amended by
Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; by Ord. 1989-4, 6/13/1989, § 4; by Ord.
1989-5, 11/8/1989; by Ord. 90-8, 10/10/1990, § 1; by Ord. 2000-3, 4/
12/2000; by Ord. 2006-3, 9/13/2006, § 1; and by Ord. No. 2018-4, 12/
12/2018]
For the purpose of the administration and enforcement of this chapter, and
unless otherwise stated in this chapter, the following words shall have the
meanings as indicated herein. Words used in the present tense shall include
1. It is not intended that these definitions include only words used or
referred to in this chapter. The words are included in order to facilitate
the interpretation of this chapter for administration purposes and in the
performance of duties by appropriate Township of Kingston officers and
by the Township of Kingston Zoning Hearing Board.
2. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following shall, for the purposes
of this chapter, have the meaning herein indicated:
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the past and future
tense.
B. The word "person" shall include a for-profit or nonprofit firm,
association, organization, corporation, company, partnership, trust,
or individual or single proprietorship, or any other similar entity.
C. The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building
shall include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used,
occupied or maintained."
D. The word "building" shall include "part hereof" and "structure."
E. The word "lot" shall include "plot," "parcel" or "tract."
F. The words "shall" and "must" are always mandatory; the words
"may" and "should" are permissive.
G. The singular number shall include the plural, and the plural
number shall include the singular.
H. Words of masculine gender shall include the feminine gender and
the neuter; words of feminine gender shall include the masculine
gender and the neuter.
I. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kinds and character.
§ 201 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:703
the future tense; words used in the singular number shall include the plural
number; words used in the plural number shall include the singular number;
the word "shall" is mandatory, not directory.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A secondary residence, garage, or other building
or structure subordinate to and not forming an integral part of the main or
principal building on a lot or parcel but pertaining to the use of the main
building. An accessory building may include servants' quarters.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A garage, or other building or structure
subordinate to and not forming an integral part of the main or principal
building on a lot or parcel but pertaining to the use of the main building.
ADULT USE(S) —
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment that has a substantial portion
of its stock-in-trade and offers for sale, for any form of consideration,
any one or more of the following: (1) books, magazines, periodicals
or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or other visual representations that are characterized
by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or (2) instruments, devices or
paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified
sexual activities.
1.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — A nightclub, bar, restaurant, club or
similar establishment that regularly features live performances that
are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
specified sexual activities, or films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides or other photographic reproductions in which a substantial
portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of
material that is characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
2.
MASSAGE PARLOR — An establishment where, for any form of
consideration, massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, electric or magnetic
treatment or similar treatment or manipulation of the human body is
administered, unless such treatment or manipulation is administered by
a medical practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist,
certified massage therapist or similar professional person licensed by
the state. This definition does not include an athletic club, health club,
school, gymnasium, reducing salon, spa or similar establishment where
massage or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an
incidental or accessory service.
3.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — As used herein, specified
anatomical areas means and includes any of the following: (1) less
than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the aureole; or (2) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
4.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:704
ADVERTISING SIGNS — A surface whereon advertising material is set
in public view, including reference to any use of premises whereon it is
displayed or posted.
ALLEY — A narrow thoroughfare dedicated or used for public passageway
up to 20 feet in width, upon which usually abut the rear of the premises, or
upon which service entrances or buildings abut, and is not generally used
as a thoroughfare by both pedestrians and vehicles, is not used for general
traffic, and is not otherwise officially designated as a street. A way which
affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.
ALTERATIONS — Any change in the arrangement of a building, including
any work affecting the structural parts of a building; or an enlargement; or
any change in wiring, plumbing, heating, or cooling system; and includes
the words "to alter" and "alter."
APARTMENT BUILDING — A building which is used or intended to be
used as a home or residence for more than two families living in separate
quarters.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors or
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final required to be filed and approved prior to
start of construction or development including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
AREA OF A COMMUNICATION SITE — The area shall be the area needed
to accommodate the tower, guy wires (if used), the equipment building,
security fence, parking area and buffer planting.
AUTOMOTIVE SALES AND SERVICES — The sale or storage of new and
used automobiles, paint and body repair shops.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS — A building occupied to
provide, for compensation, sleeping accommodations and breakfast for
transient guests.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — As used herein, specified sexual
activities means and includes any of the following: (1) the fondling or
other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus
or female breast; (2) sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; (3) masturbation,
actual or simulated; or (4) excretory functions as part of or in
connection with any of the activities set forth as an "adult use."
5.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST HOMESTAY — A home occupation providing,
for compensation, sleeping accommodations and breakfast for
compensation for transient guests.
1.
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:705
BOARD — Any body granted jurisdiction under a land use ordinance or
under this chapter to render final adjudications.
BOATHOUSE — A house or shed for sheltering one or more boats.
BOUNDARY OF DISTRICT — The center line of a street or right-of-way or
the center line of an alleyway between the rear or side property lines, or,
where no alley or passageway exists, the rear or side property lines of all
lots bordering on any district limits or any district boundary shown on the
maps adopted by § 402.
BUFFER AREA — A method of improvements designed to separate and
substantially obstruct the view of two or more adjacent land uses,
properties and/or zoning districts from one another. Unless specified
otherwise, for the purpose of this chapter, when a "buffer area" is required
it shall be deemed to represent a fence or stone wall with cork fitting, eight
feet in height with two staggered rows of evergreen trees planted in front
of the fence or wall with the spacing distance between trees not greater
than six feet. Said trees shall be not less than eight feet in height at the
time of planting. The type of evergreen trees selected for planting shall be
subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors, Zoning Hearing Board
or the Planning Commission in cases where the approval sought is under
the jurisdiction of any of the aforementioned entities.
BUILDABLE AREA — That portion of any lot which may be used or built
upon in accordance with the regulations governing the given zoning district
within which the particular lot is located once the various front, side, and
rear yard requirements required for the district have been subtracted from
the total lot area.
BUILDING — A building is any structure having a roof entirely separated
from any other structure by space or by walls in which there are no
communicating doors or windows or any similar opening and erected for
the purpose of providing support or shelter for persons, animals, things or
property of any kind, and anchored to its foundation.
BUILDING LINE — A line running parallel to the front property line at the
minimum horizontal setback distance required in each zoning district.
BUILDING SITE — The ground area of a building or buildings, together with
all open spaces surrounded by said building, or buildings.
CAMPER — A mobile home, tent, trailer, or other self-contained vehicle
designed for recreational purposes, made of metal.
CARE HOMES — Includes rest and nursing homes, convalescent homes and
boarding homes for the aged; established to render nursing care for chronic
or convalescent patients, but excludes facilities for care of active or violent
patients such as feebleminded or mental patients, epileptics, alcoholics,
senile psychotics or drug addicts.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST INN — A building occupied primarily as a
business, the owner may live on the premises, providing sleeping
accommodations and breakfast for transient guests.
2.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:706
CENTER LINE, HIGHWAY — The line running parallel with the highway
right-of-way which is halfway the distance between the extreme edges of
the official right-of-way width as shown on a map approved by the County
Tax Assessor.
CERTIFIED SURVEY — A survey, sketch, plat, map, or other exhibit is
said to be certified when a written statement regarding its accuracy or
conformity to specified standards is signed by the specified professional
engineer, registered surveyor, architect, or other legally recognized person.
CHURCH — A legally approved structure and its accessory buildings used
and approved on a permanent basis, primarily for public worship.
CLUB, PRIVATE — An organization or association of persons for some
common purpose, such as, but not necessarily limited to, a fraternal, social,
educational or recreational purpose; but not including clubs organized
primarily for profit or to render a service, which is customarily carried on as
a business. Such organizations and associations must be incorporated under
the laws of Pennsylvania as a nonprofit corporation and such corporations'
major purpose shall not be for the purpose of serving alcoholic beverages
to its members or others. This may not be located on, or operated by, or in
connection with any commercial use.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public
facilities.
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any device used for the transmission
or reception of radio, television, wireless telephone, pager, commercial
mobile radio service or any other personal wireless service facility signals
including, without limitation, omnidirectional or whip antennas and
directional or panel antennas, owned or operated by any person or entity
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to operate such
device. This definition shall not include private residence mounted satellite
dishes or television antennas or amateur radio equipment including,
without limitation, ham or citizen band radio antennas.
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING — An unmanned building or
cabinet containing communications equipment or any other operation of
communications antennas and covering an area on the ground not greater
than 250 square feet.
COMMUNICATION TOWER — A structure other than a building, such as
a monopole, self-supporting or guyed tower, designed and used to support
communications antennas for personal wireless service facilities.
COMMUNICATION TOWER SITE — Any lot or building lot whether owned
or leased, or any structure located on any lot or building lot, on which
communication towers, equipment buildings, and/or antenna are located
or proposed to be located. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit
the use of a communication tower site as an office, long term vehicle
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:707
storage, other outdoor storage or other uses not needed to send or receive
telecommunication signals.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district by the
Board of Supervisors pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Article
VI of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10601 et seq.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of those separate portions, in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act 1980-82,75 as amended.
CONSERVATION AREA, PRIMARY — Lands within the 100-year floodplain
(including the floodway), wetlands and slopes in excess of 25%.
CONSERVATION AREA, SECONDARY — All landscape elements not
included in the primary conservation area. In conservation subdivision
design, certain secondary conservation areas are designated to be
protected, while others may be developed. The extents to which these
features are preserved on an individual site are determined on a case-bybasis
during the land development process. Secondary conservation areas
include, without limitation: woodlands, hedgerows, fieldstone walls, groups
of trees, large individual trees of significance, important farmland soils,
hydric soils, swales, springs, vernal pools and lowland areas other than
wetlands, steep slopes between 15% and 25%, scenic roads and vistas, and
historic or cultural resources.
CONSERVATION DESIGN SUBDIVISION — A residential subdivision
designed around permanently preserved natural resources at the dwelling
unit density specified in this chapter.
DALLAS AREA MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY (DAMA) — The regulating agency
responsible for the collection and conveyance of sanitary wastewater at
a designated treatment facility and the maintenance of the sanitary
wastewater collection and conveyance system(s) located within the
corporate limits of the Township of Kingston.
DAY-CARE FACILITIES —
DAY CARE CENTER — A facility in which care is provided for periods
of less than 24 hours per day, for one or more children, at any one time,
where the child care areas are not being used as a family residence. (A
child is a person under 16 years of age.)
1.
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME — A facility in which care is provided for
periods of less than 24 hours per day, for more than six but less than 12
children, at any one time, where the child care areas are being used as
a family residence. (A child is a person under 16 years of age.)
2.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any premises other than the child's own
home, operated for profit or not for profit, in which child day-care is
provided at any one time to six children or less who are not relatives of
3.
75.Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:708
DBH (DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT) — The diameter of a tree trunk
measured at a point 4.5 feet above the ground at the base of the tree. If
a tree divides or splits into multiple trunks below 4.5 feet, the trunk is
measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. The term is usually
applied to trees in the field (not nursery stock).
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under any land use ordinance or this chapter to do so, either by
reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from
determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the Court of Common
Pleas of the county and judicial district wherein the Township lies.
DECK — A platform with railings, but without a roof, projecting out from
the main wall of a dwelling and intended to be used as an area for seating,
dining or recreation outdoors.
DEPTH OF LOT — The depth of a lot is the depth between its mean front
street line and its mean rear line, measured along the median between the
two side lot lines.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of
development plan" when used in this chapter shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DETERMINATION — Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with
the administration of any land use ordinance or applications thereunder,
except the following:
DRIVEWAY PERMIT — A permit required by Township of Kingston for
access onto a Township road based upon regulations as set forth under the
Kingston Township Driveway Ordinance.
the care giver, for periods of less than 24 hours per day where the child
care areas are not being used as a family residence. (A child is a person
under 16 years of age.)
1. The Board of Supervisors;
2. The Zoning Hearing Board; or
The Planning Commission, only if and to the extent the Planning
Commission is charged with final decision on preliminary or final plans
under the subdivision and land development or planned residential
development ordinances. Determinations shall be appealable only to
the boards designated as having jurisdiction for such appeal.
3.
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:709
DWELLING — A structure or portion thereof which is used exclusively for
human habitation.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling designed for
and occupied exclusively by one family and having no party wall in
common with an adjoining building including mobile homes with wheels
and axle removed and placed on a permanent foundation.
1.
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING — A dwelling designed for
and occupied exclusively by one family, and having no more than two
party walls in common with any other dwelling.
QUADRUPLEX — Four single-family attached dwellings in one
structure in which each dwelling has two open space exposures and
shares one or more party walls with adjoining units.
A.
TOWNHOUSE — A single-family attached dwelling in a row of at
least three such units, in which each unit has its own front and rear
access to the outside, no unit is located over another, and each unit
is separated from any other by one or more vertical party walls.
B.
2.
TWO-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling designed for and
occupied exclusively as a dwelling by two families.
TWIN — A two-family dwelling with one dwelling unit on each side
of the vertical party wall.
A.
DUPLEX — A two-family dwelling with one dwelling unit located
over the other and separated by an unpierced ceiling and floor
extending from exterior wall to exterior wall except for a common
stairwell exterior to both units.
B.
3.
TWO-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling containing
two units with one dwelling unit being wholly or partly above the other,
which has a party wall in common with an adjacent building, and which
may or may not have a common entrance.
4.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling designed for and occupied
exclusively by more than two families.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A multifamily dwelling of three stories or
less in height, excluding residential conversions.
A.
MID-RISE APARTMENT — A multifamily dwelling of four full
stories or more in height, excluding residential conversions.
B.
5.
SEASONAL DWELLING — A single-family detached dwelling used for
seasonal and temporary living purposes during any season.
6.
DWELLING, TRANSIENT — Dwellings which are occupied as the more
or less temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or
without meals and in which, as a rule, the rooms are occupied singly
with a common entrance. This classification includes residential hotels,
7.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:710
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property
owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person
or entity.
ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES — Commercial establishments engaged in
providing entertainment for a fee or an admission charge, such as an
arcade, bowling alley, billiard hall, roller-skating rink, movie theater,
performing arts theater or similar facilities.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT — A report and/or series of
reports on the effect of a proposed development or major action or event
that may significantly affect the environment and associated features
thereunder.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or
disposal systems and their essential buildings, excluding communications
towers and communications antennas, as defined herein.
EXCAVATION — Removal or recovery by any means whatsoever of soil,
rock, and, minerals, mineral substances or organic substances, other than
vegetation, from water or land on or beneath the surface thereof, or beneath
the land surface, whether exposed or submerged.
FAMILY — One person, or a group of two or more persons living together,
and interrelated by bond or consanguinity, marriage or legal adoption
occupying a dwelling unit designed as a single family unit, as a separate
housekeeping unit with a single set of kitchen facilities. The persons thus
lodging houses, tourist homes, boarding houses, furnished rooming
houses, guest houses, fraternity houses and dormitories.
DWELLING GROUP — One or more buildings, not more than 2 1/2
stories in height, containing dwelling units and constituting two or
three sides of a court which opens onto a street.
8.
DWELLING UNIT — Two or more rooms used exclusively for occupancy
by one person or family, containing living, sleeping, cooking, and bath
facilities for the use of and under the control of the occupants.
9.
DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY — A separate second dwelling unit
which may be located within a structure in which the principal use is
for a single-family dwelling provided that such accessory dwelling shall
be permitted only if it conforms with the following conditions:
Shall not exceed three rooms or 800 square feet in total livable
area.
A.
B. Is not intended for occupancy by more than three persons.
10.
DWELLING UNIT, TEMPORARY — A dwelling unit providing complete
or partial housekeeping facilities for one family for short term use.
11.
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:711
constituting a family may also include gratuitous guests and domestic
servants.
FARM — A tract of agricultural land not less than 2 1/2 acres, together
with fields, animals, and personnel there assembled, for the purpose of
production of specified types of agricultural crops.
FENCE — An artificial barrier constructed with materials recognized by the
fencing industry to enclose and/or separate areas of land. Hedges or other
similar types of vegetative cover shall not be deemed to be a fence.
FLOOD — The temporary inundation of water on normally dry land.
FLOOD, 100-YEAR — A flood that on the average is likely to occur once
every 100 years, i.e., that has an 1% chance of occurring annually although
the flood may occur in any year.
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river, or
watercourse and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface water from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures which
reduce or eliminate flood damage to property, structures and contents of
buildings.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river, stream or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot at any point.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross floor area for each of the several
stories under roof, measured from the interior limits or faces of a building
or structure.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — Floor area building or buildings on any lot divided
by the area of the lot.
FRONTAGE — The distance or width of a parcel of land abutting a public
right-of-way and as measured upon such right-of-way.
FUNERAL HOME — A building or part thereof used for human funeral
services. Such building may contain space and facilities for:
Embalming and the performance of other services used in preparation
of the dead for burial;
1.
2. The performance of autopsies and other surgical procedures;
The storage of caskets, funeral urns and other related funeral supplies;
and
3.
The storage of funeral vehicles, but shall not include facilities for
cremation.
4.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:712
GARAGE, COMMUNITY — A structure or series of structures under one
roof, and under one ownership, for the storage of vehicles by three or more
owners or occupants of property in the vicinity where said structure has no
public shop or mechanical services in connection therewith.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A structure for the private use of the owner or
occupant of a principal building situated on the same lot of the principal
building for the storage of motor vehicles with no facilities for mechanical
service or repair of a commercial or public nature for profit.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A structure for the storage, care, repair, or refinishing
of motor vehicles, or a structure containing a public shop, or where
automobile mechanical service is provided.
GAS STATION (FUEL SERVICE) — A structure designed or used for the
retail sale or supply of fuel, lubricants, air, water, and other operating
commodities for motor vehicles, and including the customary spacing and
facilities for the installation of such commodities on, or in, such vehicles, but
not including space or facilities for the storage, painting, repair, refinishing,
body work, or other servicing of motor vehicles.
GENERAL NUISANCE — Any use considered to be inconsistent with the
public comfort, convenience, health, safety and general welfare, including,
but not limited to, the following: fire and explosion hazards; electrical and
radioactive disturbances; noise and vibration; dust, dirt and fly ash; glare;
smoke and odors; and other forms of air pollution.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Kingston, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania.
GROUP RESIDENCE —
A dwelling unit which is shared under congregate living arrangements
by more than four unrelated persons licensed by an appropriate
governmental agency, in which the residents of the dwelling unit
receive supervised services limited to health, social and/or
rehabilitative services. Such services shall be provided on a continuous
basis in a family-like environment to a persons who are in need of
supervision and/or specialized services in a residential setting.
1.
The following shall not be deemed to constitute a group residence:
A. A boarding home and/or a personal care boarding home.
B. A day-care facility or day-care home.
A facility providing shelter and/or rehabilitative care or treatment
of persons for alcoholism and/or an addiction to a controlled
substance.
C.
A facility for persons released from or under the jurisdiction of a
governmental Bureau of Corrections or similar institutions.
D.
2.
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:713
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES —
HEALTH/RECREATION FACILITY — An indoor facility including uses such
as game courts, exercise equipment, locker rooms and related facilities.
HEDGEROW — A linear plant community dominated by trees and/or shrubs.
Hedgerows often occur along roads, fence lines, property lines, or between
fields, and may occur naturally or be specially planted (e.g., as a
windbreak).
HEIGHT — The vertical distance of a structure measured from mean level
of the finished grade surrounding the structure to the highest point of the
structure. Also refer to the definitions of " building," building height" and "
structure."
HEIGHT OF A COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — The vertical distance
measured from the mean ground level of the communications tower site
area to the highest point on a communications tower, including antennas
mounted on the tower.
HEIGHT OF ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE, COMMERCIAL — The
vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna support structure
to the highest point of the structure. If the support structure is located on a
sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest grades shall
be used in calculating the antenna height.
HIGHWAY — Any public thoroughfare wider than 33 feet including streets,
which affords primary access to abutting property, and any thoroughfare of
less width which is not classified as an alley (street).
HIGHWAY OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A permit, issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, the Luzerne County Road and Bridge
Department or Kingston Township, which authorizes access from a parcel
of land onto a highway, road or street which is under the respective
jurisdiction of the above entities. (Refer to "driveway permits.")
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation, profession, activity, or use
conducted and/or operated by a member of the family within a dwelling unit
that is clearly a customary, incidental and secondary use of that dwelling
unit and which does not alter the exterior of the property or adversely affect
or change the residential character of the neighborhood.
Any material that, by reason of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics, may:
Cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or
an increase in a serious, irreversible, or incapacitating reversible
illness.
A.
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when properly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of or otherwise managed.
B.
1.
This definition shall be deemed to include radioactive material, medical
waste and explosives.
2.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:714
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — A nonprofit organization comprised of
homeowners or property owners, planned and operated under negotiated
and approved rules and regulations, for the purpose of administering the
needs of residents through the maintenance of community-owned property.
This term is synonymous with "property owners' association."
HOSPITAL — An institution providing health services, primarily for in
patients, and medical and surgical care of the sick or injured including
as an integral part of the institution such related facilities as laboratories,
outpatient departments, training facilities, central service facilities, and
staff offices.
HOTEL — A building occupied as the more or less temporary residence of
individuals who are lodged, with or without meals, and in which there are
10 or more sleeping rooms and entrance is through a common lobby or
office.
IMPACT ANALYSIS — A study and/or report which may be required at the
discretion of the governing body prior to approval of a conditional use, or
by the Zoning Hearing Board prior to approval of a special exception use,
to determine the potential impact of the proposed use on activities, utilities,
traffic generation and circulation, surrounding land uses, community
facilities, environmental features, critical areas, the public health, safety
and welfare and other factors directly, indirectly or potentially affected. The
applicant shall be responsible for all costs related to any and all reports and/
or studies required by the governing body or Zoning Hearing Board under
or within the context of the term "impact analysis."
IMPERVIOUS MATERIAL — Any material and/or development that
substantially reduces or prevents the infiltration of stormwater into
previously undeveloped land. Impervious surfaces shall include, but may
not be limited to, buildings, roofs, surfaced, graveled or compacted parking
areas, streets, sidewalks, driveways and similar vehicular and/or pedestrian
rights-of-way.
IMPROVEMENTS — Man-made physical additions, alterations and/or
changes which become part of, placed upon or affixed to real estate.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — An industrial area designed, organized and laid out in
accordance with an overall plan for a community of industries, including the
servicing of these industries, and designed to ensure compatibility between
and among the industrial operations within the park and the surrounding
areas through such means as landscaping, architectural designs, setbacks,
performance standards and use requirements.
INDUSTRY, LIGHT — A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly
from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage,
retail sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial
processing.
INSTITUTIONAL USE — A structure or facility which provides medical,
health, educational, social and/or rehabilitative services to more than eight
persons on a continuous and/or regular basis, excluding a facility for
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:715
persons released from or under the jurisdiction of a governmental Bureau
of Corrections or similar institution.
JUNK — Old and dilapidated automobiles, trucks, tractors, and other such
vehicles and parts thereof, wagons and other kinds of vehicles and parts
thereof, scrap building material, scrap contractors' equipment, tanks, casks,
cans, barrels, boxes, drums, piping, bottles, glass, old iron, machinery, rags,
paper, excelsior, hair, mattresses, beds or bedding, or any other kind of
scrap or waste material which is stored, kept, handled, or displayed within
the Township limits.
JUNKYARD — Any land or building used for commercial, storage and/or sale
of paper, rags, scrap metals, other scrap or discarding materials, or for the
dismantling, storage or salvaging of automobiles or other vehicles not in
running condition, or of machinery or parts thereof, but not to be used as a
dump.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Shall include any of the following activities:
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — The processing and fabrication of certain
materials and products where no process involved will produce noise,
vibration, air pollution, fire hazard, or noxious emission which will disturb
or endanger neighboring properties. Light manufacturing includes the
production of the following goods: home appliances; electrical instruments;
office machines; precision instruments; electronic devices; timepieces;
jewelry, optical goods, musical instruments, novelties, wood products,
printer material; lithographic plates; type composition; machine tools, dies
and gauges; ceramics; apparel; lightweight nonferrous metal castings; film
processing; light sheet metal products; plastic goods; pharmaceutical
goods; and food products but not animal slaughtering, curing, nor rendering
of fats.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
A.
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
B.
1.
2. A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
(PA) Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), as may be amended from
time to time.76
3.
76.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:716
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT, CORNER — Any lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two or
more intersections or intercepting streets or public highways. If the angle
or intersection of the direction lines of two highways is more than 135°, the
lot fronting on said intersection is not a corner lot.
LOT, INTERIOR — Any lot which is not a corner lot that has frontage only
on one street other than an alley.
LOT LINES, FRONT — In the case of a lot abutting upon only one street, the
front lot line is the line separating such lot from such street. In the case of
a corner lot, that part of the lot having the narrowest frontage on any street
shall be considered the front lot line. In the case of any other lot, one such
line shall be elected to be the front lot line for the purpose of this chapter,
provided it is so designated by the building plans which meet the approval
of the Zoning Officer.
LOT LINES, REAR — The rear lot line is that boundary which is opposite and
most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear,
or any odd-shaped lot, the rear lot line shall be determined by the Zoning
Officer.
LOT LINES, SIDE — A side lot line is any lot boundary line not a front lot
line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is an
exterior side lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot, or lots,
is an interior side lot line.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which exists as shown or described upon a plat
or deed and duly recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Luzerne
County, Pennsylvania, on the effective date of the adoption of this chapter.
LOT, THROUGH — Any lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets or other thoroughfares.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at
the required front setback line.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling
intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or two or more
units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MANUFACTURED HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a manufactured home
park, improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single manufactured
home.
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:717
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land
which has been so designated and improved that it contains two or more
manufactured home lots for the placement thereon of manufactured homes.
MAPPED STREETS — A mapped street is any approved street shown on an
official map or the projection of any existing street through an unsubdivided
parcel of land, whether the street is dedicated or in existence or not.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MOTEL or MOTOR HOTEL — A building or group of two or more buildings
designed to provide sleeping accommodations for transient or overnight
guests with no common entrance or lobby. Each building shall contain a
minimum of 10 residential units or rooms, which generally have direct,
private openings to a street, drive or patio, etc.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant
to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the "Municipalities
Authority Act of 1945."
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Kingston, Luzerne County,
Pennsylvania, also known as "Kingston Township."
NIGHTCLUB — A commercial establishment dispensing alcoholic beverages
for the consumption on the premises and in which dancing and live
entertainment is permitted, including the term "cabaret."
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or
patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from premises, in excess of those normally associated with
residential use. The business or commercial activity must also comply with
the standards contained within § 313.1 of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reason of such adoption or amendment.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:718
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the use or extent of use provisions
of this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such
structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this chapter or
amendment or prior to the application of this chapter or amendment to its
location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include,
but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully
in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or amendment, or prior
to the application of this chapter or amendment to its location by reason of
annexation.
NURSERIES and KINDERGARTENS (PRIVATE) — A private nursery school
or kindergarten exists when five or more children from three through
six years of age are gathered regularly for the purpose of developing
intellectual, emotional, physical and social skills.
OFFICES — A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs
and management of a business, profession, service industry or government
and generally furnished with desks, tables, files and/or communication
equipment.
OPEN SPACE —
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods,
material, merchandise, equipment or vehicles which are related to the
operation of a commercial business, excluding the storage of solid waste,
hazardous substances, refuse, junk, junked vehicles discarded and/or any
inoperative durable items.
PARCEL — A continuous quantity of land in the possession of, or owned by,
or recorded as, the property of the same person or persons.
PARKING LOT — An area not within a building where motor vehicles may be
stored for the purposes of temporary, daily or overnight off-street parking.
That part of a particular development tract set permanently aside
for the protection of sensitive natural features, greenways, farmland,
scenic views and other primary and secondary conservation areas
identified by this chapter, the Township Zoning Ordinance. Open space
may be accessible to the residents of the development and/or the
Township, or it may contain areas of farmland, forest land or
conservancy lots which are not accessible to development residents or
the public.
1.
Open space must be substantially free of structures, but may contain
such improvements as are in the finally approved development plan.
Open space may be a combination of natural or naturalized areas (such
as the municipal greenway network) and more manicured areas (such
as lawn, recreational areas or play fields). Open space is permanently
restricted against further development.
2.
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:719
PARKING, SHARED — The development and use of parking areas on two or
more properties for joint use by the business on those properties.
PARKING SPACE — That area required for the parking or storage of one
automobile, including necessary aisle or driveway space providing access
thereto.
PATIO — A courtyard, with or without railings and without a roof, adjacent
to or near a dwelling but not part of the dwelling structure, and intended to
be used as an area for seating, dining or recreation outdoors.
PAVILION — A tent or tent-like covering or an open-sided structure with a
roof located in a yard, but not attached to a dwelling, and intended to be
used as an area for seating, dining or recreation outdoors.
PERMITTED USE — Any use which is specifically permitted in a particular
zoning district.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Any enterprise conducted for gain which
primarily offers services to the general public, such as shoe repair, valet
service, watch repairing, barbershops, beauty parlors and related activities.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — A building used for religious services, including
churches, synagogues, mosques and similar edifices.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, or combination of residential and nonresidential uses, the
development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of
dwelling, or use, density or intensity, lot coverage and required open space
to the regulations established in any one district created, from time to time,
under the provisions of this chapter.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The building situated or to be placed nearest
the front property line and the use of which conforms to the primary use
permitted by the zone classification in which it is located.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main use of land or structures, as distinguished
from a secondary or accessory use.
PRINT SHOP — A retail establishment that provides duplicating services
using photocopy, blueprint and offset printing equipment, including
collating of booklets and reports.
PRIVATE — Something owned, operated and supported by private
individuals or a corporation, rather than by government, and not available
for public use.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — The conduct of business in any of the
following or related categories: law; architecture; engineering; medicine;
dentistry; optometry; osteopathy; chiropractics; optician; planning,
accounting or consulting of the nature of the aforestated categories and
which do not include outside storage space for business vehicles or
equipment.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:720
PUBLIC — Something owned, operated and supported by the community or
the residents for the use and benefit of the general public.
PUBLIC BODY — Any government or governmental agency of Kingston
Township, Luzerne County, the State of Pennsylvania, or the United States
Government.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the Board of Supervisors or Planning Commission, intended to inform
and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this
chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act," 53 P.S. §§ 271 et
seq.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC USE — Use of any land, water, or buildings by a municipality,
public body or board, commission or authority, county, state or the federal
government, or any agency thereof for a public service or purpose.
PUBLIC UTILITIES FACILITIES (ESSENTIAL) — Telephone, electric and
cable television lines, equipment, structures; water or gas pipes, mains,
valves or other structures; pumping stations; telephone exchanges; and
all other facilities, equipment and structures necessary for conducting a
service by public utility, under the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission, in accordance with § 619 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.77
PUBLIC UTILITY TRANSMISSION TOWER — A structure, owned and
operated by a public utility electric company regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, designed and used to support overhead
electricity transmission lines.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — An individual authorized to prepare plans
pursuant to § 503(1) of the MPC, which states that plats and surveys shall
be prepared in accordance with the act of May 23, 1945 (P.L. 913, No.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas;
1.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities; and
2.
3. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
77.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10619.
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:721
367), known as the "Engineer, Land Surveyor and Geologist Registration
Law,"78 except that this requirement shall not preclude the preparation of
a plat in accordance with the act of January 24, 1966 (P.L. 1527, No. 535),
known as "Landscape Architects Registration Law,"79 when it is appropriate
to prepare the plat using professional services set forth in the definition of
the "practice of landscape architecture" under § 2 of that Act.80
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES, COMMERCIAL — Recreational facilities
operated as a business and open to the public for a fee.
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES, PRIVATE — Recreational facilities other than
commercial or public, not operated for a profit, and only open to their
members and their guests.
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES, PUBLIC — Recreational facilities operated as
a nonprofit enterprise by a governmental entity or a nonprofit organization
and open to the general public.
REPAIRS — Restoration of portions of a building to its condition as before
decay, wear or damage, but not including alteration of the shape or size of
any portion.
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing
made by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a solicitor to
any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the
recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision or determination.
All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and advisory only and shall
not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer, body or agency, nor shall
any appeal lie therefrom. Any report used, received or considered by the
body, board, officer or agency rendering a determination or decision shall
be made available for inspection to the applicant and all other parties to
any proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided at cost
of reproduction.
RESIDENTIAL — The term "residential" or "residence" is applied herein to
any lot, plot, parcel, tract, area, or piece of land and/or any building used
exclusively for family dwelling purposes or intended to be used, including
concomitant uses specified herein.
RESTAURANT — A building, room or rooms where food is prepared and
served to a group of families, a club, or to the public and for consumption
within the enclosed structure.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — An establishment that offers quick food
service, which is accomplished through a limited menu of items already
prepared, fried or grilled quickly, or heated in a device such as a microwave
oven. Orders are not generally taken at the customer's table, and food is
generally served in disposable wrapping or containers.
78.Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 148 et seq.
79.Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 901 et seq.
80.Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 902.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:722
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied
by a street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, and oil or gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer line or other special use.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — The outside boundaries of a highway right-of-way,
whether such right-of-way be established by usage, dedication or by the
official right-of-way.
RIPARIAN LAND — Land that is traversed or bounded by a natural
watercourse.
ROOMING HOUSE — (The terms rooming house, boarding house,
cooperative house and lodging house are used synonymously in this
chapter). A building, other than a hotel or dormitory, where, for
compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, lodging or
lodging and meals are provided for more than three persons.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room, or group of rooms, forming a single habitable
unit used for living and sleeping, but which does not contain cooking or
eating facilities.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA (NONCOMMERCIAL) —
SCHOOL — A facility which provides a curriculum of elementary and
secondary academic instruction, including kindergartens, elementary
schools, middle schools, junior high schools and high schools that are
licensed by the state as such. Preschool facilities, including, but not limited
to, day-care facilities, are excluded from said definition. (See definition of
"day-care facility.")
SEATING CAPACITY — The actual seating capacity of an area based upon
the number of seats or one seat per 18 inches of bench or pew length.
For other areas where seats are not fixed, the seating capacity shall be
determined as indicated by the most recent UCC Code.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY — A building or group of buildings
in a controlled access and fenced compound that contains varying sizes
of individual compartmentalized and controlled access stalls or lockers
that are leased to individuals for the storage of the individual's property,
possessions or wares.
SERVICE STATION — Any premises where gasoline and other petroleum
products are sold and/or light maintenance activities, such as engine tuneups,
lubrication and minor repairs, are conducted.
A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh,
or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn
or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit and/or receive
radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrial- and/or orbitalbased
uses.
1.
This definition is meant to include, but not be limited to, that which
is commonly referred to as satellite earth stories. TVROs (televisionreception-
only satellite dish antennas) and satellite microwave
antennas.
2.
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:723
SETBACK — The minimum horizontal distance between the right-of-way
line, rear or side lines of the lot and the front, rear or side lines of the
building. When two or more lots under one ownership are used, the exterior
property line so grouped shall be used in determining offsets.
SETBACK (BUILDING SETBACK LINE) — The line within a property
defining the required minimum distance between any structure and the
ultimate adjacent right-of-way, and the line defining side and rear yards
where required.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL, CENTRALIZED — A sanitary sewage collection
system, approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, in which sewage is carried from individual lots by a system of
pipes to a central treatment and disposal facility.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL, ON-LOT — Any facility designed to biochemically
treat sewage within the boundaries of an individual lot in accordance with
the applicable rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
SHOPPING CENTER, HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL — A grouping of retail
business and service uses in a single principal building or in no more than
two principal buildings on a single site with common ingress, egress and
parking facilities.
SIGN — A structure or device designed or intended to convey information
to the public in written or pictorial form.
SIGN AREA — The entire area within a continuous perimeter, enclosing
the extreme limits of sign display, including any frame or border. Curved,
spherical or any other shaped sign face shall be computed on the basis
of actual surface area. The copy of signs composed of individual letters,
numerals or other devices shall be the sum of the area of the smallest
rectangle or other geometric figure encompassing each of said letter or
devices. The calculation for a double-faced sign shall be the area of one face
only. Double-faced signs shall be so constructed that the perimeter of both
faces coincide and are parallel and not more than 24 inches apart.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign supported by one or more upright poles,
columns or braces placed in or on the ground and not attached to any
building or structure.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — A sign illuminated in any manner by an artificial
light source.
SIGN, PORTABLE — Any sign not permanently affixed in the ground or to
a building, including any sign attached to or displayed on a vehicle that
is used for the express purpose of advertising a business establishment,
product, service or entertainment when that vehicle is so parked as to
attract the attention of the motoring or pedestrian traffic.
SIGN, PROJECTING — Any sign other than a wall sign that is attached to
and projects from the wall or face of a building or structure, including an
arcade/marquee sign.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:724
SIGN, ROOF — Any sign erected upon, against, or directly above a roof
eaves, or on top of or above the parapet, or on a functional architectural
appendage above the roof or roof eaves.
SIGN, WALL — A sign painted on the outside of a building or attached to,
and erected parallel to, the face of a building and supported throughout its
length by such building.
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign painted, stenciled, or affixed on a window which
is visible from a right-of-way.
SITE — An area designated as a separate and distinct parcel of land on a
legally recorded subdivision plat or in a legally recorded deed.
SITE PLAN — A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with
complete dimensions the boundaries of a site and the location of all
buildings, structures, uses and features proposed for a specific parcel of
land.
SLOPE OF LAND — The deviation of the land surface from the horizontal,
perpendicular to the contours, expressed in percent and calculated by
dividing the vertical distance by the horizontal distance times 100.
SOCIAL HALL — A room or building used for friendly or convivial
gatherings normally owned and/or operated by a nonprofit or civic
organization.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN — A plan that
indicates necessary land treatment designed to effectively minimize soil
erosion and sedimentation measures requiring approvals by the Luzerne
County Conservation District.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Any facility operated pursuant to the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania governing the management, processing,
treatment, storage, transfer and/or disposal of solid waste or waste, as so
defined by this chapter.
SOLID WASTE or WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial, lunchroom or
office waste or other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
in gaseous material, resulting from the operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities,
excluding "hazardous substances," as so defined by this chapter, and
"hazardous waste," as so defined by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, pursuant to Chapter 271.1, under the Solid
Waste Management Act, as amended.81
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Articles VI and IX of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10601 et seq., and
§ 10901 et seq.
SPECIMEN TREE — A unique, rare, or otherwise specifically selected tree
or plant considered worthy of conservation by the municipality, because
81.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:725
of its species, size, age, shape, form, historical importance, or any other
significant characteristics, including listing as a Species of Special Concern
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STEEP SLOPES —
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it; or if there be no floor above
it, then the space between the floor and ceiling next above it.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct or any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or private.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and the outside boundary
or ultimate right-of-way of a public street, road or highway, legally opened
or officially plotted; or between a privately owned street, road or way over
which the owners or tenants of two or more lots each held in separate
ownership have the right-of-way
STREET, ARTERIAL — A major street located and designed for the
continuous movement of heavy volumes of all types of comparatively shorthaul
vehicular traffic between communities and for collecting and
distributing traffic to and from expressways.
STREET, MINOR — A street providing local access to residences and other
uses along its sides.
STREET, PRIMARY COLLECTOR — A street located and designed for all
types of intercommunity vehicular traffic, having a heavier traffic volume
than secondary collectors, and functioning to carry traffic to the arterials.
STREET, SECONDARY COLLECTOR — A street located and designed for
all types of intercommunity vehicular traffic, having a lighter traffic volume
than primary collectors, and functioning to carry traffic to the primary
collectors or directly to the arterials.
Areas of land where the grade is 15% greater. Steep slopes are divided
into two categories:
Precautionary slopes are those areas of land where the grade is
15% to 25%.
A.
Prohibitive slopes are those areas of land where the grade is
greater than 25%.
B.
1.
Slope shall be measured as the change in elevation over the horizontal
distance between consecutive contour lines. Slope shall be measured
over three two-foot contour intervals (six cumulative vertical feet of
slope). All slope measurements shall be determined by a topographic
survey signed and sealed by a registered surveyor or engineer licensed
to practice by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
2.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:726
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any change in the shape or size of any
portion of a building or of the supporting members of a building or structure
such as walls, columns, beams, arches, girders, floor joists, or roof joists.
STRUCTURE — Any thing built, constructed or erected which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something located on the ground,
whether or not affixed to the ground.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development: Provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — All subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivision, including but not limited to subdivisions of four or more lots,
or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of Township
facilities or the creation of any public improvements.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — Any subdivision containing not more than five
lots fronting on an existing public street, not involving any new street
or road, or the extension of municipal facilities, or the creation of any
public improvements, not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or
adjoining property, and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the
Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, Chapter 22 or Chapter 27 of the Code
of Ordinances of the Township of Kingston or these regulations, excluding
industrial and commercial subdivision regardless of size. Any proposed
subdivision of a lot of record which resulted from a minor subdivision
shall be classified as a major subdivision when the cumulative number of
lots, from the original lot of record and/or any resulting lot, exceeds four
lots within five years from date of its approval under a minor subdivision
classification. Information stating the above requirement shall be included
upon all deeds for lots created under a minor subdivision.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where in the judgment of the Township
engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements for
which financial security was posted pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter) of those improvements required as a condition for final approval
have been completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the
project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
SURVEYOR — A licensed surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
SWIMMING POOL — Any structure intended for swimming or recreational
bathing that contains water over 24 inches in depth. A swimming pool,
as herein defined, shall include in-ground, aboveground, and on-ground
structures, as more particularly defined in the Uniform Construction Code.
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:727
TAVERN — An establishment used primarily for serving alcoholic beverages
to the general public and where food may be served or sold only as an
accessory to the primary use.
TEMPORARY — For a limited time only; not more than 90 days; not
permanently.
TOPSOIL — Natural and friable loam containing sufficient nitrogen,
phosphorus and potassium to support plan growth and extending in depth
to the extent of penetration of feeder roots of the prevailing native grasses.
TOWNHOUSE — A residential structure constructed as a single entity
containing a row of more than two single-family attached dwelling units
but not more than six single-family attached dwelling units, whereby each
unit may be sold as an individual single-family attached unit, with each
unit having a lot under individual or association ownership. Each unit
shall have its own front and rear access to the outside and may have a
common or public open space, such as an off-street parking area, yard
area, recreational area or similar common area. No dwelling units shall be
located over another unit and each unit shall be separated from another unit
by one or more party walls without openings.
TOWNSHIP — Township of Kingston, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania, also
known as "Kingston Township."
TRACT AREA OR SIZE, GROSS — The area of land contained within the
limits of the legally described property lines bounding the tract.
TRACT AREA, ADJUSTED (ATA) — The gross tract area minus the net area
of a tract remaining after wetlands, steep slopes of over 25%, soils subject
to slumping and all existing or proposed roads have been subtracted.
TRANSFER STATION — A facility which receives and temporarily stores
solid waste at a location other than the generation site, which facilitates
the bulk transfer of accumulated solid waste to another facility or site for
further processing and/or disposal of said solid waste. Said use shall be
classified and regulated as a solid waste facility.
TRASH — Cuttings from vegetation, refuse, paper, bottles, rags.
TRUCK REPAIR AND STORAGE — A building and/or land used primarily for
the maintenance and storage of large commercial vehicles.
TRUCKING FACILITY — A structure, building and/or land consisting of a
storage area, management and dispatch office and loading and unloading
facilities connected with receipt or delivery of freight shipped by truck.
USE — The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or
intended, or for which either land or a building is or may be occupied or
maintained.
VARIANCE — Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and
Articles VI and IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S
§ 10101 et seq.
VEHICLE — A conveyance for persons or materials.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:728
VOCATIONAL SCHOOL — A secondary or higher education facility
primarily teaching usable skills that prepare students for a job in a trade
and meeting applicable state requirements as a vocational facility.
WAREHOUSE — A building used primarily for storage of goods and
material.
WAREHOUSING AND DISTRIBUTION — A use engaged in storage,
wholesale and distribution of manufactured products, supplies and
equipment, excluding the bulk storage of materials that are inflammable,
explosive, hazardous or commonly recognized as offensive.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook, creek,
or channel or ditch for collection and conveyance of water, whether natural
or man-made.
WATERFRONT — Any site shall be considered as waterfront property
provided any or all of its lot lines abut on or are contiguous to any body of
water including creek, canal, river, or any other body of water, natural or
artificial — not including a swimming pool – whether said lot line is front,
rear or side.
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of
groundwater and surface-water resources within the Township.
WETLANDS — Areas that are inundated and saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas. Any area meeting the official wetland
definition of the United States Army Corps of Engineers or the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, as amended, shall be considered
a wetland for the purposes of this chapter. In the event the definition of
"wetland" accepted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers conflicts
with the definition of a "wetland" accepted by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection, the more restrictive definition shall apply.
WIRELESS COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATION SITE — A tract or parcel
of land containing a commercial antenna, its support structure, accessory
building(s) and parking.
WOODLANDS — A tree mass or plant community in which tree species are
dominant or co-dominant and the branches of the trees form a complete,
or nearly complete, aerial canopy. Any area, grove, or stand of mature or
largely mature trees (larger than six inches DBH) covering an area of 1/
4 acre or more, or consisting of 10 individual trees larger than six inches
DBH, shall be considered a woodland. The extent of any woodland plant
community or any part thereof shall be measured from the outermost drip
line of all the trees in the plant community.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a building; said space lies
between the building setback line and nearest lot or street line.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
abutting the front lot line, the required depth of which yard is a prescribed
§ 202 HOME RULE CHARTER § 202
Ch:729
minimum distance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto on
the lot.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and abutting
the rear lot line, the required depth of which yard is a prescribed minimum
distance between the side lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot.
YARD, SIDE — A yard abutting a side lot line extending from the front yard
to the rear yard, the required width of which yard is a prescribed minimum
distance between the side lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot.
ZONING DISTRICT — A portion of the Township of Kingston illustrated
upon the Official Zoning Map,82 within which certain uniform regulations
and requirements apply under the provisions of this chapter.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of Kingston
Township, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania.
ZONING MAP — The official map that is part of this chapter and indicates
and delineates the zoning districts of the Township of Kingston, Luzerne
County, Pennsylvania.83
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer appointed by the governing
body to administer and enforce this chapter.
82.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
83.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 202 KINGSTON CODE § 202
Ch:730
Part 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 301. Abandoned Real Property. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 1; as
amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
§ 302. Access Control. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 3; as amended by
Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
In order to promote the safety of motorists and the pedestrian and to
minimize traffic congestion and conflict by reducing the magnitude of and
the number of points of contact, the following regulations shall apply on
local roads:
1. For any public street or alley which is hereafter officially vacated or
abandoned, the regulations applicable to each parcel of abutting
property shall apply to the center line of the property which is
abandoned. In the event abandoned property is not divided at the
center line for abutting properties, the zoning districts applicable shall
apply to such ownership line as determined by virtue of such
abandonment.
2. For any public property other than streets or alleys, the regulations
applicable to the zoning classifications which abuts the abandoned
property for the greatest number of lineal feet shall apply to the entire
property.
1. A point of access, that is, a driveway or other opening for vehicles onto
a public street, shall not exceed 25 feet in width, except as otherwise
provided in this section.
2. The maximum number of points of access permitted onto any one street
shall be as follows:
Lot Width Abutting Street Number of Points of Access
Less than 65 feet 1
65 feet to 200 feet 2
Greater than 200 feet 2, plus 1 for each additional 200
feet or fraction thereof
3. In lieu of any two openings permitted on any one street, there may be
permitted a single point of access up to 35 feet in width. However,
service stations shall be permitted two openings, not to exceed 35 feet
each in width along any abutting public street providing that such
property abuts such street for a distance of not less than 120 feet.
4. There shall be a minimum distance of 12 feet between any two openings
onto the same street.
5. No point of access shall be allowed within 30 feet of the intersection of
the right-of-way lines of any public street.
§ 301 HOME RULE CHARTER § 302
Ch:731
§ 303. Accessory Buildings in Residential Districts. [Ord. 6/11/
1975A, Art. III, § 4; as amended by Ord. 1989-4, 6/13/1989, § 16]
No accessory building in residential districts shall be erected in any
required court or any yard other than a rear yard, except as provided
hereafter. An accessory building may be erected as part of a principal
building or if at least six feet therefrom, may be connected thereto by
a breezeway or similar structure, provided all yard requirements of this
chapter for a principal building are complied with.
§ 304. Buildings on Through Lots. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 4; as
amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
Where a lot extends through from one street to another, the setback
requirement for each such street shall apply. On lots having frontage on
more than two streets, the minimum front yard shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of this Part on at least two of the street
frontages.
§ 305. Churches and Schools. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 6; as
amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
Public schools shall be subject to the regulations in this chapter set forth in
Part 5, § 504.
6. No curbs shall be cut or altered and no point of access or opening for
vehicles onto a public street shall be established without a permit
issued by Kingston Township Supervisors under the supervision of the
Road Superintendent.
1. Corner Lots in Agricultural and Residential Districts. On any
agricultural or residential district, where a corner lot adjoins in the rear
a lot fronting on the side street, no part of any accessory building on
such corner lot within 25 feet of the common lot line shall be nearer a
side road lot line than the least depth of the front yard required along
such side street for a dwelling on such lot, and in no case shall any part
of such accessory building be nearer to the side road lot line than the
least width of the side yard required for the principal building to which
it is accessory.
2. Setback for Accessory Structures. Part 5, §§ 503, 504, 505, and 506
(uses permitted in residential districts), are made a part hereof by
reference made thereto, and they are incorporated herein as though the
same were more fully set forth herein to provide applicable setback
requirements in all specified residential zoning districts for accessory
structures. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-4, 12/12/2018]
1. Private schools, churches and religious institutions shall be permitted
in agricultural, single-family residential districts, two-family residential
districts, multifamily residential districts, general commercial, and
§ 302 KINGSTON CODE § 305
Ch:732
§ 306. Cemeteries, Mausoleums and Crematories. [Ord. 6/11/1975A,
Art. III, § 7; as amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
No premises shall be used or occupied for the purpose of a cemetery,
mausoleum or crematory in any district excepting in multifamily residential,
single-family residential, and agricultural districts and then only upon
approval after public hearing. No land for which a plat has not been
recorded shall be used for any burials. The dead shall not be buried or
placed closer than 10 feet to any property line.
§ 307. Conversion of Dwellings. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 8]
The conversion of any building into a dwelling, or the conversion of any
dwelling so as to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or
families, shall be permitted only within a district in which a new building
for similar occupancy would be permitted under this chapter, and only when
the resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements governing new
construction in such district with respect to minimum lot size, lot area per
dwelling unit, percentage of lot coverage, dimensions of yards and other
open spaces, and off-street parking. Each conversion shall be subject also to
such further requirements as may be specified hereinafter within the Part
applying to such district.
§ 308. Excavation of Sand, Gravel, Coal or Other Material. [Ord. 6/
11/1975A, Art. III, § 10; as amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
Excavation of sand, gravel, coal or other material from the surface shall
be considered a temporary use, and shall be permitted only in a mining
district. The extent of excavations shall not be nearer than 100 feet to any
school, church, dwelling or highway. Operations for drilling, blasting and
excavating purposes shall not be conducted earlier than 7:00 a.m. nor later
than 7:00 p.m. during each day except Sunday. On Sunday, all operations
shall cease.
neighborhood commercial districts provided that the following
requirements are complied with:
A. Off-street parking shall be provided as set forth in Part 3, § 330.
B. The principal building and accessory buildings shall comply with
the yard and setback requirements of the district in which it is
located; and in no case less than the minimum requirements set
forth in the district.
2. Private schools, churches and religious institutions may be permitted as
a conditional use, see Part 6, § 603.
§ 305 HOME RULE CHARTER § 309
Ch:733
§ 309. Nonconforming Uses. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 11; as
amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; and by Ord. 91-4, 6/12/1991, § 2]
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to prohibit
a continuation of the particular lawful use or uses of any land, building,
structure, improvement or premises legally existing in the respective
districts at the time this chapter becomes effective; provided, however, that
if any such existing lawful uses change to a different use after the date
of the adoption of this chapter, such different use shall conform to the
provisions of this chapter regulating the particular district in which said
premises is situated. If any legally nonconforming use or occupancy of a
building or premises conflicts with any requirement of this chapter or any of
its amendments, such use shall not be moved, structurally altered or added
to except after approval by the Zoning Officer, subject to the requirements
of §§ 320, 321 and 322 of this chapter.
All future building, structures, repairs, alterations or other improvements
shall comply with all district requirements contained herein, and such
structural provisions of the building code and other regulations as have
been incorporated herein and made a part hereof, including any building
on which construction has been suspended at the time this chapter was
adopted and any building for which foundations were not completed at said
time.
No nonconforming building or structure shall be extended or enlarged
except when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board who may permit one
enlargement or extension up to 25% of the floor area of the structure as it
existed at the time of passage of this chapter.
§ 310. Fences. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 12]
Except in mobile home parks, industrial, general and neighborhood
commercial districts, no fence, wall, or screened structure, excluding plants
and shrubbery, over six feet in height shall be built within any required yard.
§ 311. Garbage Disposal. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 13; as
amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
Sanitary land fill disposal areas may be approved only as a conditional use
in accordance with §§ 603 and 604.
§ 312. Group Housing. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 14]
Group housing developments, two single or multiple-family dwellings to be
constructed on a plot of ground under single ownership of one acre or more,
not subdivided into the customary streets and lots and which shall not be so
subdivided, may be developed in any multifamily district provided that:
1. Maximum percent of lot coverage shall not exceed that which is
required for the districts in which the project is located.
§ 309 KINGSTON CODE § 312
Ch:734
§ 313. Home Occupations. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 15; as
amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; and by Ord. No. 2018-4, 12/12/
2018]
Home occupations, including any profession, vocation, business trade, and
personal services, may be conducted in any agricultural district. Home
occupations, with the exception of commercial stables or kennels and any
occupation which customarily requires the use of a panel or delivery truck,
may be conducted in a residential district only after approval of the Zoning
Hearing Board, which shall hold a public hearing as set forth in Part 7,
§§ 703 and 704, of this chapter. The Zoning Hearing Board may then deny
or grant approval of such home occupation in accordance with the special
exception procedures of this Zoning chapter.
2. Height limits, front, side or rear yard requirements shall be met in
accordance with the district in which such group housing is permitted.
1. The home occupation shall be conducted within the principal building
and only by members of the family residing in the building. Not more
than one person shall be employed who is not a resident of the
premises.
2. Not more than 20% of the gross floor area of any dwelling unit may be
used for a home occupation, except for medical and dental offices and
foster family care, which may use up to 40%.
3. For the purpose of identification of such use, one nonilluminated wall
sign not exceeding four square foot in area may be permitted. Such
signs shall identify only the name of the profession and the name of the
occupant of the premises and shall be mounted against a wall of the
principal building.
4. No motor power other than electrically operated motors shall be used
in conjunction with such home occupation and the total horsepower of
such permitted electrical motors shall not exceed three horsepower, or
one horsepower for any single motor.
5. There shall be no alteration in the residential character of the premises
in connection with such home occupation unless so authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board.
6. No merchandise or articles for sale shall be displayed for advertising
purposes and no sign or device relative to the sale of such merchandise
shall be displayed on the premises.
7. No article or materials used in connection with such home occupation
shall be stored other than in the principal building so used.
8. Any home occupation as provided for in this section may be reviewed by
the Zoning Officer at any time and may revoke permission to continue
such home occupation at any time thereafter for failure to comply with
this chapter or conditions established under a special exception.
§ 312 HOME RULE CHARTER § 313.1
Ch:735
§ 313.1. No-Impact Home-Based Businesses. [Ord. No. 2018-4, 12/
12/2018]
§ 314. Junkyards. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 16; as amended by
Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
§ 315. Land Subject to Flooding. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 18; as
amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
No building shall be moved onto or constructed on land subject to frequent
flooding in any zone, nor shall any existing building so located be enlarged,
repaired or altered except in accordance with the floodplain regulations,
1. A no-impact home-based business, as so defined in this chapter, shall
also be subject to the following requirements:
A. The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of
the property and surrounding residential uses.
B. The business shall employ no employees other than family
members residing in the dwelling.
C. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling
of inventory of a substantial nature.
D. There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including,
but not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
E. The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
F. The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling
and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
G. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
2. A no-impact home-based business shall be permitted in all residential
zones of Kingston Township as a use permitted by right, except that
such permission shall not supersede any deed restriction, covenant or
agreement restricting the use of land, nor any master deed, by law or
other document applicable to a common interest ownership community.
1. All junkyards shall be completely screened from view with a solid fence
or wall, maintained in good condition, and painted except for masonry
construction, or with suitable plantings.
2. No operations shall be conducted which shall cause a general nuisance
or endanger the public health.
3. All existing junkyards shall comply with these requirements within one
year of the date of this chapter or any revision thereto, or shall then
terminate their operation.
§ 313.1 KINGSTON CODE § 315
Ch:736
Chapter 8. If there is any question about the frequency or extent of flooding
of any property for which a permit has been requested, the Township
Floodplain Map shall be consulted.
§ 316. Living Units in Zones Other Than Residential. [Ord. 6/11/
1975A, Art. III, § 19; as amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
Dwellings shall not be permitted in any business or industrial zone as a
principal use. However, living units may be established within the principal
building in a business or industrial use, provided that such living units
within any general commercial or neighborhood commercial district shall
have direct access to an abutting street. In the general commercial and
neighborhood commercial districts, living units shall be permitted as
accessory to the permitted use, and single-family dwellings shall be
permitted on existing lots of record including other uses permitted on the
same lot as accessory uses. All uses permitted in this section shall be
subject to the conditional use procedures in § 601.
§ 317. Minimum Living Area. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 20; as
amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; and by Ord. No. 2018-4, 12/12/
2018]
§ 318. Mobile Homes, Trailers and Mobile Home or Trailer Parks.
[Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 21; as amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/
1987; and by Ord. 91-13, 12/11/1991]
1. No single- or multiple-family living unit shall be constructed within a
total living area of less than 525 square feet; provided, however, that a
special exception to the minimum living area requirements shall be
granted for the construction of efficiency-type apartments having no
separate bedroom, if it is established that the granting of such
exception will not adversely affect the interest of the general public or
the character of the surrounding neighborhood. Application for any
such special exception shall be made to the Zoning Hearing Board,
which shall hold a public hearing as set forth in Part 7, §§ 703 and 704,
of this chapter.
2. The Zoning Hearing Board may require the submission of plans in
connection with such applications, showing the location and type of
construction proposed, and may impose such additional requirements
as a condition of the granting of the special exception as it deems
reasonable and appropriate. (This section shall not apply to mobile
homes meeting all other requirements of this Part.)
1. Notwithstanding any provision contained in this chapter to the
contrary, a trailer or mobile home, which is to be used exclusively as a
single-family dwelling, shall be permitted to be placed in all zoning
districts of the Township of Kingston in which a residential use is
permitted hereunder, upon the condition that the placement, siting,
erection and/or maintenance of said trailer or mobile home for
§ 315 HOME RULE CHARTER § 318
Ch:737
§ 319. Moving of Buildings. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 22; as
amended by Ord. No. 2018-4, 12/12/2018]
Whenever a building is moved from any location to a site within Kingston
Township, the building shall immediately be made to comply with all
provisions of the UCC Codes, if any, and all other relevant zoning
regulations of Kingston Township. The person causing the building to be
moved shall first secure a building permit from the Township Zoning Officer.
exclusive use as a single-family dwelling in any such zoning district of
the Township of Kingston, which is not designated as a permitted trailer
or mobile home park must conform with and be in strict accordance
with all of the terms and provisions of all ordinances and codes of the
Township of Kingston relating to the use of land and to the construction
and maintenance of all improvements upon land, now in force or
hereafter to be enacted, as the same may apply generally to
conventional single-family dwelling units and specifically to trailers or
mobile homes.
2. A mobile home or trailer may be used temporarily for office purposes
during the construction of a principal building or a road, on the
issuance of a temporary permit by the Zoning Officer. Such period of
use shall not exceed six months, without the approval of the Board.
3. Except as otherwise provided herein and except for trailers offered for
sale on trailer sale lots, the parking of a trailer, trailer coach or mobile
home outside of a permitted trailer park in any district for 49 hours or
more, shall be prohibited. Small utility trailers are excluded from this
provision.
4. Camping and Recreational Equipment. Any owner of camping and
recreational equipment, including but not limited to travel trailers,
pick-up coaches, motorized homes and boat trailers may park or store
such equipment on private residential property subject to the following
conditions:
A. Such parked or stored camping and recreational equipment shall
never be occupied or used for living, sleeping or housekeeping
purposes.
B. If the camping or recreational equipment is parked or stored
outside of a building, it shall be parked or stored, if possible to the
rear of the front building line of the lot.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 318, Subsection 2, above,
camping and recreation equipment may be parked anywhere on the
premises while actually being loaded or unloaded.
§ 318 KINGSTON CODE § 320
Ch:738
§ 320. Nonconforming Buildings or Structures. [Ord. 6/11/1975A,
Art. III, § 23; as amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
Any lawful use of any dwelling, building or structure existing at the effective
date of this chapter may be continued, even though such use does not
conform to the provisions hereof. If no structural alterations are made, a
nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming
use of a more restrictive classification. Whenever a nonconforming use has
been changed to a more restrictive use or to a conforming use, such use
shall not thereafter be changed to a less restrictive use. The nonconforming
use of a building may be extended throughout those parts thereof which
were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption
of this chapter. No nonconforming building or structure shall be extended,
or enlarged except when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board which
may permit one enlargement or extension up to 25% of the floor area of the
structure as it existed at the time of passage of this chapter.
Whenever the use of a building shall become nonconforming through a
change in the Zoning Ordinance or in the district boundaries, such use may
be continued, and if no structural alterations are made, may be changed
to another nonconforming use of the same or of a more restrictive
classification.
A nonconforming use of a building or portion thereof which is hereafter
discontinued for a continuous period of six months shall not again be used
except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which such
building is located.
A nonconforming building which has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of
God or the public enemy to the extent of more than 60% of its reproduction
value at the time of damage, shall not be restored except in conformity
with the regulations of the district in which it is located. When damage is
less than 60% of its reproduction value, a nonconforming building may be
repaired or reconstructed, and used as before the time of damage, provided
such repairs or reconstruction are completed within one year of the date of
such damage.
Nonconforming mobile homes located on a lot in any district when once
removed shall not be relocated on such lot and shall not be replaced with
another mobile home.
§ 321. Nonconforming Lot. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 24; as
amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
1. Remedies. Where two or more nonconforming lots with continuous
frontage are under the same ownership or where a nonconforming lot
has a continuous frontage with a larger tract under the same
ownership, such lot or lots shall be combined to form one or more
building sites meeting the lot requirements of the district in which they
are located.
§ 320 HOME RULE CHARTER § 321
Ch:739
§ 322. Nonconforming Use of Buildings and Structures. [Ord. 6/11/
1975A, Art. III, § 25; as amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; and by
Ord. 1989-4, 6/13/1989, § 17]
Use of any building or structure not in conformance with these regulations
pertaining to uses permitted on the effective date of this chapter may not
be:
2. Dwellings on Nonconforming Lots. A building permit may be issued for
a single-family dwelling on any nonconforming lot, provided that the
remedies set forth in this section cannot be complied with and provided
that the regulations of the district in which the lot is located are met.
3. Nonconforming Uses of Land. The nonconforming use of land not
involving any principal building or structure existing on the effective
date of this chapter may be continued; provided, however, that no such
nonconforming use of land shall in any way be expanded or extended
either on the same or adjoining property. If such nonconforming use of
land or any portion thereof is discontinued or changed, any future use
of such land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
4. Dwellings on Sub-Standard Lots. The Zoning Officer may issue a
building permit for a single-family dwelling for a substandard lot only
after the Zoning Hearing Board grants such variances on lot and
building requirements, in cases of physical hardship, so as not to create
any condition detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare.
1. Applicable to a change to another nonconforming use, except where it
is determined by the Zoning Hearing Board that the design,
construction, and character of the building is unsuitable for uses
permitted in the district in which such nonconforming use is situated.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hold a public hearing, as set forth in
Part 7, §§ 703 and 704, of this chapter, in order to determine the
question of suitability for uses permitted in the district in which such
subject building is located. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-4, 12/12/
2018]
2. Reestablished after discontinuance for six months except where it is
determined by the Zoning Hearing Board that the design, construction,
and character of the building is unsuitable for uses permitted in the
district in which such nonconforming use is situated. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall hold a public hearing, as set forth in Part 7, § 703,
of this chapter, in order to determine the question of suitability for uses
permitted in the district in which such building is located.
3. Extended, enlarged, or expanded unless authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board which may permit one enlargement or extension up to
25% of the floor area of the structure as it existed at the time of passage
of this chapter.
§ 321 KINGSTON CODE § 323
Ch:740
§ 323. Nursing Homes. [Ord. 6/ll/1975A, Art. III, § 26]
Nursing homes shall include convalescent homes, homes for the aged,
and such other activities designed to take care of the aged or persons
unable to care for themselves without supervision or assistance. Nursing
homes only with Zoning Hearing Board approval shall be permitted in any
multifamily residential district. Such uses shall comply with all regulations
applicable to the district. Such uses shall comply with the off-street parking
requirements set forth in this chapter. In addition, such uses shall meet the
minimum requirements as set forth by state or federal agencies regulating
such activities and shall, upon application, for either building permit or
occupancy certificate, provide certificates indicating approval by such state
and federal agencies.
§ 324. Obstruction to Vision at Road and/or Driveway Intersections.
[Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 27; as amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/
1987]
In order to minimize accidents caused by obstruction to vision at road
and/or driveway intersections, the following regulations shall apply in all
districts:
§ 325. Offensive Color, Designs, Smoke, Noise, Etc. [Ord. 6/11/
1975A, Art. III, § 28; as amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; and by
Ord. No. 2018-4, 12/12/2018]
Nothing shall be allowed on the premises in any district which would in any
way be offensive, disturbing, or noxious by reason of the emission of odors,
liquids, gas, dust, smoke, vibration or noise. All uses must comply with the
requirements of the State DEP.
§ 326. Off-Street Parking and Loading. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III,
§ 29; as amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
In all districts off-street parking facilities shall be provided and properly
maintained as set forth in this section for any building which is hereafter
erected, enlarged or increased in capacity.
1. Within the area formed by the rights-of-way lines of intersecting roads
and a straight line connecting points on such rights-of-way lines, at a
distance of 20 feet from their points of intersection such connecting line
extending beyond the points to the curbline there shall be a clear space
with no obstruction to vision between the height of 30 inches and a
height of 10 feet above the average grade of each road as measured at
the center line thereof.
2. Requirements of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit any
necessary retaining wall.
3. Trees shall be permitted in the clear space provided that foliage is cut
away within the prescribed height.
§ 323 HOME RULE CHARTER § 326
Ch:741
1. Size and access. Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not
less than 180 square feet exclusive of access drives or aisles and be in
usable shape and condition, except in the case of single family detached
dwellings, no parking area shall contain less than three spaces. There
shall be adequate ingress and egress to all parking spaces. Where a lot
does not abut on a public or private alley or easement of access, there
shall be provided an access drive leading to the parking or storage
areas or loading spaces. Such access drive shall be not less than 10 feet
in width in the case of a dwelling, and not less than 20 feet in width in
all other cases.
Access to off-street parking areas shall be limited to several welldefined
locations, and in no case shall there be unrestricted access
along the length of a street or alley.
2. Number of Parking Spaces Required. The number of off-street parking
spaces required are set forth in the following table. Where the use of
the premises is not specifically mentioned, requirements for similar
uses shall apply.
Off-Street Parking Space Requirements
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Automatic laundry 1 for each laundry machine
Automobile sales and
service garage
1 for each 400 square feet floor area
Banks/professional offices 1 for each 300 square feet floor area
Bowling alleys 4 for each alley
Churches, temples, or
places of worship, funeral
homes, schools, public
buildings, theaters,
auditoriums, areas and
places of assembly, private
clubs, community buildings,
social halls, and lodges
1 for each 4 seats of maximum seating
capacity in principal assembly area or 1
for each 17 classroom seats, whichever
is greater
Country clubs, golf clubs,
gun clubs, tennis clubs and
organizations designed to
provide outdoor sporting or
recreational activities
1 for each 5 members
Driving ranges and golf
courses
2 for each tee
Dwellings – single-family 2 for each unit
Dwellings – multiple 1 1/2 for each unit
Food store, supermarket 1 for each 200 square feet floor area
Funeral homes, mortuaries 1 for each 4 seats
§ 326 KINGSTON CODE § 326
Ch:742
Off-Street Parking Space Requirements
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Furniture, appliance stores 1 for each 200 square feet floor area
Hospitals, sanitariums, and
nursing homes
1 for each 2 patient beds
Hotels and motels 1 for each guest room plus 1 for each 3
employees
Manufacturing, industrial
plant, research laboratory,
bottling plants
1 for each 2 employees on largest shift
plus 1 per company vehicle
Manufacturing and
industrial concerns with
retail business on premises
1 for each 2 employees on largest shift
plus 1 for each 150 square feet devoted
to sales or service
Medical or dental offices 3 for each doctor or dentist
Restaurants, beer parlors,
nightclubs
1 for each 2.5 seats plus 1 for each 3
employees
Retail stores and shops 1 for each 300 square feet floor area
Rooming houses, boarding
houses, dormitories,
fraternities and sororities
1 for each 2 beds
Service station 2 for each pump
Sports arenas, auditoriums,
theaters, assembly halls
1 for each 3.5 seats
Trailer or monument sales
or auctions
1 for each 2,500 square feet of lot area
Wholesale and warehouse
concerns
1 for each 2 employees, plus 1 for each
company vehicle, plus 1 for each 500
square feet of wholesale or retail sales
or service
3. Location.
A. Such parking space as required in this section shall in no part exist
upon and no portion of any vehicle shall overhang the right-of-way
of any public road, street, alley or walkway. There shall be no offstreet
parking in the front yards of residential districts except as
normally exists in driveways.
B. The parking spaces for all dwellings shall be located on the same
plot as the main building.
C. Parking spaces for all other uses shall be provided on the same plot
with the main building or not more than 300 feet distance, as
measured along the nearest pedestrian walkway provided that such
parking area is under the same ownership as the principal use. The
§ 326 HOME RULE CHARTER § 326
Ch:743
applicant for a building permit which proposes to use an area
for off-street parking in order to meet the requirements of this
chapter and in accordance with the provisions of this subsection
shall submit evidence of a restrictive covenant running with the
land to be used for off-street parking purposes stating that such
land shall not be encroached upon, used, sold, leased, or conveyed
for any other purpose until such time as the principal building
ceases to be required to provide such off-street parking facilities.
D. Parking requirements for two or more uses of the same or of
different types may be provided by the establishment of the
required number of spaces for each use in a common parking area
provided that all such uses being served by a common parking area
are under the same ownership. Accessory uses shall not be
required to have additional parking spaces other than those
required by the principal use.
E. Off-street parking areas may be situated in any residential district
abutting any commercial district or industrial district to a depth not
exceeding 120 feet and provided that all off-street parking lot
improvements as provided in Subsection 4A of this section are
complied with.
4. Requirements. Any off-street parking lots serving any use other than
dwellings of four units per building or less shall meet the following offstreet
parking lot improvement requirements:
A. Screening and Landscaping. Off-street parking areas for more than
five vehicles, and off-street loading areas shall be screened on each
side which joins or faces residential or industrial premises situated
in any R District.
B. Surfacing for all retail sales and services, business services and
professional services serving the general public and having access
to and abutting a paved street, the off-street parking area shall be
provided with a hard surface, all-weather pavement of asphalt or
cement and shall be so graded and drained to provide for the
adequate runoff and disposal of surface water.
C. Lighting. Where lighting facilities are provided for the parking
area, they shall be designed and installed so as to reflect the light
away from any contiguous residentially zoned property.
5. Off-Street Loading Requirements.
A. Every hospital, institution, commercial or industrial building or
similar use having a floor area of 20,000 square feet or more and
requiring receipt or distribution by vehicle of materials or
merchandise shall have at least one permanent off-street loading
space for each 20,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction
thereof immediately adjacent to the principal building.
§ 326 KINGSTON CODE § 326
Ch:744
§ 327. Overhanging or Extruding Projections. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art.
III, § 30; as amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
B. Every building which requires the receipt or distribution by
vehicles of material or merchandise, shall provide off-street loading
berths in accordance with the following tables:
Off-Street Loading Space Requirements
Uses
Square Feet of Floor
Area
Required Off-
Street Loading
Berths
Commercial,
wholesale
manufacturing and
storage
10,000 to 25,000 1
25,000 to 40,000 2
40,000 to 60,000 3
60,000 to 100,000 4
For each additional
50,000 or major
fraction thereof
1 additional
Hospitals (in addition
to space for
ambulance)
10,000 to 30,000 1
For each additional
300,000 or major
fraction thereof
1 additional
Hotels, offices and
multi-dwellings
10,000 or more 1
Schools 15,000 or more 1
Undertakers and
funeral parlors
5,000 1
C. Every off-street loading and unloading space shall have direct
access to the public street or alley and shall have the following
minimum dimensions: length, 30 feet; width, 12 feet; height, 14
feet.
1. One Family Residential Districts, Two Family Residential Districts,
Multifamily Residential and Mobile Home Districts. Every part of a yard
or court shall be open from its lowest point to the sky unobstructed
except for the customary projection of sills, belts, courses, cornices,
ornamental features, and eaves; provided, however, that none of the
above projections shall extend into a yard more than 36 inches. Open or
enclosed fire escapes, outside stairways, balconies, chimneys, flues or
§ 326 HOME RULE CHARTER § 327
Ch:745
§ 328. Parking of Motor Vehicles and Trailers. [Ord. 6/11/1975A,
Art. III, § 31; as amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
All motor vehicles shall, in addition to parking regulation of this chapter,
comply with regulations found in Chapter 15, Motor Vehicles.
§ 329. Performance Standards. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 32]
These performance standards shall apply to all nonresidential uses,
other projections shall not extend into any yard except that uncovered
steps may project not more than three feet into the yard.
1. Smoke, Dust and Dirt. There shall be no emission of visible smoke, dust,
dirt, fly ash or any particulate matter from any pipes, vents, or other
openings from any other source into the air. All fuels shall be either
smokeless in nature or shall be used so as to prevent any emission of
visible smoke, fly ash, or cinders into the air.
2. Fumes, Vapors and Gases. There shall be no emissions of any fumes,
vapors or gases of a noxious, toxic or corrosive nature which can cause
any damage or irritation to health, animals, vegetation or to any form of
property.
3. Sewerage. There shall be no discharge at any point of liquid or solid
waste into any public sewage disposal system which will overload such
system or create detrimental effects in the flow and treatment of public
sewage. There shall be no discharge of any industrial wastes into any
private sewage disposal system, stream, or into the ground of any kind
or nature which would contaminate any water supply or otherwise
cause emission of dangerous or objectionable elements or conditions.
There shall be no accumulation of solid waste conducive to the breeding
of rodents or insects.
4. Odors. There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other odorous
matter in such quantities as to be offensive, obnoxious or unpleasant
beyond the property line on which the principal use is located. Any
process including the preparation of food which may involve the
creation and emission of any such odor shall be provided with a primary
and secondary safeguard system so that odor control may be
maintained in the event of failure of the primary safeguard system.
5. Noise. The permitted level of noise or sound emission at the property
line of the lot on which the principal use is located shall not at any time
exceed the average noise level prevailing for the same hour as
generated by streets and traffic activity. The determination of noise
level shall be measured with a sound level meter that conforms to
specifications published by the American Standards Association.
6. Glare. There shall be no direct glare visible from any residential district
caused by unshielded floodlights or other sources of high intensity
lighting.
§ 327 KINGSTON CODE § 330
Ch:746
§ 330. Pending Applications for Building Permits. [Ord. 6/ll/1975A,
Art. III, § 33]
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the overall layout,
plans, construction, size or designated use of any development, building,
structure, or part thereof, for which official approval and required permits
have been granted, or where no approvals or permits are necessary, where
construction has been legally started, before the enactment of this chapter
and completed within a one-year period.
§ 331. Permitted Building Area. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 34]
The principal building on any lot or parcel of land shall be erected within
the area bound by the building lines established by setback or yard
requirements. Accessory buildings may be erected within any building line
established for the principal building and in required rear yards as may be
otherwise provided in these regulations.
§ 332. Principal Building on a Lot. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 35]
Except mobile home park districts and the group housing projects as
provided in these regulations, only one principal building and its customary
accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on any lot of record. Any
dwelling shall be deemed to be the principal building on the lot on which
the same is located. An addition to any building shall not be construed as a
principal building.
§ 333. Retaining Walls. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 36; as amended
by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
Nothing in these regulations shall be construed to prohibit or to prevent the
erection of a retaining wall on any property provided that such retaining
wall does not adversely affect the natural flow of surface water or create any
other adverse effect upon adjacent or adjoining properties. However, any
application for a retaining wall shall be subject to approval of the Zoning
Officer before the issuance of a permit.
§ 334. Shopping Centers. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 37; as
amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
Shopping centers are hereby defined as a group of retail stores or shops
on one or more lots under single ownership or management with an area
of five acres or more and with a minimum depth of 300 feet established
as a shopping entity with common parking facilities, ingress and egress
loading and unloading facilities. Shopping centers shall be permitted in
any general or neighborhood commercial district and may be developed in
accordance with approval of a plat of a subdivision or land development as
approved by the Planning Commission. The shopping center shall not be
divided into separate lots for each store or use. No permit shall be issued
for the construction of shopping centers until the plans and specifications,
including the design of ingress and egress roads, parking facilities and
§ 330 HOME RULE CHARTER § 334
Ch:747
other such items as may be found of importance, have been approved by
the Planning Commission. No buildings shall be erected closer than 50 feet
to any road right-of-way line. There shall be provided a minimum of one
parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area designed to be used for
business or shopping purposes. Such parking area including maneuvering
areas, ingress and egress roads, and driving lanes shall be paved and kept
in good repair at all times with a hard all-weather surface. All points of
access shall be to a public road; however, there shall be no public roads or
alleys within the shopping center property. All loading and unloading shall
be done entirely within the shopping center property. Except as otherwise
provided in this section all uses within the shopping centers shall conform
with other regulations as set forth in this chapter.
§ 335. Rear Dwelling and Easements Required Therewith. [Ord. 6/
11/1975A, Art. III, § 39]
In all districts except the industrial districts, no building in the rear of a
principal building on the same lot shall be used for residence purposes
unless it conforms to the open space requirements of this chapter, and for
the purpose of determining the front yard in such case, the rear line of the
required rear yard for the principal building in front shall be considered the
front lot line for the building in the rear. In addition, there must be provided
for any such rear dwelling an unoccupied and unobstructed accessway not
less than 10 feet wide to a road, and there shall not be more than one
dwelling housing not more than two families for each such easement, except
that a common easement of access at least 40 feet wide may be provided for
two or more dwellings housing any number of families.
§ 336. Road Frontage Required. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 40]
No lot shall contain any dwelling unless it abuts at least 20 feet on a public
street, or unless it conforms to the easement of access required of this Part.
§ 337. Traffic Visibility Across Corner Lots. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art.
III, § 41]
On any corner lot in any district, no fence, structure or planting, more than
30 inches high measured from the center of the road, shall be erected or
maintained within 20 feet of the "corner" so as not to interfere with traffic
visibility across the corner.
§ 338. Certain Building and Land Use Excepted. [Ord. 6/11/1975A,
Art. III, § 42; as amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
1. Agricultural Uses. Except for compliance with minimum yard
requirements, visibility across corner lots, and for the commercial
raising of fur-bearing animals, or hog farms, nothing in this chapter
shall prohibit the use of any land for agricultural purposes as defined
herein, or the construction or use of buildings or structures incident to
§ 334 KINGSTON CODE § 338
Ch:748
§ 339. Swimming Pools; Private, Community or Club. [Ord. 6/11/
1975A, Art. III, § 43; as amended by Ord. 1980-2, 11/12/1980, §§ 1,
2; and by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
the use for agricultural purposes of the land on which such buildings or
structures are located, in any agricultural district.
1. Private Swimming Pools. A private swimming pool in the ground or
permanent installations above the ground, but not including farm
ponds, as regulated herein, shall be any pool, lake or open tank not
located within a completely enclosed building and containing or
normally capable of containing water to a depth at any point greater
than 1 1/2 feet. No such swimming pool shall be allowed in a B-1, A-1 or
any R District except as an accessory use and unless it complies with
the following conditions and requirements:
A. The pool is intended and is to be used solely for the enjoyment of
the occupants of the principal use of the property on which it is
located, and their guests, and no fee shall be charged.
B. It may not be located, including any walks or paved areas or
accessory structures adjacent thereto, closer than 10 feet to any
property line of the property on which it is located.
C. The swimming pool, or the entire property on which it is located,
shall be so walled or substantially fenced so as to prevent
uncontrolled access by children from the street or from adjacent
properties. Said fence or wall shall not be less than four feet above
ground level and shall be maintained in good condition and
grounded for electricity. All pools shall conform to the Pennsylvania
DEP Standards. Said fence or wall shall be installed completely
around the perimeter of the pool area and shall entirely surround
prior to the pool being filled with water. The penalty for having
failed to install a fence or wall as above prescribed before filling the
pool with water shall be a fine levied upon the owner at the rate of
$100 per day. Inspection by the Zoning Officer shall be made within
48 hours of having been notified by the owner of the completion of
all construction with respect to the swimming pool and the
enclosure surrounding the perimeter. [Amended by Ord. No.
2018-4, 12/12/2018]
2. Community or Club Swimming Pools. A community or club swimming
pool shall be any pool constructed by an association of property owners,
or by a private club solely for use and enjoyment by members of the
association or club and their families and guests of members.
Community and club swimming pools shall comply with the following
conditions and requirements:
A. The pool and accessory structures thereto, including the areas
used by the bathers, shall not be closer than one 100 feet to any
property line of the property on which it is located.
§ 338 HOME RULE CHARTER § 339
Ch:749
§ 340. Time Limitation. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. III, § 44]
No zoning permit for construction, erection, or alteration of any building
or structure or part thereof, or for signs or outdoor advertisements, or part
thereof, shall be valid for more than one year unless work at the site has
commenced within such period.
§ 341. Notice of Starting Work. [Ord. 6/ll/1975A, Art. III, § 45]
The Zoning Officer shall be given at least 24 hours' notice by owner or
applicant prior to commencement of work at the site under zoning permits.
§ 342. Existing Lots of Record. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. VI, § 1]
Any lot of record existing at the effective date of this chapter in any A-1
or R District may be used for the erection of a single-family dwelling,
even though its area and width is less than the minimum requirements set
forth herein, except as set forth hereafter. Front, side and rear yards shall
conform with the requirements of this chapter as closely as possible. Where
two adjacent lots of record with less than the required area and width are
held by one owner, the request for a permit shall be referred to the Board,
which may require that the two lots be combined and used for one main
building.
§ 343. Yards. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. VI, § 2]
B. The swimming pool and all of the area used by the bathers shall be
so walled or fenced as to prevent uncontrolled access by children
from the street or adjacent properties. The said fence or wall shall
not be less than four feet in height and maintained in good
condition and grounded for electricity. The area surrounding the
enclosure, except for the parking spaces, shall be suitably
landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs and trees and maintained in
good condition.
3. No owner or possessor of a swimming pool may cause any water from a
swimming pool to drain or backwash or to be drained or backwashed
directly or indirectly upon the real or personal property of another.
1. Front Yards: Residence Districts, Through Lots. In any R District, where
a lot runs through a block from street to street, a front yard as required
by this chapter shall be provided along each street lot line.
2. Projections into Yards and Courts. A wall or fence six feet in height or
under, or higher if a retaining wall, may be erected within the limits of
any yard not extending beyond the front setback line. Any wall or fence
in the front yard, not including a retaining wall, shall be limited to 30
inches in height.
§ 339 KINGSTON CODE § 343
Ch:750
§ 344. Day-Care Facilities. [Ord. 90-8, 10/10/1990, § 2]
Patios may not be located closer than 10 feet to any adjacent property
line.
Architectural Projections. Chimneys, leaders, cornices, eaves, gutters
and bay windows, and the like, may extend not more than 24 inches
into any required yard.
3. Accessory Structures. Attached accessory structures, which are
attached to the principal buildings, shall comply with all yard
requirements for a principal structure. [Amended by Ord. No.
2018-4, 12/12/2018]
A. Unattached accessory structures in A-1 and R Districts may be
erected within a rear yard, provided they conform with the
following:
(1) Maximum height: 1 1/2 stories or 15 feet, except in A-1
Districts.
(2) An accessory structure shall not be less than the distance
provided in Chapter 27, Part 3, § 303, Subsection 2, hereof,
from any lot line.
(3) An accessory structure shall be located not less than 10 feet
from a principal structure.
(4) Not more than two accessory structures, including a private
garage, shall be located in any R District, on one lot.
B. Unattached nonresidential accessory structures shall comply with
the front and side yard requirements for the principal structure.
They shall have a rear yard (see Chapter 27, Part 3, § 303,
Subsection 2, hereof), except as otherwise specified in this chapter.
1. Family day-care homes and group day-care homes may locate by right
in any residential district subject to the standards in that particular
district for a single family residence and the following additional
safeguards, whichever is more restrictive:
A. Day-care facilities must hold an approved Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare registration certificate or license, as
appropriate, and meet all current Department of Public Welfare
regulations including those standards governing adequate indoor
space, accessible outdoor play space and any applicable state or
local building and fire safety codes.
B. Parking. In addition to the particular district's parking
requirements, there shall be one additional off-street parking space
provided for each nonresident employee and one safe passenger
unloading space measuring at least 10 feet by 20 feet.
§ 343 HOME RULE CHARTER § 344
Ch:751
C. Fencing. The requisite outdoor play area shall be surrounded by a
safety fence.
D. Hours. Outside play shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m.
E. Sign. Any sign shall comply with standards governing signs for
home occupations. See § 313 of this chapter.
F. When day-care is provided in a home, the amount of floor area
devoted to such purposes shall not exceed 30% of the total floor
area of the dwelling and there shall be no change to the exterior of
the building for the purpose of accommodating the day-care use.
G. All day-care homes and facilities shall be fully protected by smoke
detectors and fire extinguishers.
2. Day-care centers may locate by special exception, in any district, except
C1 Conservation District, subject to the regulations of that zoning
district for single family residence and the following additional
standards, whichever is more restrictive:
A. Parking. There shall be one off-street space provided for each
employee and one safe passenger unloading space measuring 10
feet by 20 feet, for each 10 children that the facility is licensed to
accommodate.
B. Off-Premises Play Area. When an off-premises outdoor area is
utilized, it must be located within 800 feet and be safety accessible
without crossing at grade any arterial street or other hazardous
area.
C. Fence. The outdoor play area required by state licensing shall be
surrounded by a safety fence.
D. Play Area Setback. No portion of the outside play area shall be less
then 100 feet from an existing occupied dwelling.
E. Hours. Outside play shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m.
F. Signs. Any sign shall comply with regulations applicable to
institutional signs. See § 201, Subsection 2, of Chapter 19, Part 2,
Township Sign Ordinance.
G. Concentration. No day-care center shall be established within 500
feet from another day-care center or private nursery or
kindergarten.
H. Lot Size. The minimum site or lot area shall be one acre. When
centralized water and sewerage systems are not available, the
minimum lot size shall be increased as necessary to meet the DEP
§ 344 KINGSTON CODE § 344
Ch:752
§ 345. Private Nurseries and Kindergartens. [Ord. 90-8, 10/10/1990,
§ 2]
The private nursery or kindergarten shall be permitted to locate by special
exception in any zoning district, except C1 Conservation District, if it
complies with all zoning regulations governing day-care centers (see § 344)
with the exception of licensing by the Department of Public Welfare, and the
following additional safeguards:
Chapter 73, Standards for Onlot Sewage Treatment Facilities (25
Pa. Code § 73.17). [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-4, 12/12/2018]
The minimum site or lot area shall be determined by the following
table when centralized water and sewage service is provided:
License Capacity
(children)
Minimum Lot Size
(square feet)
7 to 10 8,000
11 to 15 10,000
16 to 20 15,000
21 to 25 20,000
26 to 30 25,000
31 to 40 35,000
41 to 50 40,000
51 and above 40,000 plus 500 square feet for
additional child, i.e., 52 children
equals 41,000 square feet
I. Soundproofing. When co-located in a building employing noisy
operations, the municipality may require sound proofing of the daycare
facility to protect the children.
J. Day-care centers must hold an approved Pennsylvania Department
of Public Welfare license as appropriate, and meet all current
Department of Public Welfare regulations including those
standards governing adequate indoor space, accessible outdoor
play space and any applicable state or local building fire safety
codes.
K. All day-care facilities shall be fully protected by smoke detectors
and fire extinguishers.
1. The operator possesses a valid license issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Education's State Board of Private Academic Schools.
2. Other Regulations. The private nursery or kindergarten must also meet
any applicable state and municipal building and fire safety codes.
§ 344 HOME RULE CHARTER § 345
Ch:753
§ 346. Bed-and-breakfast Establishments. [Ord. 90-8, 10/10/1990,
§ 2]
§ 347. Public and Semipublic Uses. [Ord. 94-9, 6/8/1994, § 2]
3. Municipal officials reserve the right to make periodic inspections to
ensure continued compliance with all state and municipal
requirements.
4. All facilities shall be fully protected by smoke detectors and fire
extinguishers.
1. Bed-and-breakfast homestay may locate in any Single Family (R-1) or
Two Family (R-2) Residential District as a home occupation subject to
all home occupation regulations as set forth in this chapter and the
following additional requirements, whichever is more restrictive.
A. Sleeping accommodations shall be located only within an owneroccupied
dwelling and shall be limited to one or rooms with a total
size not to exceed 20%, or 500 square feet of the dwelling,
whichever is less.
B. Not more than one family or four unrelated guests may be
accommodated at any one time. The length of stay per guest shall
be limited to seven days per thirty-day period.
C. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each two guests
of the bed-and-breakfast establishment, provided that, in no case
shall the total number of parking spaces on the lot exceed four.
D. Meals for compensation shall be provided only to guests of the bedand-
breakfast establishment and shall be limited to breakfast.
E. No more than one bed-and-breakfast establishment is permitted
per lot. No bed-and-breakfast establishment may be located within
500 feet of an existing bed-and-breakfast establishment, to be
measured from the closest distance between lot lines of the
properties accommodating said bed-and-breakfast establishments.
2. Bed-and-breakfast inn may locate in any commercial district subject to
all regulations in that district as set forth in this chapter.
1. Public and semipublic uses are permitted as conditional uses in all
zoning districts pursuant to standards and criteria expressed in this
Chapter 27, and Part 7, § 709, of this Chapter 27, and, in addition
thereto, the following additional standards and criteria shall apply:
A. No structure on the lot is closer than 50 feet from any abutting
residential property line or 15 feet from any abutting commercial,
agricultural or industrial property line.
B. All parking areas will comply with off-street parking regulations as
specified in Part 3, § 326, of this chapter.
§ 345 KINGSTON CODE § 347
Ch:754
§ 348. Regulations Governing Communications Antennas and
Communications Equipment Buildings. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art II; as
added by Ord. 2000-3, 4/12/2000, § 348]
2. In granting a conditional use, the Board of Supervisors may order such
reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in
this chapter, as it may deem necessary.
1. Where possible a communications antenna shall be attached to an
existing structure or building.
2. An antenna may not be located on a building or structure that is listed
on a historic register, or is in a historic district.
3. Building mounted communications antennas shall not be located on any
single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling.
4. Building mounted communications antennas shall be permitted to
exceed the height limitations of the applicable zoning district by not
more than 20 feet.
5. Omnidirectional or whip communications antennas shall not exceed 20
feet in height and seven inches in diameter.
6. Directional or panel communications antennas shall not exceed five feet
in height and three feet in width.
7. Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be mounted on a
building or other structure shall submit evidence from a Pennsylvania
registered professional engineer certifying that the proposed
installation will not exceed the structural capacity of the building or
other structure, considering wind and other loads associated with the
antenna location.
8. Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be mounted on a
building or other structure shall submit detailed construction and
elevation drawings indicating how the antennas will be mounted on the
Structure for review by the Code Enforcement Officer for compliance
with the Township building code and other applicable law.
9. Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be mounted on a
building or other structure shall submit evidence of agreements and/or
easements necessary to provide access to the building or structure on
which the antennas are to be mounted so that installation and
maintenance of the antennas and communications equipment building
can be accomplished.
10. Communications antennas shall comply with all applicable standards
established by the Federal Communications Commission governing
human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
11. Communications antennas shall not cause radio frequency interference
with other communications facilities located in the Township.
§ 347 HOME RULE CHARTER § 348
Ch:755
12. All communications equipment shall be enclosed within an existing
building, or an addition to the existing structure, unless the site is
vacant, then the Communications Equipment Building shall be subject
to the height and setback requirements of the applicable zoning district
for an accessory structure.
13. A landscape buffer shall be planted in accordance with § 601,
Subsection 2W, and vehicle access and parking access to the building
shall not interfere with the parking of vehicular circulation on the lot of
the principal use. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-4, 12/12/2018]
14. The communications tower site shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis, unless emergency conditions prevail. Two
reserved off-street paved parking spaces shall be required upon a
communications tower site.
15. The owner or operator of communications antennas shall be licensed by
the Federal Communications Commission to operate such antennas.
16. Any security fence shall be a minimum of eight feet tall with, as a
minimum, the lower six feet being visually opaque. The fence is to be
constructed of wood, decorative masonry or appropriate iron elements
designed to minimize the visual impact of the fence on the surrounding
landscape. The following materials will not be permitted: fences made
of mesh or chain link as well as vinyl. Barbed or security wire will not be
permitted nor will electrified fences of any type. Security fences
constructed of common cast masonry units will not be permitted, unless
the fence matches the predominant finish of the equipment building.
Decorative, split, ground or textured face, cast masonry unit fences
may be permitted.
17. All fences must be actively maintained throughout the life of the facility.
18. A sign not to exceed 12 inches by 16 inches in size will be securely
attached to the fence at any entrance and two other sides of the
communication tower site. This sign shall provide the following
information in a legible typeface and size:
A. Owner of facility.
B. Operator(s) of facility.
C. FCC license number for facility.
D. Emergency phone contact number(s) (in bold text).
E. Locational information for facility.
F. Local community emergency services number.
G. Number for local building and zoning office.
H. A warning to trespassers.
§ 348 KINGSTON CODE § 348
Ch:756
§ 349. Wind Energy Facilities. [Ord. 2010-8, 10/13/2010]
19. The signs must be maintained, secured and legible and must be
updated when any of the information becomes obsolete.
20. The location of the signs shall be delineated on the site landscape plan.
21. The owner, applicant or his designee of the communications tower shall
submit on an annual basis verification of all current FCC license(s) to
that location, the name, address and emergency telephone number for
the operator of all communication antennae, and certificate of
insurance as provided at the initial application.
1. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this Section:
APPLICANT — The person or entity filing an application for a permit
under this Section.
FACILITY OWNER — The entity or entities having an equity interest
in the wind energy facility, including their respective successors and
assigns.
OPERATOR — The entity responsible for the day-to-day operation and
maintenance of the wind energy facility.
HUB HEIGHT — The distance measured from the surface of the tower
foundation to the height of the wind turbine hub, to which the blade is
attached.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — A residence, school, hospital, church, public
library or other building used for public gathering that is occupied or in
use when the permit application is submitted.
TURBINE HEIGHT — The distance measured from the surface of the
tower foundation to the highest point of the turbine rotor plane.
WIND ENERGY FACILITY — An electric generation facility whose main
purpose is to supply electricity, consisting of one or more wind turbines
and other accessory structures and buildings, including substations,
meteorological towers, electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and
other appurtenant structures and facilities. The term does not include
a stand-alone wind turbine constructed primarily for on-site residential
or farm use.
WIND TURBINE — A wind energy conversion system that converts
wind energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator
and includes the nacelle, rotor, tower and pad turbine, if any.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alternation or
maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
transmission or distribution systems, collection, communications,
supply or disposal systems and their essential buildings, excluding
communications towers and communications antennas and wind energy
§ 348 HOME RULE CHARTER § 349
Ch:757
facilities. Essential services also include public service buildings, such
as police emergency medical and transfer responders and fire facilities.
2. Applicability.
A. This Section constitutes an integral part of the Zoning Ordinance of
the Township of Kingston, and it is an addition to Chapter 27 of the
Code of Ordinances of the Township of Kingston, Part 3, and shall
be designated as § 349 thereof.
B. This Section applies to all wind energy facilities proposed to be
constructed after the effective date of this Section, except that this
Section is not intended to apply to stand-alone wind turbines
constructed primarily for residential or farm use.
C. Wind energy facilities constructed prior to the effective date of this
Section shall not be required to meet the requirements of this
Section, provided that any physical modification to an existing wind
energy facility that materially alters the size, type and number of
wind turbines or other equipment shall require a permit under this
Section.
3. Conditional use.
A. In all M-1 (Mining Districts) and A-1 (Agricultural Districts), a wind
energy facility shall be considered a conditional use. Such
conditional use is to be granted only upon the approval of an
application for a permit, together with all conditions stated therein.
B. All applications for conditional use are to be submitted to the
Township Zoning Officer, together with the payment of all
prevailing conditional use application fees.
C. An application for the use, operation or maintenance of a wind
energy facility is to be submitted to the Township Zoning Officer,
together with the payment of all prevailing permit fees.
4. Regulations governing wind energy facilities as Conditional Uses.
Where wind energy facilities are provided for by conditional use, the
following specific standards and regulations shall apply and the same
shall be specifically addressed in any application for a permit. Design
and installation regulations.
A. Uniform Construction Code. To the extent applicable, the wind
energy facility shall comply with the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code, Act 45 of 1999, as amended, and regulations
adopted by the Department of Labor and Industry.
B. Design Safety Certification. The design of the wind energy facility
shall conform to applicable industry standards, including those of
the American National Standards Institute. The applicant shall
submit certificates of design compliance obtained by the equipment
manufacturers from Underwriters Laboratories, Det Norske
§ 349 KINGSTON CODE § 349
Ch:758
Veritas, Germanishcer Lloyd Wind Engines, or other similar
certifying organizations.
C. Controls and Brakes. All wind energy facilities shall be equipped
with a redundant braking system. This includes both aerodynamic
overspeed controls (including variable pitch, tip, and other similar
systems) and mechanical brakes. Mechanical brakes shall be
operated in a fail-safe mode. Stall regulations shall not be
considered a sufficient braking system for overspeed protection.
D. Electrical Components. All electrical components of the wind
energy facility shall conform to relevant and applicable local, state
and national codes, and relevant and applicable international
standards. The maximum turbine power output shall be limited to
10 kilowatts.
E. Environmental and Visual Appearance; Power Lines.
(1) Wind turbines shall be a nonobtrusive color such as white, offwhite
or gray.
(2) Wind energy facilities shall not be artificially lighted, except to
the extent required by the Federal Aviation Administration or
other applicable authority that regulates air safety.
(3) Wind turbines shall not display advertising, except for
reasonable identification of the turbine manufacturer, facility
owner and operator.
(4) On-site transmission and power lines between wind turbines
shall be placed underground.
(5) Where wind characteristics permit, wind turbine shall be set
back from the tops of visually prominent ridgelines to minimize
the visual contrast from any public access.
(6) Wind turbines shall be designed and located to minimize
adverse visual impacts from neighboring residential areas to
the greatest extent feasible.
F. Warnings To Public.
(1) A clearly visible warning sign concerning voltage must be
placed at the base of all pad-mounted transformers and
substations.
(2) Visible, reflective, colored objects, such as flags, reflectors, or
tape shall be placed on the anchor points of guy wires and
along the guy wires up to a height of 10 feet from the ground.
G. Climb Prevention/Locks.
(1) Wind turbines shall not be climbable up to 15 feet above
ground surface.
§ 349 HOME RULE CHARTER § 349
Ch:759
(2) All access doors to wind turbines and electrical equipment
shall be locked or fenced, as appropriate, to prevent entry by
nonauthorized persons.
H. Occupied Buildings Setbacks.
(1) Wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest occupied
building a distance no less than the greater of the maximum
setback requirements for that zoning classification where the
turbine is located or 1.1 times the turbine height, whichever is
greater. The setback distance shall be measured from the
center of the wind turbine base to the nearest point on the
foundation of the occupied building.
(2) Wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest occupied
building located on a nonparticipating landowner's property a
distance of not less than five times the hub height, as measured
from the center of the wind turbine base to the nearest point
on the foundation of the occupied building.
I. Property Lines Setback. All wind turbines shall be set back from
the nearest property line a distance of not less than the greater of
the maximum setback requirements for that zoning classification
where the turbine is located or 1.1 times the turbine height,
whichever is greater. The setback distance shall be measured to the
center of the wind turbine base.
J. Public Roads. All wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest
public road a distance of not less than 1.1 times the turbine height,
as measured from the right-of-way line of the nearest public road to
the center of the wind turbine base.
K. Wetlands. All wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest
wetlands a distance of not less than the greater of the maximum
setback requirements for that zoning classification where the
turbine is located at 1.1 times the turbine height, whichever is
greater.
L. Streams, Lakes, Ponds, Rivers and Creeks. All wind turbines shall
be set back from the nearest stream, lake, pond, river and creek a
distance of not less than the greater of the maximum setback
requirements for that zoning classification where the turbine is
located or 1,500 feet from said body of water, whichever is greater.
M. Waiver of Setbacks. Upon request, the governing body may grant
partial waivers of setback requirements hereunder where it has
determined that literal enforcement will exact undue hardship
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question,
and provided that such waiver will not be contrary to the public
interest. The governing body may take into consideration the
support or opposition of adjacent property owners in granting
waivers of setback requirements hereunder.
§ 349 KINGSTON CODE § 349
Ch:760
N. Use of Public Roads.
(1) The applicant shall identify all state and local public roads to
be used within the Township of Kingston to transport
equipment and parts for construction, operation or
maintenance of the wind energy facility.
(2) The Kingston Township Engineer or a qualified third party
engineer hired by the Township and paid for by the applicant
shall document road conditions prior to construction. The
engineer shall document road conditions again 30 days after
construction is complete or as weather permits.
(3) The Township may require the bonding of the road in
compliance with state regulations.
(4) Any road damage caused by the applicant or its contractors
shall be promptly repaired at the applicant's expense.
(5) The applicant shall demonstrate that it has appropriate liquid
financial resources to ensure the prompt repair of damaged
roads. A financial statement of the applicant must be produced
at the time of application for the permit.
O. Local Emergency Services. The applicant shall provide a copy of
the project summary and site plan to local emergency services,
including Police Department, Fire Companies and emergency
medical responders. Upon request, the applicant shall cooperate
with all police, fire, and emergency service providers to develop
and coordinate implementation of an emergency response plan for
the wind energy facility.
P. Noise and Shadow Flicker. Audible sound from a wind energy
facility shall not exceed 55 dBA, as measured at the exterior of any
occupied building on a nonparticipating landowner's property.
Methods for measuring and reporting acoustic emissions from wind
turbines and the wind energy facility shall be equal to or exceed the
minimum standards for precision described in AWEA Standard 2.1
— 1989, titled Procedures for the Measurement and Reporting of
Acoustic Emissions from wind turbine Generation Systems Volume
I: First Tier. The municipality may grant a partial waiver of such
standards where it has determined that literal enforcement will
exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to
the land in question, and provided that such waiver will not be
contrary to the public interest. The facility owner and operator
shall make reasonable efforts to minimize shadow flicker to any
occupied building on a nonparticipating landowner's property. The
governing body may take into consideration the support or
opposition of adjacent property owners on granting waivers of
noise and shadow flicker restrictions.
§ 349 HOME RULE CHARTER § 349
Ch:761
Q. Signal Interference. The applicant shall make reasonable efforts to
avoid any disruption or loss of radio, telephone, television or
similar signals, and shall mitigate any harm cause by the wind
energy facility.
R. Liability Insurance. There shall be maintained a current general
liability policy covering bodily injury and property damage with
limits of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence and $1,000,000 in
aggregate. Certificates shall be made available to the Township
upon request.
S. Maximum Turbine Height. The maximum turbine height, as so
defined herein, shall not exceed 350 feet.
T. Inspection Reports. The owner of the wind energy facility shall
have it inspected each year for structural and operational integrity
by a licensed professional engineer and shall submit a copy of the
inspection report to the Township Manager no later than December
31 of each year. If such report recommends that repairs or
maintenance are to be conducted, the owner shall provide the
Township Manager with a written schedule for the repairs or
maintenance and certify the completion thereof.
5. Decommissioning.
A. The facility owner and operator shall, at its expense, complete
decommissioning of the wind energy facility, or individual wind
turbines, within 12 months after the end of the useful life of the
facility or individual wind turbines. The wind energy facility or
individual wind turbines will presume to be at the end of its useful
life if no electricity is generated for a continuous period of 12
months.
B. Decommissioning shall include removal of wind turbines, buildings,
cabling, electrical components, roads, foundations to a depth of 36
inches, and any other associated facilities.
C. Disturbed earth shall be graded and reseeded, unless the
landowner requests in writing that the access roads or other land
surface areas not be restored.
D. An independent and certified professional engineer shall be
retained to estimate the total cost of decommissioning
("decommissioning costs") without regard to savage value of the
equipment, and the cost of decommissioning net salvage value of
the equipment ("net decommissioning costs"). Said estimates shall
be submitted to the Township after the first year of operation and
every fifth year thereafter.
E. The facility owner or operator shall post and maintain
decommissioning funds in an amount equal to net decommissioning
costs; provided that at no point shall decommissioning funds be
§ 349 KINGSTON CODE § 349
Ch:762
less than 25% of decommissioning costs. The decommissioning
funds shall be posted and maintained with a bonding company or
Federal or Commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by
the facility owner or operator and participating landowner posting
the financial security, provided that the bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within
the Commonwealth and is approved by the Township.
F. Decommissioning funds may be in the form of a performance bond,
surety bond, letter of credit, corporate guarantee or other form of
financial assurance as may be acceptable to the Township.
G. If the facility owner or operator fails to complete decommissioning
within the period prescribed herein, then the landowner shall have
six months to complete decommissioning.
H. If neither the facility owner or operator nor the landowner
complete decommissioning within the periods prescribed herein,
then the Township may take such measures as necessary to
complete decommissioning. The entry into and submission of
evidence of a participating landowner agreement to the Township
shall constitute agreement and consent of the parties to the
agreement, their respective heirs, successors and assigns that the
Township may take such action as necessary to implement the
decommissioning plan.
I. The escrow agent shall release the decommissioning funds when
the facility owner or operator has demonstrated and the
municipality concurs that decommissioning has been satisfactorily
completed, or upon written approval of the municipality in order to
implement the decommissioning plan.
6. Public Inquiries and Complaints.
A. The facility owner and operator shall maintain a phone number and
identify a responsible person for the public to contact with
inquiries and complaints throughout the life of the project.
B. The facility owner and operator shall make reasonable efforts to
respond to the public's inquiries and complaints.
7. Remedies.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate or
fail to comply with or take any action which is contrary to the terms
of this Section, or any permit issued under this Section, or cause
another to violate or fail to comply, or to take any action which is
contrary to the terms of this Section or any permit issued under
this Section.
B. If the Township determines that a violation of this Section or the
permit has occurred, the Township shall provide written notice to
§ 349 HOME RULE CHARTER § 349
Ch:763
§ 350. Small-Scale Windmills. [Ord. 2010-7, 10/13/2010]
any person, firm, or corporation alleged to be in violation of this
Section or permit. If the alleged violation does not pose an
immediate threat to public health or safety, the Township and
the parties shall engage in good-faith negotiations to resolve the
alleged violation. Such negotiations shall be conducted within 30
days of the notice of violation. If a violation constitutes an
immediate risk of harm to person or property and is detrimental
to the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Township
of Kingston, appropriate legal action can be taken to cause the
violation to be abated or remedied immediately.
C. If, after 30 days from the date of the notice of violation, the
Township determines, in its discretion, that the parties have not
resolved the alleged violation, the Township may institute civil
enforcement proceedings or any other remedy at law or in equity to
ensure compliance, as provided for in the Zoning Ordinance of the
Township of Kingston.
1. Small-scale windmills for the purpose of serving residential or
commercial buildings on site shall be permitted as an accessory use in
Agricultural, Residential and Commercial Districts.
2. The structure and all appurtenances of the small-scale windmill shall be
subject to site plan approval by the Kingston Township Planning
Commission. The site plan shall be drawn to an appropriate scale and
shall provide construction details and show the location of all existing
public roads, existing structures, utility lines and all structures,
facilities and power lines to be constructed on the site, as well as
identifying adjoining property owners, and the location of any
structures on adjoining properties within 100 feet of the common
property lines.
3. Small-scale windmill facilities, including but not limited to towers, shall
be of safe and secure construction to be approved by the Planning
Commission, and they shall be subject to any requirements of the
Uniform Construction Code, manufacturer's recommendations and
stamped and signed plans by a professional engineer certified by
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-4, 12/
12/2018]
4. Towers shall be located at least 50 feet from all property lines. Other
facilities must follow generally applicable setbacks within the particular
zoning district in which the site of the facilities are to be constructed
and maintained.
5. Towers shall be no more than 35 feet in height from the elevation of the
ground at the base of the tower, before the placement of fill, to the top
of the blade.
§ 349 KINGSTON CODE § 350
Ch:764
6. No more than two towers shall be located upon a property or serve a
single commercial or residential structure.
7. The property owner must consume at least 2/3 of the power generated
by the windmills in his or her or their home or business located on site.
The property owner receiving site plan approval shall annually provide
a verified report of any electricity generated and all electricity sold
from the windmills. Failure to provide an annual report within 60 days
of the end of each calendar year shall result in the termination of the
authorization to maintain the windmill and subject the property owner
to an order for immediate removal of the tower.
8. The property owner shall construct and maintain the windmill and
tower in a safe manner so as not to present a danger to neighbors or to
present an unsightly appearance. The property owner receiving site
plan approval shall annually provide a verified report of a qualified
contractor certifying as to the structural integrity of the tower and
windmill assembly. Failure to provide an annual report within 60 days of
the end of each calendar year shall result in the termination of the
authorization to maintain the windmill and subject the property owner
to an order for immediate removal of the tower.
§ 350 HOME RULE CHARTER § 350
Ch:765

Part 4
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
§ 401. Type of Districts. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. IV, § 1; as amended
by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
For the purpose of this chapter, the area of Kingston Township,
Pennsylvania, is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
C-1 Conservation Districts
A-1 Agricultural Districts
R-1 Single-Family Residential Districts
R-2 Two-Family Residential District
R-3 Multifamily Residential District
R-4 Mobile Home Park Residential District
B-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
B-2 General Commercial District
I-1 Industrial District
M-1 Mining District
§ 402. Zoning Maps. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. IV, § 2]
The boundaries of these zoning districts are hereby established on a map
to be designated "Zoning Map for Kingston Township, Pennsylvania," which
is hereby made a part of this chapter, together with all existing and future
notations, references and amendments. The originals of said "Zoning Map,"
properly attested, shall be and remain on file in the office of the Kingston
Township Planning Commission. (All map changes are found in the
Appendix of this codification.)
§ 403. District Boundary Lines. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. IV, § 3]
The district boundary lines on the zoning maps are intended to follow
property lines or the centers of streets, alleys, railroads or watercourses.
In the case of unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines shall be
determined using the appropriate scale.
§ 401 HOME RULE CHARTER § 403
Ch:767

Part 5
USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
§ 501. C-1 Conservation Districts. [Ord. 6/11/197BA, Art. V, § 1; as
amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; and by Ord. 2000-3, 4/12/2000]
It is the intent of this section that the C-1 Zoning District be established and
maintained to preserve and/or control development within certain swamp,
steep slope, and other extremely sensitive areas of the natural environment.
The regulations which apply within this district are designed to reserve
such areas and to discourage any encroachment by residential, commercial,
industrial or other uses capable of adversely affecting the undeveloped
character of the district. Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit to build
or place any structure within a Conservation District, approval must be
obtained from the Zoning Officer.
1. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted in any
Conservation District:
A. Wildlife refuge, including one-family or two-family dwelling units of
caretakers employed to maintain and protect the refuge.
B. Timber and/or forestry area.
C. Activities related to soil and water conservation, measurement and
control.
D. Water retention pond.
E. Accessory structures given approval by Zoning Hearing Board, as a
special exception.
F. Agricultural uses.
G. Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, communication tower, building or other
structure and related communications equipment buildings,
subject to the standards set forth at § 348.
2. Conditional Uses.
A. Communications towers and required communications equipment
buildings subject to the standards for communications towers as
conditional uses set forth at § 601.
3. Lot Requirements. A conservation area shall be established as follows:
A. Extend 35 feet from stream bed on both sides.
B. Extend 40 feet on a line perpendicular to the shore line of any lake,
pond, or swamp area; and
C. On all slopes greater than 20%.
§ 501 HOME RULE CHARTER § 501
Ch:769
§ 502. A-1 Agricultural Districts. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. V, § 2; as
amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; by Ord. 2000-3, 4/12/2000, § 502;
and by Ord. 2003-4, 5/14/2003, § 1]
Conditions. No use or activity, including those set forth above,
shall be permitted in a Conservation District that would disturb,
destroy or impair the natural fauna, flora, water regimen or
topography.
1. Permitted Uses.
A. Single- and two-family dwellings with their customary uses, on the
basis of one dwelling for each 2 1/2 acres or more under the same
ownership.
B. All uses permitted in the Conservation District as shown in Part 5,
§ 501.
C. All commercial agricultural pursuits, and structures incidental
thereto, including dairy products, livestock, poultry and poultry
products, field crops, truck crops, horticultural specialties and
forestry.
D. Churches, charitable, semiprivate or philanthropic institutions or
camps and state parks.
E. Airfield, together with accessory uses.
F. Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, communication tower, building or other
structure, and related communications equipment buildings,
subject to the standards set forth at § 348.
G. Conservation subdivision (see § 512).
2. Conditional Uses. The following uses shall be permitted in any
Agricultural Zoning District on a conditional basis upon approval by the
Board of Supervisors after review by the Planning Commission:
A. Commercial stables provided that no building or enclosure for
animals is located closer than one 100 feet from any property line.
B. Cemetery, when accessory to and on the same property as a
permitted use in the Agricultural District.
C. Planned Residential Development (PRD). (See § 511.)
D. Communications towers and required communications equipment
buildings subject to the standards for communications towers as
conditional uses set forth at § 601.
E. Oil and gas development and production, oil and gas drilling
subsurface facilities, oil and gas surface facilities, natural gas
§ 501 KINGSTON CODE § 502
Ch:770
§ 503. R-1 Single Family Residential Districts. [Ord. 6/11/1975A,
Art. V, § 4; as amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; by Ord. 91-4, 6/12/
1991, § 1; and by Ord. 2000-3, 4/12/2000]
compressor stations and natural gas processing facilities. [Added
by Ord. 2011-2, 4/13/2011]
3. Prohibited Uses. Any business, commercial, or industrial use, except in
connection with the agricultural pursuits otherwise permitted in this
section.
4. Lot and Building Requirements. The principal building, accessory
buildings, and other land uses shall be located so as to comply with the
following requirements:
Principal Building
Minimum lot 2 1/2 acres
Minimum lot width at building
line
400 feet
Minimum front yard 100 feet
Minimum side yard, interior 50 feet
Minimum side yard, street 40 feet
Minimum rear yard 50 feet
Maximum percent of lot
coverage
20%
Accessory Buildings Minimum Setback from Lot Line:
Front 40 feet
Rear 30 feet
Side Same as principal building
1. Permitted Uses.
A. All uses permitted in a Conservation District as shown in Part 5,
§ 501.
B. Noncommercial horticulture or agriculture, but not including the
keeping of poultry or farm animals. Household pets that are usually
or traditionally kept out of doors shall be limited to five per housing
unit.
C. Single- family detached dwelling.
D. Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, communication tower, building or other
structure, and related communications equipment buildings,
subject to the standards set forth at § 348.
2. Conditional Uses.
§ 502 HOME RULE CHARTER § 503
Ch:771
A. Home occupations as a special exception.
B. Church, synagogue, temples or other place of worship provided
that: (1) such use is housed in a permanent structure; and (2) no
structure on the lot is closer than 25 feet to any abutting residential
property line.
C. Public and private school engaged in teaching general curriculum
for educational advancement, provided the structures are placed
not less than 50 feet from any residential property line.
D. Public utilities substation or sub installation including water
towers, provided that: (1) such use is enclosed by a painted or
chain-link fence or wall at least six feet in height above finished
grade; (2) there is neither office nor commercial operation nor
storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises; and (3) a
landscaped strip not less than five feet in width is planted and
maintained around the facility.
E. Cemetery, provided that such use: (1) consists of a site of at least
five acres; (2) includes no crematorium or dwelling unit other than
for a caretaker; (3) has a front yard setback of at least 70 feet from
the center line of the street or 10 feet from the street right-of-way
line; whichever is further; and (4) maintains a nonilluminated sign
no greater than 30 square feet and 10 feet in height.
F. Communications towers and required communications equipment
buildings subject to the standards for communications towers as
conditional uses set forth at § 601.
3. Lot and Building Requirements. The principal building and accessory
buildings shall be located and constructed in accordance with the
following requirements:
Minimum lot area 15,000 square feet
Minimum lot width at building
line
100 feet
Minimum front yard 35 feet
Minimum rear yard 25 feet
Minimum side yard, interior 15 feet
Minimum side yard, street 20 feet
Maximum building height 35 feet
Maximum percent of lot
coverage
30%
Accessory Buildings
Minimum setback from lot line:
Rear 10 feet
Side Same as principal building
§ 503 KINGSTON CODE § 503
Ch:772
§ 504. R-2 Two-Family Residential District. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. V,
§ 5; as amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; by Ord. 91-4, 6/12/1991;
and by Ord. 2000-3, 4/12/2000, § 504]
4. Required Utilities: If a lot is not serviced by central sanitary sewer
service an applicant for a building permit must have a minimum of 3/4
of an acre. If neither central sanitary sewer nor central water system is
available to the lot at the time of building the applicant must have a
minimum of an acre and the permit will be issued with the requirement
that upon such time that either service is extended to the property,
hook-up will be required within 90 days.
5. In all districts, all lots which require on lot sewage disposal shall
require a sewage permit. The sewage permit shall be issued by the
Kingston Township Sewage Enforcement Officer upon receiving
satisfactory results during site investigation, percolation tests, and
other requirements set forth under the Sewage Facilities Act 537.
1. Permitted Uses.
A. All permitted uses in single-family residential district.
B. Duplexes.
C. Customary accessory buildings incidental to the above permitted
use.
D. Home occupation as a special exception.
E. Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, communication tower, building or other
structure and related communications equipment buildings,
subject to the standards set forth at § 348.
2. All conditional uses permitted in an R-1 Single-Family Residential
District (§ 503, Subsection 2) shall be permitted in an R-2 Two-Family
Residential District. [Added by Ord. No. 2018-4, 12/12/201884]
3. Lot and Building Requirements.
Principal Buildings
Living units Maximum 4 per acre
Minimum lot area (2 units and
greater)
15,000 square feet
Minimum lot width at building
line
100 feet minimum
Front yard 35 feet
Minimum rear yard 25 feet
84.Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, former Subsection 2 was renumbered as
Subsection 3.
§ 503 HOME RULE CHARTER § 504
Ch:773
§ 505. R-3 Multifamily Residential Districts. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art.
V, § 6; as amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; and by Ord. 2000-3, 4/
12/2000]
Principal Buildings
Minimum side yard, interior 25 feet
Minimum side yard, street 20 feet
Maximum building height 35 feet
Maximum percent of lot
coverage
30%
Accessory Buildings
Minimum setback from lot line:
Rear 10 feet
Side Same as principal building
1. Permitted Uses.
A. All permitted uses in single-family residential districts and twofamily
residential districts.
B. Multiple-family dwellings, rooming houses, fraternities, sororities,
and dormitories.
C. Customary accessory buildings incidental to the above permitted
uses.
D. Planned residential developments as a conditional use.
E. Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, communication tower, building or other
structure, and related communications equipment buildings,
subject to the standards set forth at § 348.
2. Conditional Uses.
A. Communications towers and required communications equipment
buildings subject to the standards for communications towers as
conditional uses set forth at § 601.
3. Lot and Building Requirements, Principal Buildings: Garden
Apartments.
Living units Maximum 12 per acre
Minimum lot area 7,200 square feet
Minimum lot width at building
line
150 feet
Minimum front yard 10 feet
§ 504 KINGSTON CODE § 505
Ch:774
§ 506. R-4 Mobile Home Park Residential Districts. [Ord. 6/11/
1975A, Art. V, § 7; as amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; and by Ord.
2000-3, 4/12/2000, § 506]
Minimum rear yard 15 feet
Minimum side yard, interior 15 feet
Minimum side yard, street 20 feet
Maximum building height 35 feet
Maximum percent of lot
coverage
40%
4. Accessory Buildings.
Minimum setback from lot line:
Rear 10 feet
Side Same as principal building
5. Principal Building: Townhouses
Living units Maximum 10 per acre
Minimum lot area 2,200 square feet per unit
Minimum lot width at building
line
25 feet
Minimum front yard 10 feet
Minimum rear yard 14 feet
Minimum side yard (end units) 40 feet
Maximum number of units
having same building line
8 Units
Maximum building height 35 feet
1. Permitted Uses.
A. Mobile home parks, and accessory structures incidental thereto.
B. Recreational facilities.
C. Laundry facilities solely for the mobile home park occupants.
D. Office and mail facilities for the mobile home park.
E. The sale of new and used mobile home shall be permitted within
the boundaries of an approved mobile home park subject to the
following conditions:
(1) Allowable Number. The number of mobile homes for sale shall
not exceed 5% of the total number of approved mobile home
spaces in the mobile home parks.
§ 505 HOME RULE CHARTER § 506
Ch:775
§ 507. B-1 Neighborhood Commercial District. [Ord. 6/11/1975A,
Art. V, § 9; as amended by Ord. 94-9, 6/8/1994, § 1; and by Ord.
2000-3, 4/12/2000]
(2) Location. Mobile homes for sale shall be located only on
approved mobile home spaces in the mobile home parks, and
subject to the same setbacks and yard requirements as
occupied mobile homes.
(3) Maintenance. There shall be no renovating, overhaul, or repair
to mobile homes offered for sale within the mobile home park.
However, customary maintenance shall be permitted, such as
would be allowed for an occupant while living in a mobile
home.
(4) Advertising. There shall be no advertising signs, banners,
pennants, or any type of display advertising mobile homes for
sale except that one sign, not over 18 inches by 24 inches shall
be permitted to be posted on each mobile home offered for
sale.
F. Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, communication tower, building or other
structure, and related communications equipment buildings,
subject to the standards set forth at § 348.
2. Conditional Uses. Communications towers and required
communications equipment buildings subject to the standards for
communications towers as conditional uses set forth at § 601.
3. Approval of Mobile Home Parks. No mobile home park may hereafter be
developed or expanded until all requirements and regulations set forth
in the Kingston Township Subdivision and Land Development Chapter
have been met and the site plan thereof has the approval of the
Kingston Township Planning Commission.
1. Permitted Uses.
Retail stores
Personal services
Professional services and offices
Banks
Commercial offices
Soda fountains, taverns, cafes or restaurants (without entertainment)
Clubs and lodges
Parking areas
Mortuaries
Public and semipublic uses
§ 506 KINGSTON CODE § 507
Ch:776
§ 508. B-2 General Commercial Districts. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. V,
§ 10; as amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; by Ord. 94-9, 6/8/1994,
§ 1; and by Ord. 2000-3, 4/12/2000]
Utilities (except storage yards)
Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, communication tower, building or other structure,
and related communications equipment buildings, subject to the
standards set forth at § 348
Accessory uses to the above
2. Conditional Uses. The following uses shall be permitted in a
Neighborhood Commercial District upon approval of the Board of
Supervisors:
Multiple dwellings
Theaters (indoor)
Entertainment facilities
Drive-in commercial uses (not including drive-in theaters)
Accessory uses to the above
Communications towers and required communications equipment
buildings subject to the standards for communications towers as
conditional uses set forth at § 601
3. Lot and Building Requirements. [Amended by Ord. No. 2018-4, 12/
12/2018]
Principal and Accessory Structures
Minimum lot area 6,000 square feet
Minimum lot width at building
line
50 feet
Minimum front setback 30 feet
Minimum rear setback 25 feet
Minimum side setback, interior 10 feet
Minimum side setback, street 15 feet
Maximum building height 35 feet
Maximum percent of lot
coverage
30%
1. Permitted Uses.
Service stations
Restaurants
Motel and tourist courts
§ 507 HOME RULE CHARTER § 508
Ch:777
Tourist homes
Entertainment facilities
Retail business
Personal services
Offices and banks
Professional activities
Garages for service and/or vehicular sales (excluding storing junked
vehicles outdoors)
Drive-in commercial uses (not including theater)
Mortuaries
Animal hospitals, clinics or kennels
Commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries
Golf driving ranges and miniature golf
Public and semipublic uses
Utilities
Lumberyards
Used car sales and trailer and mobile home lots
Tire retreading and recapping
Business services
Food processing
Research and testing facilities
Billiard or pool rooms
Commercial recreation
Hotels
Printing, lithographing or publishing plants
Taverns
Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, communication tower, building or other structure,
and related communications equipment buildings, subject to the
standards set forth at § 348
Accessory uses to the above
2. Conditional Uses. The following uses shall be permitted in a General
Commercial District upon approval of the Board of Supervisors:
Amusement parks
Feed and grain, sales and storage
Wholesale business
Equipment sales and repair
§ 508 KINGSTON CODE § 508
Ch:778
§ 509. Industrial Districts. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. V, § 11; as
amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; by Ord. 2000-3, 4/12/2000; and by
Ord. 2006-3, 9/13/2006, §§ 2, 3]
Truck terminals
Stone or monument works
Bulk fuel storage
Cleaning, laundry and drying plants
Drive-in theaters
Cemeteries
Apartments
Machine shops
Communications towers and required communications equipment
buildings subject to the standards for communications towers as
conditional uses set forth at § 601
Accessory uses to the above
3. Lot and Building Requirements.
Minimum lot area 6,000 square feet
Minimum lot width at building
line
50 feet
Minimum front setback 30 feet
Minimum rear setback 30 feet
Minimum side setback, street 15 feet
Minimum side setback, interior 10 feet
Maximum building height 35 feet
Maximum percent of lot
coverage
30%
1. Submission of Plats. The owner of a tract of land zoned for industrial
uses shall submit to the Planning Commission for its review a plan for
the use and development of such tract of land. It shall then be the duty
of the Planning Commission to investigate and ascertain whether the
proposed activity complies with all of the provisions of this Part which
pertain to I-1 Districts. The Commission may employ experts in specific
fields as needed, and as funds are available, to determine whether a
proposed use meets the required performance standards.
2. Referral and Authorization. A report of its findings shall be furnished by
the Commission to the Zoning Hearing Board. The Commission may
suggest disapproval, recommend the plan as submitted, or may modify,
alter, adjust or amend the plan before recommendation, and in
recommending it, may propose the prescribing of other conditions. The
report of the Planning Commission to the Zoning Hearing Board shall
§ 508 HOME RULE CHARTER § 509
Ch:779
be in writing, and shall include a finding as to whether the proposed
use is consistent with the applicable provisions and requirements of the
Zoning Chapter. If the Board finds that the proposed use is consistent
with the purpose of the Zoning Chapter to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare, it may direct the proper official to authorize
a permit.
3. Performance Standards. All industrial uses must conform to the
following performance standards:
A. Smoke: The emission of grey smoke at a density greater than No. 1
on the Ringlemann chart published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines
(Power's micro-Ringlemann Chart, McGraw-Hill Publishing Co.,
1954, may be used) shall not be permitted except grey smoke of a
shade not darker than No. 2 may be emitted for not more than four
minutes. These provisions, applicable to grey smoke, shall also
apply to visible smoke of a different color but with equivalent
apparent opacity.
B. Odor: No emission of unpleasant gases or other odorous matter
shall be permitted in such quantities as to be offensive outside the
lot lines of the tract. Any process which may involve the creation or
emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard
system, so that control will be maintained if the primary safeguard
system should fail. There is hereby established as a guide in
determining such quantities of offensive odors Table 3 (Odor
Thresholds) in Chapter 5, "Air Pollution Abatement Manual",
copyright 1951, by Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc.,
Washington, D.C. Where said publication gives a range of figures a
simple average of these shall be used.
C. Toxic Gases: The emission of gases or fumes injurious to persons or
property beyond the lot lines occupied by the use is prohibited.
(Table 1, Industrial Hygiene Standards), Maximum Allowable
Concentration, Chapter 5, of the Air Pollution Abatement Manual
furnishes a list of toxic pollutants.
D. Glare and Heat: Glare and heat from are welding, acetylene torch
cutting or similar processes shall be performed so as not to
produce glare which is visible, or objectionable heat, beyond the
property line of the lot on which the operation is located. Direct
glare from incandescent exposed lights shall not be visible from
adjoining streets or properties.
E. Sewage: No discharge is permitted at any point in any private
sewage disposal system or stream or into the ground, of any
materials in such a way or of such nature or temperature as could
contaminate any water supply, or otherwise cause the emission of
dangerous objectionable elements, except in accordance with the
standards as approved by water pollution control boards of
appropriate agencies of the State Department of Environmental
§ 509 KINGSTON CODE § 509
Ch:780
Resources. Furthermore, no accumulation of solid wastes
conducive to the breeding of rodents or insects shall be permitted.
F. Vibration: Any use creating intense earthshaking vibration shall be
set back as far as possible from the lot lines on all sides, and, in no
case shall any such vibration be perceptible along any lot line.
4. Permitted Use. Communications antennas mounted on an existing
public utility transmission tower, communication tower, building or
other structure, and related communications equipment buildings,
subject to the standards set forth at § 348.
5. Conditional Use.
A. Communications towers and required communications equipment
buildings subject to the standards for communications towers as
conditional uses set forth at § 601.
B. Adult use(s).
(1) In addition to all other regulations contained herein, an adult
use shall be subject to the following supplemental standards:
Any adult use, as so defined herein, shall be located upon a lot
not less than two acres. Said adult use shall not be located less
than 250 feet from any of the following uses:
(a) A residential dwelling.
(b) A place of worship or other actual place of regularly stated
religious worship established prior to the proposed adult
use.
(c) A public or quasi-public use of structure.
(d) A school.
(e) A public playground or a public park.
(f) A child-care facility.
(g) A zoning boundary of any zoning district in which
residences are permitted as a principal permitted use.
Measurements of the required distance shall be made in
a straight line, from the nearest portion of the structure
or premises of an adult use, to the nearest property line
of the above-noted uses. Excluding approved access
driveways, the structure and/or premises of an adult use,
including all off-street parking areas shall be completely
enclosed by a buffer area, as so defined herein. The owner
of the property shall be responsible to maintain the buffer
area, including the replacement of any trees which are
damaged, die, removed by whatever means or otherwise
fail to grow.
§ 509 HOME RULE CHARTER § 509
Ch:781
(2) Off-Street Parking. Paved off-street parking shall be required
for any adult use, based upon the following standards:
(a) Adult bookstore: one space for every 50 square feet of
gross floor area, plus two additional spaces for every three
employees based upon the maximum working shift.
(b) Adult entertainment: one space for every 50 square feet of
gross floor area, plus:
One additional space for every two seats and/or, one
space for each 50 square feet of floor area when there is
no fixed seating.
Two additional spaces for every three employees based
upon the maximum working shift.
(c) Massage parlor: one space for every 50 square feet of
gross floor area, plus two additional spaces for every three
employees based upon the maximum working shift.
(3) General Standards. The general standards contained herein
shall be utilized in the review of applications and plans for any
adult use.
(a) The proposed use shall not jeopardize nor adversely affect
health, safety and welfare of the public and/or the
environment.
(b) Public services and facilities such as streets, sewage
disposal, water, police and fire protection shall be
adequate for the proposed use.
(c) Existing and future streets and access to the site shall be
adequate for emergency services, for avoiding undue
congestion, and for providing for the safety and
convenience of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The
proposed use shall not result in unsafe or dangerous traffic
conditions.
(d) The proposed use shall be compatible with the adjoining
development and the character of the zoning district
where it is proposed to be located. The nature and
intensity of the operation of the proposed use shall be
considered regarding its compatibility or lack thereof with
the adjoining development and the character of the zoning
district.
(e) The proposed use shall not substantially impair the value
of the other property in the neighborhood where it is
proposed to be located.
§ 509 KINGSTON CODE § 509
Ch:782
(f) The proposed use shall not be more objectionable in its
operation in terms of noise, fumes, odors, vibration or
lightning than would be the operations of any permitted
use in the district.
(g) The proposed use shall not result in any adverse or
negative impacts based upon the information required
with submission of an environmental impact statement
required hereunder.
(h) The submission of any reports and/or studies within the
context of the definition of "impact analysis" as provided
herein, must conclusively demonstrate that the proposed
use will not have a negative impact upon the interest of
protecting the health, safety and welfare of the public and
environmental features and characteristics of the site and/
or surrounding areas.
(4) Procedures for Applications and Criteria for Application for
Conditional Uses Regarding Adult Uses in an Industrial
District. The application for a conditional use permit for adult
use and the criteria thereof shall be in strict accordance with
the following provisions:
(a) An application for such conditional use permit shall be
submitted to the Zoning Officer with a site plan at a scale
of not greater than: one inch equals 50 feet for properties
in excess of two acres; or one inch equals 20 feet for
properties being two acres or less.
(b) Such plan shall, minimum, indicate:
[1] The location and size of all building and structures,
both principal and accessory, both existing and
proposed.
[2] The location of all off-street parking areas and/or
loading and unloading areas.
[3] The location of all open space areas, including buffer
areas and fencing, as applicable.
[4] Traffic access to the site and internal traffic
circulation including the width and pavement of traffic
lanes and aisle widths.
[5] All streets, both public and private within 200 feet of
the site, including right-of-way and cartway widths.
[6] Streams, ponds, watercourses, wetlands or any types
of bodies of water, including natural or man-made
drainage swales, located on the site or within 200 feet
of the site.
§ 509 HOME RULE CHARTER § 509
Ch:783
[7] The location, nature and terms of any existing or
proposed easements on the site, and any easements
both on site and off-site which are used or intended to
be used for access to the site, including the name and
address of the owner or owners granting such
easement.
[8] The location of any residential structures which
border the site on an adjoining lot and/or those within
200 feet of any property boundary line of the subject
site.
[9] The map, block and lot number of the subject parcel,
as contained in the records of the office of the Luzerne
County Recorder of Deeds.
[10] A location map at a scale of not greater than one inch
equals 2,000 feet, indicating the relation of the size to
its geographic proximity within the Township.
[11] In cases when a proposed use includes new
construction and/or grading of the site, contours of
the site for each five feet of change in elevation, based
upon a field survey of the site, with the name of the
person or firm who conducted the survey and the date
of the survey shall be required. As applicable, the
applicant shall be required to submit a soil erosion
and sedimentation control plan for review and
approval by the Luzerne County Conservation District.
[12] The applicant shall submit with the site plan a
narrative that outlines and fully describes all proposed
uses or development of the site, along with all
pertinent operational aspects, features and/or
activities related to the proposed uses or development
of the site.
[13] The applicant shall supply any other information
required by the Kingston Township Board of
Supervisors for determining the conformity of the
conditional use with the regulations for that particular
use.
(5) Conditional Use Permit Application Fee. The conditional use
permit application fee shall be established by ordinance
contained in the Code of Ordinances. Further, the applicant
shall be responsible to reimburse the Township for all
reasonable and necessary consulting fees which are incurred
by the Township to review plans, reports, data, studies and any
other information related to an application for a conditional
use permit.
§ 509 KINGSTON CODE § 509
Ch:784
§ 510. M-1 Mining District. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. V, § 12; as
amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; and by Ord. 2000-3, 4/12/2000]
6. Uses Prohibited.
A. Residential subdivisions and developments and the construction of
dwellings on existing lots zoned as industrial except for dwellings
for watchmen, caretakers or farms.
B. Schools, hospitals, clinics or other institutions for human care,
except where incidental to a permitted principal use.
1. Submission of Plans. The owner of all land upon which mining is desired
shall submit to the Planning Commission a site plan for its review the
development of such tract of land. It shall then be the duty of the
Planning Commission to investigate and ascertain whether the
proposed activity complies with all of the provisions of this chapter
relative to environmental protection (especially in Part 3, General
Provisions). The Planning Commission shall then present its
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors.
2. Permitted Uses.
Strip mining coal areas
Areas of deep coal mining
Mining of rock
Mining of sand and gravel
Processing of materials mined
Storage of materials mined
Tipples
Railroad yards
Contractors yards
Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, communication tower, building or other structure,
and related communications equipment buildings, subject to the
standards set forth at § 348
Oil and gas development and production, oil and gas drilling
subsurface facilities, oil and gas surface facilities, natural gas
compressor stations and natural gas processing facilities [Added by
Ord. 2011-2, 4/13/2011]
Accessory uses to the above
3. Conditional Uses. The following uses shall be permitted in a Mining
District upon approval of the Board of Supervisors:
Solid waste disposal area
Junkyards
§ 509 HOME RULE CHARTER § 510
Ch:785
§ 511. Planned Residential Development. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. V,
§ 14; as amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
In order that the public health, safety and welfare be furthered in an era
of increasing urbanization and growing demand for housing of all types
and design; to ensure that the enacted Zoning Ordinance provisions of
Kingston Township shall not be applied to the improvement of land by other
than lot-by-lot development in a manner that would distort the objectives
of this chapter; to encourage innovations in residential development and
redevelopment so that the growing demand for housing may be met by
greater variety in type, design and layout of dwellings and by the
conservation and more efficient use of open space ancillary to said
dwellings; so that greater opportunities for better housing and recreation
may extend to all citizens and residents of Kingston Township; and in order
to encourage a more efficient use of land and of public services and to
reflect changes in the technology of land development so that economies
secured may add to the benefit of those who need homes; and, in the
aid of these purposes to provide a procedure which can relate the type,
design and layout of residential development to the particular site and
the particular demand for housing existing at the time of development in
a manner consistent with the preservation of the property values within
existing residential areas, and to ensure that the increased flexibility of
regulations over land development authorized herein is carried out under
such administrative standards and procedures as shall encourage the
disposition of proposals for land development without undue delay.
Bulk fuel storage
Communications towers and required communications equipment
buildings subject to the standards for communications towers as
conditional uses set forth at § 601
Accessory uses to the above
1. Applicability of the Planned Residential Development.
A. The provisions of § 513 of this code shall apply only to a tract of
land which has a minimum of 15 acres.
B. The Kingston Township Planning Commission in their review of the
proposed development plan shall consider:
(1) The proper relation between the proposed development and
surrounding uses, and the effect of the plan upon
comprehensive planning for Kingston Township.
(2) The adequacy of existing and proposed street, utilities, and
other public services to serve the development.
(3) The character, design, and appropriateness of the proposed
land uses and their adequacy to encourage desirable living
conditions, to provide separation and screening between uses
§ 510 KINGSTON CODE § 511
Ch:786
where desirable to preserve the natural amenities of streams,
wooded areas and similar natural features.
(4) The adequacy of open and play areas and that recreation
facilities are provided for the needs of the development.
C. Approval and recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be
accompanied by a report stating the reasons for approval of the
application and specific evidence and facts showing that the
proposed planned residential development will not adversely affect
the property adjacent to the area included in the plan.
D. Final approval of a planned residential development shall not be
granted until the owner or owners of the property give written
notice of their consent to the proposed development.
2. Review and Administrative Procedures.
A. Preapplication Conference. Before submitting an application for a
planned residential development an applicant, at his option, may
confer with the Planning Commission to obtain information and
guidance before entering into binding commitments or incurring
substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys, and other
data.
B. Development Plan. The following information shall appear on the
preliminary development plan:
Detailed plan and general location map, showing the projected
area prepared at a scale not less than one inch equals 100 feet
and shall show such designations as proposed streets (public and
private), all buildings and their use, common open space,
recreation facilities, parking areas, service areas, and other
facilities to indicate the character of the proposed development.
The submission may be composed of one or more sheets and
drawings and shall include:
(1) Boundary lines: bearings and distance.
(2) Easement: location, width and purpose.
(3) Streets on, and adjacent to, the tract street name, right-of-way
width, existing or proposed center line elevations, pavement,
walks, curbs, gutters, and culverts (and their respective types).
(4) Utilities on, and adjacent to, the tract location, size and invert
elevation of sanitary and storm sewers; location and size of
water mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, manholes,
electrical and telephone lines and streetlights; direction and
distance to, and size of, nearest water mains and sewers
adjacent to the tract showing invert elevation of sewers.
§ 511 HOME RULE CHARTER § 511
Ch:787
(5) Ground elevations on the tract: for land that slopes less than
2%, show one foot contours; show spot elevations at all breaks
in grades, along all drainage channels or swales, and at
selected points not more than 100 feet apart in all directions;
land that slopes more than 2% shall be shown at five foot
contours.
(6) Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the Township
Engineer: location and results of tests made to ascertain
subsurface soil, rock, and groundwater conditions; depth to
groundwater, unless test pits are dry at a depth of five feet.
(7) Zoning on, adjacent to, the tract.
(8) Internal uses of each building or structure, as well as the
specific overall land use of the premises.
(9) Title and certificates: present tract designation according to
official records of the Recorder of Deeds; title under which the
proposed development is to be recorded, with names and
addresses of owners, and notation stating acreage.
(10) Names: the names and addresses of the persons to whom
notices of hearings hereunder may be sent including the
subdivider or developer, the designer of the subdivision or
development, and the owners of the land immediately
adjoining the land to be platted.
(11) Open space: all parcels of land intended to be dedicated for
public use or reserved for the use of all property owners with
the purpose indicated and their sizes.
(12) General location, purpose, and height of each building, other
than single-family residences on individually platted lots.
(13)Map data: name of development north point, scale and date of
preparation.
(14) Character: explanation of the character of the planned
residential development and the reasons why it has been
planned to take advantage of the flexibility of these
regulations.
(15) Ownership: statement of present and proposed ownership of
all land within the project.
(16) Schedule: development schedule indicating:
(a) Stages in which project will be built with emphasis on
area, density, use, and public facilities such as open space
to be developed with each stage. Overall design of each
stage shall be shown on the plan and through supporting
graphic material.
§ 511 KINGSTON CODE § 511
Ch:788
(b) Approximate dates for beginning and completion of each
stage.
(17) Covenants: proposed agreements, provisions, or covenants
which will govern the use, maintenance, and continued
protection of the planned residential development and any of
its usable open space.
(18) Density: provide information on the density of residential uses,
including dwelling units per acre, the number of dwelling units
by type, and the number of buildings by type.
(19) Nonresidential use: provide information on the type and
amount of ancillary and nonresidential uses in a residential
planned unit development, including the amount and location
of usable open space.
(20) Service facilities: provide information on all service facilities
and off-street parking facilities.
C. Architectural plans: preliminary architectural plans for all primary
buildings shall be submitted in sufficient detail to permit an
understanding of the style of the development, the design of the
building, and the number, size, and type of dwelling units.
D. Facilities plans: preliminary plans for:
(1) Roads, including classification, width of right-of-way, width of
pavement, and construction details.
(2) Sidewalks.
(3) Sanitary sewers.
(4) Storm drainage.
(5) Water supply system.
(6) Underground utilities program.
(7) A general landscape planting plan.
3. Public Hearings.
A. Within 60 days after the filing of an application for tentative
approval of a planned residential development pursuant to this
chapter, a public hearing pursuant to public notice on said
application shall be held by the Board of Supervisors.
B. Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the zoning officer and to any person who has made
timely request for the same. Written notices shall be given at such
time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by rules of the
Planning Commission. In addition to the written notice provided
§ 511 HOME RULE CHARTER § 511
Ch:789
herein, written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted
on the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing.
C. The parties to the hearing shall be the Township, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of
record before the Board of Supervisors, and any other person
including civic or community organizations permitted to appear by
the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall have
power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board of
Commissioners for that purpose.
D. The chairman, or acting chairman in the absence of the chairman,
of the Board of Supervisors shall have power to administer oaths
and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses
and documents requested by the parties.
E. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
F. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial,
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
G. The Board of Supervisors shall keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be
shared equally by the applicant and the Board of Supervisors. The
cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board of
Supervisors if the transcript is ordered by the Board of Supervisors
or shall be paid by the person appealing from the decision of the
Board of Supervisors if such appeal is made, and in either event the
cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting
such copy or copies. In other cases the party requesting the
original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
H. The Board of Supervisors shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with
any issue involved except upon notice for all parties to participate,
shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda, or other materials, except advice from their solicitor,
unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the
material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its
surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party
or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to
be present.
I. The Board of Supervisors may continue the hearing from time to
time, and may refer the matter back to the Planning Commission
for a report, provided, however, that in any event, the public
§ 511 KINGSTON CODE § 511
Ch:790
hearing or hearings shall be concluded within 60 days after the
date of the first public hearing.
4. Status of Plan After Tentative Approval.
A. The official written communication shall be certified by the
Township Secretary and shall be filed in his office, and a certified
copy shall be mailed to the landowner. Where tentative approval
has been granted, it shall be deemed an amendment to the zoning
map, effective upon final approval, and shall be noted on the Zoning
Map.
B. Tentative approval of a development plan shall not qualify a plat of
the planned residential development for recording nor authorize
development or the issuance of any building permits. A
development plan which has been given tentative approval as
submitted, to which has been given tentative approval with
conditions which have been accepted by the landowner (and
provided that the landowner has not defaulted nor violated any of
the conditions of the tentative approval), shall not be modified or
revoked nor otherwise impaired by the action of the Township
pending an application or applications for final approval, without
the consent of the landowner, provided an application or
applications for final approval is filed or, in the case of development
over a period of years, provided applications are filed, within the
periods of time specified in the official written communication
granting tentative approval.
C. In the event that a development plan is given tentative approval
and thereafter, but prior to final approval, the landowner shall elect
to abandon said development plan and shall so notify the Board of
Supervisors in writing, or in the event the landowner shall fail to
file application or applications for final approval within the
required period of time or revoked and all that portion of the area
included in the development plan for which final approval has not
been given shall be subject to those ordinances otherwise
applicable thereto as they may be amended from time to time, and
the same shall be noted on the zoning map and in the records of the
Township Secretary.
5. Final Detailed Plan Content. A final plan, suitable for recording with the
Recorder of Deeds shall be prepared. The purpose of the planned
residential development plan is to designate with particularity the land
subdivided into conventional lots as well as the division of other lands,
not so treated, into common open areas and building areas, and to
designate and limit the specific internal uses of each building or
structure, as well as of the land in general. The final plan of the planned
residential development shall include, but not be limited to:
A. An accurate legal description of the entire area under immediate
development within the planned residential development.
§ 511 HOME RULE CHARTER § 511
Ch:791
B. An accurate legal description of each separate unsubdivided use
area, including usable open space.
C. Designation of the exact location of all buildings to be constructed,
and a designation of the specific internal uses to which each
building shall be put.
D. Tabulations on each separate unsubdivided use area, number of
dwelling units per acre.
E. Public Facilities. All public facilities and improvements made
necessary as a result of the planned residential development shall,
at the election of the Township, be guaranteed by escrow deposits,
irrevocable letters of credit in a form approved by the Township, or
performance bonds in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
F. Covenants. Final agreements, provisions, or covenants shall govern
the use, maintenance and continued protection of the planned
residential development.
G. A landscape plan showing the location, type and size at installation
of all proposed landscape materials, existing landscaping and trees
to be retained on the site, as well as an identification of the existing
trees to be removed that are two inches in diameter or greater, all
proposed fences, walls, berms and any pertinent architectural
elements associated with the landscape plan.
6. Application for Final Approval.
A. An application for final approval may be for all the land included in
a development plan or, to the extent set forth in the tentative
approval, for a section thereof. Said application shall be made to
the Planning Commission and within the time or times specified
herein. The application shall include any drawings, specifications,
covenants, easements, performance bond and such other
requirements as may be specified hereby, as well as any conditions
set forth in the official written communication at the time of
tentative approval. A public hearing on an application for final
approval of the development plan, or part thereof, shall not be
required provided the development plan, or the part thereof,
submitted for final approval, is in compliance with the development
plan theretofore given tentative approval and with any specified
conditions attached thereto.
B. In the event the application for final approval has been filed,
together with all drawings, specifications and other documents in
support thereof, and as required by this chapter, and the official
written communication of tentative approval, the Township shall,
within 30 days of such filing, grant such development plan final
approval.
§ 511 KINGSTON CODE § 511
Ch:792
C. In the event the development plan as submitted contains variations
from the development plan given tentative approval, the Board of
Supervisors may refuse to grant final approval and shall, within 30
days from the filing of the application for final approval, so advise
the landowner in writing of said refusal, setting forth in said notice
the reasons why one or more of said variations are not in the public
interest. In the event of such refusal, the landowner may either:
(1) Refile his application for final approval without the variations
objected, or
(2) File a written request with the Board of Supervisors that it hold
a public hearing on his application for final approval. If the
landowner wishes to take either such alternate action he may
do so at any time within which he shall be entitled to apply for
final approval, or within 30 additional days if the time for
applying for final approval shall have already passed at the
time when the landowner was advised that the development
plan was not in substantial compliance. In the event the
landowner shall fail to take either of these alternate actions
within said time, he shall be deemed to have abandoned the
development plan. Any such public hearing shall be held
pursuant to public notice within 30 days after request for the
hearing is made by the landowner, and the hearing shall be
conducted in the manner prescribed by law for public hearings
on applications for tentative approval. Within 30 days after the
conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Supervisors shall by
official written communication either grant final approval to
the development plan or deny final approval. The grant or
denial of final approval of the development plan shall, in cases
arising under this section, be in the form and contain the
findings required for an application for tentative approval set
forth in this chapter.
D. A development plan, or any part thereof, which has been given final
approval shall be so certified without delay by the Board of
Supervisors and shall be filed of record forthwith in the office of the
recorder of deeds before any development shall take place in
accordance therewith. Upon the filing of record of the development
plan the zoning and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to
the land included in such plan shall cease to apply thereto. Pending
completion within a reasonable time of said planned residential
development or of that part thereof, as the case may be, that has
been finally approved, no modification of the provisions of said
development plan, or part thereof, as finally approved, shall be
made except with the consent of the landowner.
E. In the event that a development plan, or a section thereof, is given
final approval and thereafter the landowner shall abandon such
plan or the section thereof that has been finally approved, and shall
so notify the Board of Supervisors in writing; or, in the event the
§ 511 HOME RULE CHARTER § 511
Ch:793
landowner shall fail to commence and carry out the planned
residential development within such reasonable period of time as is
fixed hereby after final approval has been granted, no development
or further development shall take place on the property included in
the development plan until after the said property is resubdivided
and is reclassified by enactment of an amendment to the Borough
Zoning Ordinance in the manner prescribed for such amendments
in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
7. Mylar of Approved Final Plan. Within a maximum of three weeks
following the date of final approval by the Planning Commission of the
final development plan, the applicant shall submit an eighteen-inch by
twenty-four-inch reproducible mylar of the approved final development
plan to the Planning Commission who, at the expense of the developer,
shall record said final plan in the office of the Recorder of Deeds. The
mylar shall contain the following information:
A. Graphic representation of the exact location of all buildings and
accessory structures.
B. Land use characteristics in table form containing the following
information:
(1) Gross project area in terms of acres.
(2) Net project area in terms of acres.
(3) Approved density for the project in terms of lot area/D.U.
(4) Approved usable open space for the project in terms of square
feet of open space/D.U.
(5) Total number of parking spaces.
(6) Total number of dwelling units in the project.
(7) Number and type of residential units in the project.
C. Types and square footage of floor spaces of all nonresidential uses
provided:
(1) Graphic representation of all public easements and legal
descriptions thereof, who the easement is conveyed to, the
purpose of such easement, and any conditions relating to the
use of the easement.
D. Legal description of the gross project area.
E. All public and private streets, roads and alleys included in the
project shall be shown by their bearings, widths and names. All
streets, roads or alleys, not dedicated to public use, shall be
marked "private" and named. All curves, portions of streets, roads
or alleys shall be defined by curve data including points of
§ 511 KINGSTON CODE § 511
Ch:794
curvature, points of tangency, points of compound curvature, radii
of curves, central angles and length and bearing of its long chord.
F. In the event streets in the planned residential development are to
be dedicated, a statement shall appear on the mylar that the streets
shown on it are dedicated to the use of the public.
G. The Planning Commission shall issue a certificate certifying the
final approval of the planned residential development, and the
Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and Chairman of the
Planning Commission shall place their signature on such certificate
which shall appear on the mylar. In the event said mylar is not
submitted three weeks following the date of final approval, the
Building Official shall not issue any building permits for the
development or phase of a particular development until said mylar
is received.
H. In the event the planned unit development is to be submitted for
final approval in stages, the applicant shall submit reproducible
Mylars for each stage of the development containing the
information required above.
8. Control of the Planned Residential Development after Final Approval.
A. After the certificate of approval has been stamped on the
reproducible mylar and other prints of plans and signed by
appropriate Township officials, the use of land and the
construction, modification or alteration of any buildings or
structures within the planned residential development will be
governed by the approved and recorded final development plan
rather than by other provisions of this Zoning Chapter except the
minor land use and engineering changes permitted by this section.
B. After the certificate of final approval has been issued and the final
plan recorded, no changes may be made in the approved final
development plan except upon application to the appropriate
agency under the procedures provided below:
(1) Major Land Use Changes. Changes which alter the concept or
intent of the planned residential development including
changes in the approved public street or private drive
construction standards, increases in density, decreases in
proposed open space, changes in sizes of public and/or private
sewer or water lines, other than service connections, resulting
in less capacity, changes in the location of and types of
nonresidential uses approved by the Planning Commission,
change in the alignment of any street, drive, parking area or
water or sewer line in excess of 25 feet, change in the location
of any public easement, change in the proportion of housing
types by not more than 15% of the approved dwelling unit
count, a violation of any specific condition set forth by the
Planning Commission and any changes in the final governing
§ 511 HOME RULE CHARTER § 511
Ch:795
agreements, provisions or covenants. All such changes may
be approved only by submission of a new preliminary plan
and supporting data, following the preliminary approval steps
and subsequent amendment of the final planned residential
development plan.
(2) Minor Land Use Changes. The following minor changes to the
approved final plan may be authorized by the Planning
Commission upon written request by the developer and upon
submission of detailed plans demonstrating the requested
change:
(a) Decrease in density.
(b) Increases in open space.
(c) Changes in the proportion of housing unit types by less
than 15% of the approved dwelling unit count.
(d) Increases in acreage of the planned residential
development providing that the acreage under
consideration is 10% or less of the gross site area, in which
the increase can only be used for open space, accessory
buildings or parking.
(e) A density increase of not more than 10% of the approved
dwelling unit total, providing that the overall lot area
requirement per dwelling unit of the district is not
exceeded.
(3) Minor Engineering Changes. The following minor engineering
changes to the approved engineering plans may be authorized
by the Township Engineer as required only upon written
request by the developer and submission of detailed
engineering plans demonstrating the requested change:
(a) Changes in road alignment and parking lot location by 25
feet or less.
(b) Changes in the alignment of storm and sanitary sewers
and water lines by 25 feet or less.
(c) Increases in the approved capacity of storm and sanitary
sewers and water lines.
In the event a situation occurs where it is not clear
whether a modification constitutes a major or minor
change, the responsibility to make such determination
shall be jointly vested with the Chairman of the Kingston
Township Planning Commission, and the Township
Engineer.
§ 511 KINGSTON CODE § 511
Ch:796
§ 512. Conservation Subdivision. [Ord. 6/11/1975A; as added by
Ord. 2003-4, 5/14/2003, § 2]
(4) A development plan, or any part thereof, which has been given
final approval shall be so certified without delay by the
Planning Commission and shall be filed of record forthwith in
the office of the recorder of deeds before any development
shall take place in accordance therewith. Upon filing record of
the development plan the zoning and subdivision regulations
otherwise applicable to the land included in such plan shall
cease to apply thereto. Pending completion within a reasonable
time of said planned residential development or of that part
thereof, as the case may be, that has been finally approved, no
modification of the provisions of said development plan, or part
thereof, as finally approved, shall be made except with the
consent of the landowner.
(5) In the event that a development plan, or a section thereof, is
given final approval and thereafter the landowner shall
abandon such plan or the section thereof that has been finally
approved, and shall so notify the governing body in writing; or
in the event the landowner shall fail to commence and carry
out the planned residential development within such
reasonable period of time as may be fixed by the Board of
Supervisors after final approval has been granted, no
development or further development shall take place on the
property included in the development plan until after the said
property is resubdivided and is reclassified by enactment of an
amendment to the municipal zoning chapter.
1. Purposes. To provide for protection of natural and historic features and
resources; to conserve open lands by setting them aside from
development; to minimize disturbance of natural or cultural features
(such as mature woodlands, streams, hedgerows and tree lines, critical
wildlife habitats, historic buildings and fieldstone walls); to preserve
scenic views and elements of the Township's rural character; to create
neighborhoods with direct visual access to open land, with amenities in
the form of neighborhood open space and with a strong neighborhood
identity; to provide for active and passive recreational use by residents;
and to provide greater design flexibility and efficiency in the siting of
services and infrastructures, including the opportunity to reduce length
of roads, utility runs and the amount of paving required for residential
development.
2. Definitions.
BUILDABLE LAND or ADJUSTED TRACT ACREAGE — The net area of
a tract remaining after wetlands, steep slopes of over 25%, soils subject
to slumping and all existing or proposed road and aboveground utility
rights-of-way or easements have been subtracted. In any tract zoned
A-1, the dwelling yield is computed by dividing buildable land by 2.5.
§ 511 HOME RULE CHARTER § 512
Ch:797
The dwelling yield represents the number of dwellings that could be
placed on the tract with a 2 1/2 acre minimum lot size.[Amended by
Ord. No. 2018-4, 12/12/2018]
3. Conservation Easement. If a duly recorded, permanent conservation
easement is obtained for at least 50% of the buildable land in a tract to
be developed as a conservation subdivision, then a number of dwellings
equal to the dwelling yield plus 50% (and rounded if necessary to the
next higher number) is permitted in the tract. The open spaces retained
under the conservation easement are known as greenway lands and are
to be left for the common enjoyment of all residents of the development.
Greenway lands may be commonly owned by the residents through a
homeowners' association, or they may be owned by a land trust, an
individual landowner, the Township or a combination of the above; they
are typically managed by either a land trust or a homeowners'
association. Each parcel of the greenway land must be at least three
acres. The length-to-width ratio of each parcel cannot exceed 4:1. The
layout of the greenway lands must be approved by the Planning
Commission; this approval should not be denied without reason.
4. Sensitive Area Disturbance. The proposed design shall strictly minimize
disturbance of environmentally sensitive areas, such as wetlands, lands
within the one-hundred-year floodplain, lands having slopes in excess of
25% or rock outcroppings. Demonstration by the applicant that these
features will be protected by the proposed development shall be
prerequisite to approval of the plan.
5. Uses Permitted on Greenway Lands. The following uses are permitted
in greenway land areas.
A. Conservation of open land in its natural state (for example,
woodland, fallow field or managed meadow).
B. Neighborhood open spaces uses such as village greens, commons,
picnic areas, community gardens, trails and similar low-impact
passive recreational uses. The clearing of woodland habitat shall
generally be prohibited, except as necessary to create trails or
recreation facilities or placing houses. Specifically excluded are
motorized off-road vehicles, rifle ranges and other uses similar in
character and potential impact as determined by the Board of
Supervisors.
C. Active noncommercial relations areas, such as playing fields,
playgrounds, courts and bikeways, provided such areas do not
consume more than half of the minimum required greenway land or
five acres, whichever is less. Playing fields, playgrounds and courts
shall not be located within 100 feet of abutting properties.
D. Water supply and sewage disposal systems and stormwater
detention areas designed, landscaped and available for use as an
integral part of the greenway lands.
§ 512 KINGSTON CODE § 512
Ch:798
E. Easements for drainage, access, sewer or water lines or other
public purposes.
F. Underground utility rights-of-way. Aboveground utility and street
rights-of-way may traverse conservation areas but shall not count
toward the minimum required greenway land.
6. Lot and Building Requirements. In a conservation subdivision, the
principal building, accessory buildings and other land uses shall be
located so as to comply with the following requirements:
Principal Building Present Proposed
Minimum lot 2 1/2 acres 3/4 acres
Minimum lot width at
building line
400 feet 125 feet
Minimum front yard 100 feet 50 feet
Minimum side yard, interior 50 feet 25 feet
Minimum side yard, street 40 feet 20 feet
Minimum rear yard 50 feet 25 feet
Minimum percent of lot
coverage
20% 30%
Accessory Buildings
Minimum Setback from Lot
Line
Front 40 feet 20 feet
Rear 30 feet 15 feet
Side Same as principal building
The majority of house lots should abut the greenway lands in order
to provide direct views and access. Furthermore, to permit safe and
convenient pedestrian (as well as maintenance) access to the
greenway lands from each lot not abutting greenway lands, each
neighborhood shall provide one centrally located access point per 15
lots a minimum of 20 feet in width.
7. Buffer for Adjacent Public Parkland. Where the proposed development
adjoins public parkland, a natural greenway buffer at least 150 feet
deep shall be provided within the development along its common
boundary with the parkland, within which no new structures shall be
constructed, nor shall any clearing of trees or understory growth be
permitted. Where this buffer is unwooded, the Board may require
vegetative screening to be planted, or that it be managed to encourage
natural forest succession through "no-mow" policies and the periodic
removal of invasive alien plant and tree species.
8. Ownership of Greenway Lands.
§ 512 HOME RULE CHARTER § 512
Ch:799
A. All greenway land shall be permanently restricted from future
subdivision and development by a conservation easement.
B. The following options for ownership may be used:
(1) Homeowners' Association. The applicant shall provide the
Township a description of the organization of the proposed
association, including its bylaws and all documents governing
ownership, maintenance and use restrictions for common
facilities; membership in the association will be automatic for
all purchasers of dwelling units and their successors in title.
(2) Conservation Organization (such as a land trust). The owner
may transfer fee simple title of the open space or easements on
the open space to a private nonprofit conservation organization
provided that (i) the conservation organization is acceptable to
the Township and is a bona fide conservation organization
intended to exist indefinitely; (ii) the conveyance contains
appropriate provisions proper reverter or retransfer in the
event that the organization becomes unwillingly or unable to
continue carrying out its functions.
(3) Private landowner.
(4) The Township, if, at the time of the initial development the
Township wishes to assume ownership, and under the
conditions that there is no cost of acquisition to the Township
and the Township agrees to and has access to maintain such
facilities.
9. Maintenance of Greenway Lands.
A. Unless otherwise agreed to by the Board of Supervisors, the cost
and responsibility of maintaining common facilities and greenway
land as well as property taxes and any liability insurance on the
greenway lands shall be borne by the property owner, homeowners'
association or conservation organization. Funds adequate for
maintenance for at least one year must be maintained on an
ongoing basis. A conservation organization may require an
endowment from the developer to fund maintenance.
B. The applicant shall, at the time of preliminary plan submissions,
provide a plan for maintenance of greenway lands and operation of
common facilities in accordance with the following requirements.
(1) The plan shall define ownership.
(2) The plan shall establish necessary regular and periodic
operation and maintenance responsibilities for the various
kinds of open space (i.e., lawns, playing fields, meadow,
woodlands, etc.).
§ 512 KINGSTON CODE § 512
Ch:800
(3) The plan shall estimate staffing needs, insurance requirements
and associated costs, and define the means for funding the
maintenance of the greenway land and operation of any
common facilities on an ongoing basis. Such funding plans
shall include the means for funding long-term capital
improvements as well as regular yearly operating and
maintenance costs.
(4) At the Township's discretion, the applicant may be required to
escrow sufficient funds for the maintenance and operation
costs of common facilities for up to one year.
(5) Any changes to the maintenance plan shall be approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
C. In the event that the organization established to maintain the
greenway lands and the common facilities, or any successor
organization thereto, fails to maintain all or any portion thereof in
reasonable order and condition, the Township may assume
responsibility for maintenance, in which case any escrow funds
may be forfeited and any permits may be revoked or suspended. In
this case, the Township may enter the premises and take corrective
action, including extended maintenance. The costs of such
corrective action may be charged to the owner of the greenway
lands. Such costs shall become a lien on said premises.
10. Guidelines for Preparing a Conservation Subdivision. An existing
features site analysis program drawn to scale and locating and
analyzing a site's special features is required for all proposed
conservation subdivisions. This plan provides the basis for the design
process for greenway lands, house locations, street alignments and lot
lines. A sketch plan, which can be shown on an overlay sheet on the
existing features site analysis plan, is required to indicate tentative
placements of the above aspects of the design. With these tentative
plans in hand, the Planning Commission should conduct an on-site
walkabout with the applicant and may use the services of a consultant
with expertise in the design of conservation subdivisions. These plans
developed by the applicant should use the following four-step design
process:
A. Identify primary conservation lands (wetlands, floodplains, slopes
over 25% and soils susceptible to slumping). In addition to the
primary conservation areas, at least 50% of the remaining land
shall be designated as a secondary conservation area. Both primary
and secondary conservation areas shall be permanently protected
by a conservation easement. Secondary conservation lands
typically include, but are not limited to, mature woodlands, other
woodlands, hedgerows, aquifer recharge areas, significant wildlife
habitats, prime farmland, other fields and historic, archeological
and cultural features. Such potential secondary conservation lands
must be identified as to type on the existing features site analysis
§ 512 HOME RULE CHARTER § 512
Ch:801
plan. The applicant shall prioritize the secondary conservation
lands in the tract in terms of their highest to least suitabilities for
inclusion in the proposed greenway lands. At the on-site walkabout
the Planning Commission should provide guidance to the applicant
regarding the tentative location of the secondary conservation
areas, potential house locations and street alignments.
B. Locate House Sites. House sites should generally not be located
closer than 100 feet from primary conservation areas nor within 50
feet of secondary conservation areas.
C. Lay Out Streets and Lots. Align proposed streets to provide
vehicular access to houses while minimizing adverse impacts on
conservation areas. Wetland crossings and streets traversing
existing slopes over 15% shall be strongly discouraged.
D. Draw in lot lines.
§ 512 KINGSTON CODE § 512
Ch:802
Part 6
CONDITIONAL USES
§ 601. General Criteria: Conditional Uses. [Ord. 6/11/1975A; as
added by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987; and as amended by Ord. 2000-3, 4/
12/2000]
1. Any application for a conditional use shall demonstrate that:
A. The use will not endanger the public health and safety if located
where proposed and will not deteriorate the environment or
generate nuisance conditions.
B. The use can be accommodated on the site with no variances
required.
C. The use is compatible with or will support the uses in the
neighborhood of the site.
D. The use does not require substantial earthmoving, revision of
drainage patterns, or create excessive traffic congestion or
substantial increase in stormwater flow.
E. Off-street parking is provided as required by § 326 of this chapter
and areas not covered by buildings or paved are landscaped and
maintained.
F. Access to parking lots are located as remote as possible from
nearby street intersections and adequate sight distances are
available at access points for motorists entering and leaving the
property proposed for the use.
2. Standards for Communications Towers as Conditional Uses.
A. The applicant shall be required to demonstrate, using technological
evidence, that the tower or antenna must be situated at the location
and height where it is proposed in order to satisfy its function in the
applicant's grid system or coverage diagrams. The technological
evidence must be provided with the initial application. The
Township reserves the right, at its option, to have such
demonstration reviewed by an independent professional radio
frequency engineer. All costs to be borne by the applicant as
engineering review fees.
B. Every effort shall be made to locate the tower below the ridge line
of mountains and hills while still preserving the site's usefulness.
C. The applicant shall demonstrate that it is licenses by the Federal
Communications Commission to operate a communications tower,
if applicable, and communications antennas.
D. The applicant shall submit a copy of the lease or other
documentation evidencing that the owner of the property approves
§ 601 HOME RULE CHARTER § 601
Ch:803
the siting of the tower, antenna, and other supporting equipment
and the access provided to the site. All financial details of the lease
may be omitted.
E. The communications tower site shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis, unless emergency conditions prevail.
Two reserved off-street paved parking spaces shall be required
upon a communications tower site.
F. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed communications
tower and communications antennas proposed to be mounted
thereon comply with all applicable standards established by the
Federal Communications Commission governing human exposure
to electromagnetic radiation.
G. Communications towers shall comply with all applicable Federal
Aviation Administration, Commonwealth Bureau of Aviation and
applicable airport zoning regulations.
H. Any applicant proposing construction of a new communications
tower shall demonstrate that a good faith effort has been made to
obtain permission to mount the communications antennas on an
existing building, structure, or communications tower. A good-faith
effort shall require that all owners of potentially suitable structures
within a 1/2 mile radius of the proposed communications tower site
be contacted and that one or more of the following reasons for not
selecting such structure apply:
(1) The proposed antennas and related equipment would exceed
the structural capacity of the existing structure and its
reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a reasonable cost.
(2) The proposed antennas and related equipment would cause
radio frequency interference with other existing equipment for
that existing structure and the interference cannot be
prevented at a reasonable cost.
(3) Such existing structures do not have adequate location, space,
access or height to accommodate the proposed equipment or
to allow it to perform its intended function.
(4) Addition of the proposed antennas and related equipment
would result in electromagnetic radiation from such structure
exceeding applicable standards established by the Federal
Communications Commission governing human exposure to
electromagnetic radiation.
(5) A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached
with the owners of such structures.
I. Access shall be provided to the communications tower site by
means of a public street or easement to a public street. The
§ 601 KINGSTON CODE § 601
Ch:804
easement shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width and shall be paved
to a width of at least 10 feet for its entire length.
J. A communications tower site may be located on a lot occupied by
other principal structures and may occupy a leased parcel within a
lot meeting the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning
district.
K. Site plans for all communications towers sites shall be submitted as
a land development and shall comply with the Kingston Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and will include a
complete landscape plan prepared by a Pennsylvania registered
landscape architect.
L. Recording of a plat of subdivision or land development shall be
required for any parcel on which a communications tower site is
proposed to be constructed.
M. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed height of the
communications tower is the minimum height necessary to perform
its function.
N. In all zoning districts, the maximum height of any communications
tower shall be 100 feet; provided, however, that if the tower is
replacing an existing communication tower structure such height
may be increased to no more than the height of the existing tower
structure or 150 feet, whichever is less, provided the required
setbacks from adjoining property lines (not lease lines) are
increased by one foot for each one foot of height in excess of the
existing tower structure or 100 feet whichever is less.
O. The tower shall be set back from adjacent property lines and
existing buildings a distance equal to the maximum collapsible fall
zone for the proposed tower as certified by a Pennsylvania
registered engineer responsible for designing the proposed tower,
plus 25 feet. At no time will the setback be less than the existing
setback requirement or 50 feet whichever is greater.
P. The base of a communication tower shall be landscaped so as to
screen the fenced foundation, base and communications equipment
building from abutting properties.
Q. The communications equipment building shall comply with the
required yards and height requirements of the applicable zoning
district for an accessory structure.
R. The applicant shall submit certification from a Pennsylvania
registered professional engineer that a proposed communications
tower will be designed and constructed in accordance with the
current Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and
Antenna Supporting Structures, published by the Electrical
§ 601 HOME RULE CHARTER § 601
Ch:805
Industrial Association/Telecommunications Industry Association,
and applicable requirements of the Township's Building Code.
S. The applicant shall submit certification that the tower and its
method of installation has been designed by a Pennsylvania
registered engineer and is certified by that registered engineer to
be structurally sound and able to withstand wind and other loads
projected for the proposed site in accordance with the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) as amended, and other federal,
state and local building regulations and accepted industry
standards.
T. The applicant shall submit on an annual basis a copy of its current
Federal Communications Commission license; the name, address
and emergency telephone number for the operator of the
communication tower; and a certificate of insurance evidencing
general liability coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000
per occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering the
communications tower, communications antennas, and all elements
of the communications tower site.
U. All guy wires associated with guyed communications towers shall
be clearly marked so as to be visible at all times and shall be
located within the fenced enclosure.
V. The communications tower site including guy wires and equipment
buildings shall be secured by a security fence with a minimum
height of eight feet to limit accessibility by the general public, as
described in § 348.
W. The following buffer plantings shall be located around the
perimeter of the communication tower site:
(1) An evergreen screen shall be planted that consists of either a
hedge, planted three feet on center maximum, or a row of
evergreen trees planted 10 feet on center maximum. The
hedge shall be sized to reach a height of 48 inches and
evergreen trees shall be sized to reach a height of 96 inches
within 36 months of installation.
(2) Existing vegetation (trees and shrubs) shall be preserved to the
maximum extent possible.
(3) All planting and planting areas shall be actively maintained
throughout the life of the facility.
(4) A landscape plan prepared by a Pennsylvania registered
landscape architect shall be submitted as part of the land
development and or subdivision plan. This plan will become
part of the final approved subdivision and or land development
plans and will be recorded with the approved plans. This plan
§ 601 KINGSTON CODE § 601
Ch:806
§ 602. Procedure for Review. [Ord. 6/11/1975A; as added by Ord.
86-5, 1/14/1987]
shall delineate planting areas, plant types, and sizes at
installation, fencing type construction and finishes, as well as
paved and lawn areas. The buffer planting will be maintained
per the approved design as delineated in the recorded plans.
(5) No signs or lights shall be mounted on a communications
tower, except as may be required by the Federal
Communications Commission, Federal Aviation Administration
or other governmental agency which has jurisdiction, or
related solely to the use of the communication tower.
(6) All lighting shall be shielded and reflected away from adjoining
properties, except as required by the Federal Aviation
Administration or other regulatory agencies.
(7) Communication towers shall be painted or camouflaged in such
a way to minimize the visual impact on the surrounding
landscape and to blend into the surrounding landscape.
(8) Communication towers shall be protected and maintained in
accordance with the requirements of the Township's Property
Maintenance Code.
X. If a communication tower remains unused for a period of 12
consecutive months, the owner or operator shall dismantle and
remove the communications tower within six months of the
expiration of such twelve-month period. Failing to do so, the
Township may cause the same to be removed and charge the cost of
the removal to the foregoing parties. In addition, the Township may
file a municipal lien against the land to recover the cost of removal
and attorney's fees. If the owner or operator plans to discontinue
use of the facility, a copy of intent to cease operations must be
submitted to Kingston Township.
Y. In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures
needed in a community in the future any proposed new support
structure shall be designed to accommodate at least one other
user(s), including other communications company(ies) and local
fire, police, ambulance and emergency provider(s).
1. A developer proposing a conditional use shall submit to the Zoning
Officer five copies of the following materials at least five calendar days
before a regular meeting of the Planning Commission:
A. A written statement supporting the general criteria outlined in
§ 601 above and describing in detail the proposed use;
B. A scaled illustrative site plan showing the arrangement of the
proposed use on the site, including property lines, setback lines,
§ 601 HOME RULE CHARTER § 602
Ch:807
§ 603. Oil and Gas Development and Production. [Added by Ord.
2011-2, 4/13/2011]
uses on adjacent properties, abutting streets, buildings existing
and proposed on the site by use and height, points of access
into the site, internal driveways, parking area layout with number
of spaces noted, freestanding signs, areas of earth moving with
grade of finished slope noted, means of disposing of stormwater,
proposed landscaping and other pertinent information.
C. The Commission may waive parts of the site plan submission that
are clearly irrelevant in a particular case.
2. The Commission shall review the documents required by this section
together with the specific criteria that apply to the proposed use at its
next meeting and may recommend approval of the plan as submitted,
rejection or approval with specific conditions to be met by the
developer. Also, the Commission may table it for further information, or
schedule a public hearing on it to gather public opinion.
3. The Commission shall note its discussion of the proposal and its
recommendation to the Board of Supervisors in its minutes of the
meeting and shall submit a copy to the developer and copies to the
Board, together with the developer's submission.
4. The Board shall review the Commission's recommendations at the
Board's next regular meeting and shall vote to accept or reject the
recommendations. A copy of the Board's decision shall be sent to the
Planning Commission and the developer.
5. The Board's decision shall be made not more than 90 days after the
submission was first reviewed by the Planning Commission, provided
the plan is not withdrawn and resubmitted. The review period shall
start over upon resubmission. When the Board fails to render a decision
within the allotted time period 90 days, the application for a conditional
use shall be deemed to be approved, unless an extension of time has
been agreed to by the applicant.
6. If the Board grants approval, it shall authorize the Zoning Officer to
issue a zoning permit for the proposed development. If conditions are
attached to approval, they shall be noted on the building permit.
1. General Criteria and Standards of Conditional Uses.
A. General Standards. Kingston Township hereby declares that oil and
gas development and production is a conditional use, as defined in
this chapter, and the conditional use is authorized by the issuance
of a conditional use permit by the Township, subject to the
following conditions, criteria, and standards:
(1) Oil and gas drilling surface activities shall only be permitted to
be drilled on a lot of land that is a minimum area of 10
§ 602 KINGSTON CODE § 603
Ch:808
contiguous acres or larger, as calculated in accordance with
prevailing established procedures and practices of land
surveying in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) Oil and gas drilling surface activities, natural gas compressor
stations, and natural gas processing facilities are prohibited
for use in Single-Family Residential Districts (R-1), Two-Family
Residential Districts (R-2), Multifamily Residential Districts
(R-3), Mobile Home Park Residential Districts (R-4), Industrial
Districts (I-1), and Conservation Districts (C-1).
(3) Oil and gas drilling subsurface activities are authorized in all
zoning districts.
(4) Oil and gas drilling surface activities, natural gas compressor
stations and natural gas processing facilities are authorized as
a conditional use in Agricultural Districts and as a permitted
use in Mining Zoning Districts of the Township, pursuant to the
criteria set forth in this section.
B. Additional General Criteria and Standards of Conditional Uses. The
use of a lot of land for oil and gas development and production, oil
and gas drilling subsurface facilities, oil and gas surface facilities,
natural gas compressor stations and natural gas processing plants
shall comply in all respects with each term and provision of the
Township of Kingston Code of Ordinances, Chapter 27, Part 6,
§ 601 ("General Criteria: Conditional Uses"), which are
incorporated herein and made a part hereof as though the same
were set forth at length herein.
C. Special Criteria and Standards for Approval and Permanent
Maintenance of Conditional Uses Provided for in this Section:
(1) A copy of the well location plat as submitted to and approved
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
showing the location(s) of the planned well(s).
(2) A general description of the planned operation of the planned
well(s) and associated equipment used in development of the
well(s).
(3) A copy of the approved drilling permit issued by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
(4) A map showing the planned access route(s) on public roads to
the well sites.
(5) Planned hours of construction activities involving excavation of
or alteration to the work of any access road or well site.
(6) Procedure and methods of compliance with the noise controls
as provided in this section.
§ 603 HOME RULE CHARTER § 603
Ch:809
(7) A copy of the plan to control spill, leak or malfunction and to
remove or cause to be removed all waste materials from any
public or private property affected by such spill, leak or
malfunction.
(8) The name of the person supervising the drilling operation and
toll-free number where such person can be reached 24 hours a
day.
(9) The identity, address and contact telephone numbers for all
subcontractors associated with the development or production
facility. The Township will be notified by the operator within 48
hours of any subcontractor changes.
(10) Verification that the operator and all subcontractors have read
and will comply with all provisions of this section.
2. Procedure for Review, Approval and Permitting of Conditional Uses
Provided for in this Section.
A. Application Fee. An application fee in the amount of $3,000 shall be
paid by the operator/applicant for the purposes of payment for
expenses incurred or to be incurred by the Township of Kingston
associated with all documentation, general area inspection, and
engineering costs related to public safety requirements of the oil
and gas well site areas, both before and after drilling, and the
processing of the oil- and gas-related conditional use application.
B. Application, Review and Approval Procedure. The procedure for
the conditional use plan application, review, approval and
permitting applicable to this section is set forth in all respects in
§ 602, Subsections 1 through 6, of Part 6 of this chapter, which is
incorporated herein and made a part hereof as though the same
were set forth at length herein.
C. Land Development. Following the issuance of conditional use
approval by the Board of Supervisors, the operator/applicant shall
forthwith comply with all of the terms and conditions necessary for
the final approval of a land development, as provided in Chapter 22
of the Code of Ordinances of the Township of Kingston, which
chapter is incorporated herein in its entirety and made a part
hereof by specific reference thereto herein.
3. Conditions Imposed Upon the Use of Land for the Purposes Provided for
in this Section Following Conditional Use Approval and Land
Development Approval.
A. Conditions.
(1) The operator, its successors and assigns, shall be liable for the
full and complete repair and restoration of all damages of
whatever nature to all Township roads directly caused by truck
§ 603 KINGSTON CODE § 603
Ch:810
hauling from the oil and gas drill site in excess of any usual
and customary damage attributable to normal and general
vehicular use. Notwithstanding the provisions contained
herein relating to an excess maintenance agreement and the
bonding of the operator's performance thereof, should the
operator, its successors and assigns, fail to repair and restore
fully and completely such road repair and restoration of
damages to Township roads attributable to the drilling process,
the Township reserves the right to proceed against the
operator, its successors and assigns, by the commencement of
an action in law or equity seeking payment of the entire cost of
such repair and restoration of road damage, including but not
limited to all costs of suit and reasonable attorneys' fees.
(2) The operator shall disclose the proposed routes of all trucks
and other heavy equipment to be utilized for hauling to and
from the oil and gas drill site and the estimated weights of
those trucks and/or heavy equipment associated with the
drilling process. The Township reserves the right to designate
alternate routes in the event that the operator's proposed
routes are determined by the Township Engineer to be
inadequate, unsafe, or overly disruptive to normal vehicular
traffic.
(3) Before the commencement of any drilling operations, including
but not limited to the construction of the well site, the
Township Engineer and the operator shall conduct an on-site
inspection of all roads to be utilized for truck hauling to and
from the oil and gas drill site. Upon the basis of the inspection,
the Township Engineer and the operator shall prepare a
detailed report documenting the existing structural condition
of the road. Photographs and videotapes will be taken to
substantiate the report. Copies of the inspection report,
photographs, and/or videotapes will be made available to the
operator and the Township.
(4) The operator shall plan or design all proposed hauling routes
to minimize the use and impact of such truck hauling upon
Township roads wherever feasible.
(5) The operator shall produce evidence satisfactory to the
Township Engineer that all intersections along proposed
hauling routes provide a sufficient turning radius for trucks to
be utilized for hauling so that all turns can be safely made
without damage to vehicles, sidewalks, curbs or surrounding
property.
(6) All Township roads used by the operator for truck and/or
equipment hauling from the oil and gas drill site will be kept
and restored to the same or similar condition during and after
the drilling operations. Accordingly, prior to any drilling
§ 603 HOME RULE CHARTER § 603
Ch:811
operations, the Township and the operator shall enter into an
excess maintenance agreement, in a form acceptable to the
Township, in order to guarantee the repair and the restoration
of any Township road(s) which may be determined in the
reasonable professional opinion of the Township Engineer
founded, in whole or in part, on the inspection report and
the graphic documents in support of the inspection report,
to be subject to damage as a result of and in the course of
traffic generated by truck and/or equipment hauling from the
oil and gas drill site. In the excess maintenance agreement,
the operator must assume explicitly its responsibility to repair
and restore any Township road determined to be damaged as
a result of traffic generated by truck and/or equipment hauling
from the oil and gas drill site and in excess of the usual and
customary extent due to general vehicular use. The reasonable
professional opinion of the Township Engineer as to damage(s)
shall prevail hereunder.
(7) In addition to the aforesaid excess maintenance agreement and
to secure the performance thereof, the operator shall post a
bond or other financial security in favor of the Township and in
a form acceptable to the Township. The principal of the bond
shall be determined by the Township Engineer acting on behalf
of the Township. The bond to be posted by the operator may be
in a principal sum in excess of otherwise-applicable PennDOT
limits when the Township Engineer has reasonably estimated
that the cost of the repair and restoration of Township roads
will exceed the prevailing PennDOT bonding limits.
(8) The operator is responsible for the satisfactory and complete
repair and restoration of damaged roads, as above determined,
before the excess maintenance agreement can be terminated
and the security released.
(9) Notwithstanding any other provision herein set forth, the
operator shall, at all times, utilize the Township roads only in a
manner that permits unobstructed and safe passage for other
members of the traveling public. The operator shall covenant
in the excess maintenance agreement to make immediate
repair of any conditions on the road attributable to its use for
truck hauling from the oil and gas drill site which restricts use
of the road by the traveling public or causes or contributes to
an unsafe condition, including the removal of mud and dirt
from the road.
(10) Where truck traffic generated by oil and gas drill site hauling is
heavy in the proximity of school bus stops, the operator will
provide flagmen to ensure the safety of children waiting for or
leaving school buses.
§ 603 KINGSTON CODE § 603
Ch:812
(11) The access driveway off the public road to the drill site shall be
gated at the entrance to prevent illegal access into the drill
site. The drill site's assigned address shall be clearly visible on
the access gate for emergency 911 purposes. In addition, the
sign shall include the well name and number, the name of the
operator and the telephone number for a person responsible
who may be contacted in case of emergency.
(12) Access of well site roads directly to state roads shall require
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT)
highway occupancy permit approval. Prior to initiating any
work at a drill site, the Township shall be provided a copy of
the highway occupancy permit.
(13) The operator shall not clear brush or trees by way of burning,
and it shall chip, grind or remove all tree stumps from
properties it clears for development purposes. The operator
shall comply in all respects with the Township's Burning
Ordinance.85
(14) Prior to development, the operator shall provide to all of the
Township's first responders (fire, police, ambulance, and
emergency medical treatment) and the Zoning Officer a copy of
its preparedness, prevention and contingency ("PPC") plan
relating to emergencies.
(15) Before drilling, the Township shall ascertain whether the
Township's first responders have secured adequate
information to cope satisfactorily with any potential dangerous
conditions that may result due to development activities. First
responders shall have initial access to on-site orientation and
be provided adequate emergency awareness information.
Upon request from the Township, the operator will, prior to
drilling of an oil and gas well, make available, with at least 30
days' notice, at its sole cost and expense, an appropriate site
orientation for first responders. Such site orientation shall be
made available at least annually during the period when the
operator anticipates drilling activities in the Township.
(16) The operator shall take all necessary safeguards to ensure
appropriate dust-control measures are in place.
(17) Recognizing that the specific location of equipment and
facilities is an important and integral part of the oil and gas
development, as and as part of the planning process, the
operator shall strive to consider location of its temporary and
permanent operations, where prudent and possible, so as to
minimize interference with Township residents' enjoyment of
their property and future Township development activities as
85.Editor's Note: See Ch. 7, Fire Prevention and Fire Protection, Part 2, Open Burning.
§ 603 HOME RULE CHARTER § 603
Ch:813
authorized by this chapter and the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (Chapter 22).
(18) Recognizing that adequate and appropriate lighting is
essential to the safety of those involved in the development of
oil and gas, the operator shall take steps, to the extent
practicable, to direct site lighting downward and inward
toward the drill site, wellhead or other area being developed so
as to attempt to minimize glare on public roads and adjacent
buildings within 300 feet of the drill site, wellhead or other
area being developed.
B. Additional Conditions of Conditional Use for Purposes Provided for
Herein.
(1) Public Meeting.
(a) At least 30 days prior to the initial development activities
or any subsequent or additional development activities,
the operator must inform the Zoning Officer of such
development activities. The Zoning Officer shall thereupon
issue public notice once and written notice delivered by
regular United States mail of a public meeting to be held in
the Kingston Township Administration Building to be
conducted by the Board of Supervisors and the Planning
Commissioners jointly, at which the operator shall present
all general information regarding all such initial or
additional planned development activities. The written
notice of the public meeting required herein is limited to
owners or occupants of land lying within 1,000 feet of the
surface location(s) of the planned development activities.
All costs of public notice by publication and mail shall be
borne by the operator. The individual in primary charge of
such proposed development activities shall be present at
the public meeting.
(b) The operator shall provide to the Zoning Officer and each
Supervisor and Planning Commissioner the following
information at least 30 days before the aforesaid public
meeting:
[1] A copy of the well survey plat showing the location(s)
of the planned development activities;
[2] A general description of the planned operations and
associated equipment used in the development of the
planned activities; and
[3] The address and telephone contact information of the
operator.
§ 603 KINGSTON CODE § 603
Ch:814
(2) Additional Requirements for the Conditional Use Provided
Herein.
(a) In addition to the requirements provided herein, for any oil
and gas well where the planned surface location of the
well will be within 500 feet of a protected structure, the
operator shall:
[1] Install temporary safety fencing, at least six feet in
height, around the established drilling pad containing
drilling and hydraulic fracturing equipment and install
permanent fall-protection fencing meeting OSHA
requirements around any pits that contain or could
contain water or other liquids at depths greater than
two feet.
[2] Install warning signs providing notice of the potential
dangers at the well site.
[3] Provide at least one well site security guard at all
times when a drilling rig or hydraulic fracturing
equipment is on the well site.
(b) In addition to the requirements provided herein, prior to
drilling an oil and gas well or multiple oil and gas wells at a
location, no later than 45 days beforehand, the operator
shall notify each resident whose property lies within 1,000
feet where horizontal drilling will take place under their
property for informational purposes.
(c) Prior to the commencement of drilling activities, no
construction activities involving excavation of, alteration
to, or repair work on any access road or well site shall be
performed during the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. on
weekdays and 9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. on Saturdays and
Sundays.
(d) The Township recognizes and acknowledges that oil and
gas development is accomplished by inherent noise.
However, the operator shall take all reasonable steps to
minimize, to the extent practicable, the noise resulting
from the development. In the event that noise emanating
from the oil and gas development becomes an unlawful
nuisance within 1,000 feet of a protected structure, the
Township may require the operator, at its cost, to erect and
maintain suitable sound barriers surrounding the well site
as determined by the Township Engineer. The operator will
ensure that any and all vehicles servicing oil and gas well
sites, whether owned by the operator or not, are equipped
with mufflers and other equipment to minimize the noise
generated by the use of these vehicles.
§ 603 HOME RULE CHARTER § 603
Ch:815
(e) The Township reserves the right to review and approve all
housing arrangements of a temporary nature for
employees of the operator and any subcontractors working
on the oil and gas well site during the duration of drilling
operations. All such temporary housing arrangements
must comply with all Department of Environmental
Protection sanitary sewer disposal rules and regulations.
All such temporary housing must be removed within 30
days of the completion of the operator's drilling operation.
(f) All permanent surface facilities shall be painted an earthtone
color to blend in with the surrounding area. The
Township may require fencing and/or landscaping to
buffer the facilities from adjacent properties.
(g) The Township reserves the right to inspect the environs or
general surrounding area of the well site, including but not
limited to all public roadway conditions surrounding the
site, all water sources in and around the site, as defined
herein and deemed to be "protected areas," and all
property boundaries of real estate adjacent to the well site.
A videotape may be made of such inspection; a copy of
which shall be delivered to the operator.
(h) The operator shall provide to the Township a statement of
the manner of and soil sampling of water and soils from all
sources by the operator and a copy of the water sample
report(s) provided to DEP by the operator. The water
sampling shall address all water sources and soil types and
characteristics within the radius of the well drilling
activity. All water sampling and soil sampling shall be
performed and certified by an independent and qualified
third party.
4. Zoning Approval Procedure and Standards for Conditional Uses
(Natural Gas Compressor Stations and Natural Gas Processing
Facilities).
A. Zoning Approval. All applications for the conditional use or the
permitted use of natural gas compressor stations and natural gas
processing plants shall be processed, and the same shall be
reviewed, and, if applicable, approved, in the same procedural
manner as provided in Subsection 2B and C of this section.
B. Standards and Criteria.
(1) The minimum site required for a natural gas processing facility
shall be 50 acres, and site location is limited to the Agricultural
and Mining Zoning Districts of the Township.
(2) Natural gas compressor stations shall be limited to the
Agricultural and Mining Zoning Districts. The minimum area of
§ 603 KINGSTON CODE § 603
Ch:816
the site of a natural gas compressor station shall be 10 surface
acres or larger, as calculated in accordance with prevailing
standards and principles of Pennsylvania land surveying.
(3) Compressors shall be located within a completely enclosed
building. During the periods of normal operations, doors,
windows, and similar operations shall remain closed to ensure
maximum noise suppression.
(4) Compressors and other power-driven equipment shall utilize
electric motors, where feasible, rather than internal
combustion engines. No electric power shall be generated on
the site. All electrical installations shall conform to local, state
and national codes.
(5) All property lines adjoining property of the specific site
wherein a natural gas compressor station is located shall be
screened by a landscaped buffer area for the distance
necessary to screen buildings, structures, parking areas,
storage areas and equipment.
(6) First responders shall be provided with a complete, detailed
list of all gases, chemicals and waste products produced,
stored and distributed on the site.
(7) All waste disposal and storage of gases or by-products shall be
in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PA
DEP) and any other applicable federal, state or local agency.
(8) Incident to the use stated herein, no person shall place,
deposit, discharge or cause to be placed, deposited or
discharged any oil, petroleum, asphalt, tar hydrocarbon
substances or any refuse, including wastewater or brine from
any natural gas processing facility or the contents of any
container used in connection with it on any public right-of-way,
alley, street, lot, storm drain, ditch or sewer, sanitary drain,
lake, pond, creek or similar body of water or on any private
property, all such waters being protected areas, without
permits from the appropriate regulatory agencies.
(9) Drip pans and other containment devices shall be placed or
installed underneath all tanks, containers, pumps, lubricating
oil systems, engines, fuel and chemical storage tanks, system
valves, connections and any other areas or structures that
could potentially leak, discharge or spill hazardous liquids,
semiliquids or solid waste materials, including hazardous
waste that is inseparable by simple mechanical-removal
processes and is made up primarily of natural material.
(10) All chemicals and/or hazardous materials shall be stored in
such a manner as to prevent, contain and facilitate rapid
§ 603 HOME RULE CHARTER § 603
Ch:817
remediation and cleanup of any accidental spill, leak or
discharge of a hazardous material. The operator shall have
all material safety data sheets (MSDSs) for all hazardous
materials on site. All applicable federal and state regulatory
requirements for the proper labeling of containers shall be
followed. Appropriate pollution-prevention actions shall be
required and include but are not limited to chemicals and
materials raised from the ground (e.g., wooden pallets), bulk
storage, installation and maintenance of secondary
containment systems, and protection from stormwater and
weather elements.
(11) All equipment and facilities shall comply with the noise
limitations provided in this section.
5. Penalties. Any operator, or person performing work at their direction,
who violates or permits a violation of this section shall, upon being
found liable therefor in an enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than $500,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the
Township. No judgment shall be commenced or imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby
authorized to issue a cease-and-desist notice and/or to seek equitable
relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith. No bond
will be required if injunction relief is sought by the Township.
§ 603 KINGSTON CODE § 603
Ch:818
Part 7
ZONING HEARING BOARD
§ 701. Zoning Hearing Board. [Ord. 1989-5, 11/8/1989; as amended
by Ord. 2004-5, 7/15/2004, § 1]
1. There is hereby created for the Township a Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the provisions of Article IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
2. The membership of the Board shall consist of five residents of the
Township appointed by resolution by the Board of Supervisors. The
terms of office of the Kingston Township Zoning Hearing Board, which
is composed of five members, shall be for five years and shall be so fixed
that the term of office of one member of the Zoning Hearing Board shall
expire each year. The Board shall notify promptly the Board of
Supervisors of any vacancy(ies) that may occur in the membership of
the Board. Appointments to fill vacancy shall be only for the unexpired
portion of the term. Members of the Board shall hold no other office in
the Township. [Amended by Ord. 2010-3, 4/14/2010]
3. Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or
nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the
Board of Supervisors which appointed the member, taken after the
member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such
a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the
member shall request it in writing.
4. The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall
serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the
conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action a quorum shall be
not less than a majority of all the members of the Board, but the Board
may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any
hearing on its behalf and the parties may waive further action by the
Board as provided in this chapter.
5. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Township and laws of the
Commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its business,
which records shall be the property of the Township and shall submit a
report of its activities to the Board of Supervisors as requested by the
Board of Supervisors.
6. Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Board of Supervisors, the
Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel,
consultants and other technical and clerical services. Members of the
Board may receive compensation for the performance of their duties, as
may be fixed by the Board of Supervisors, but in no case shall it exceed
the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the members of the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 701 HOME RULE CHARTER § 702
Ch:819
§ 702. Parties Appellant Before the Board. [Ord. 1989-5, 11/8/1989]
Appeals raising the substantive validity of any land use ordinance (except
those to be brought before the Board of Supervisors pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Code, procedural questions or alleged defects
in the process of enactment or adoption of a land use ordinance; or from
the determination of the zoning officer, including, but not limited to, the
granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the application therefor,
the issuance of any cease and desist order or the registration or refusal
to register any nonconforming use, structure or lot; from a determination
by the Township engineer or the zoning officer with reference to the
administration of any floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such
provisions within a land use ordinance; from the determination of any
officer or agency charged with the administration of any transfers of
development rights or performance density provisions of this chapter; from
the determination of the zoning officer or Township engineer in the
administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof with reference
to sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater management insofar
as the same relate to development not involving subdivision and land
development or planned residential development may be filed with the
Zoning Hearing Board in writing by the landowner affected, any officer or
agency of the Township, or any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance
and for special exception may be filed with the Board by any landowner or
any tenant with the permission of such landowner.
§ 703. Stay of Proceedings. [Ord. 1989-5, 11/8/1989]
1. Upon filing of any appeal proceeding before the Zoning Hearing Board
and during its pendency before the Board, all land development
pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the zoning
officer or of any agency or body, and all official action thereunder, shall
be stayed unless the zoning officer or any other appropriate agency or
body certifies to the Board facts indicating that such stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case the development or
official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order,
which may be granted by the Board or by the court having jurisdiction
of zoning appeals, on petition, after notice to the zoning officer or other
appropriate agency or body. When an application for development,
preliminary or final, has been duly approved and proceedings designed
to reverse or limit the approval are filed with the Board by persons
other than the applicant, the applicant may petition the court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order such persons to post bond as a
condition to continuing the proceedings before the Board.
2. After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to
determine if the filing of the appeal is frivolous. At the hearing,
evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It shall be the
burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous. After
consideration of all evidence presented, if the court determines that the
appeal is frivolous, it shall grant the petition for a bond. The right to
§ 702 KINGSTON CODE § 703
Ch:820
§ 704. Hearings. [Ord. 1989-5, 11/8/1989]
The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and made decisions in
accordance with the following requirements:
petition the court to order the appellants to post bond may be waived
by the appellee, but such waiver may be revoked by him if an appeal is
taken from a final decision of the court.
3. The question whether or not such petition should be granted and the
amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the court. An
order denying a petition for bond shall be interlocutory. An order
directing the responding party to post a bond shall be interlocutory.
4. If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from an
order of the court dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond
and the appellate court sustains the order of the court below to post a
bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon motion of the
petitioner and after hearing in the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals, shall be liable for all reasonable costs, expenses and attorney
fees incurred by the petitioner.
1. Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the zoning officer and to any person who has made timely
request for the same. Written notices shall be given at such time and in
such manner as shall be prescribed by rules of the Board. In addition to
the written notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing shall
be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one week
prior to the hearings.
2. The hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date of the applicant's
request, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of
time.
3. The hearings shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may appoint
any member as a hearing officer. The decision, or, where no decision is
called for, the findings shall be made by the Board, however, the
appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the
Township, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or
findings by the Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing
officer as final.
4. The parties to the hearing shall be the Township, any person affected by
the application who has made timely appearance of record before the
Board, and any other person including civic or community
organizations permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have
power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for that
purpose.
5. The chairman or acting chairman of the Board or the hearing officer
presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
§ 703 HOME RULE CHARTER § 704
Ch:821
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested
by the parties.
6. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
7. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
8. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing officer or shall be paid by
the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is
made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid by
the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
9. The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any
issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda, or other materials, except advice from their solicitor,
unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so
noticed and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless
all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
10. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before
the Board or hearing officer. Where the application is contested or
denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon together with the reasons therefor.
Conclusions based on any provisions of this chapter or of any law,
ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision
relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in
the light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing
officer, and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings
are final, the Board shall make his report and recommendations
available to the parties within 45 days and the parties shall be entitled
to make written representations thereon to the Board prior to final
decision or entry of findings, and the Board's decision shall be entered
no later than 30 days after the report of the hearing officer. Where the
Board fails to render the decision within the period required by this
subsection, or fails to hold the required hearing within 60 days from the
date of the applicant's request for a hearing, the decision shall be
deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the
§ 704 KINGSTON CODE § 704
Ch:822
§ 705. Variances. [Ord. 1989-5, 11/8/1989]
applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time.
When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because
of the failure of the Board to meet or render a decision as hereinabove
provided, the Board shall give public notice of the said decision within
10 days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in
the same manner as provided in Subsection 1 of this section. If the
Board shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing
in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the
application to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
11. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him
not later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have
filed their name and address with the Board not later than the last day
of the hearing, the Board shall provide by mail or otherwise, brief notice
of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full
decision or findings may be examined.
12. The Board of Supervisors shall establish, by resolution, fees with
respect to hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board.
1. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship
upon the applicant. The Board may by rule prescribe the form of
application and may require preliminary application to the zoning
officer. The Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the
following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
A. That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
B. That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
C. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
D. That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
§ 704 HOME RULE CHARTER § 705
Ch:823
§ 706. Jurisdiction. [Ord. 1989-5, 11/8/1989]
use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
E. That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
2. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
1. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
A. Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,
except those brought before the Board of Supervisors pursuant to
Sections 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (hereinafter "MPC"), 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and
10916.1.
B. Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of said
ordinance. Where the ordinance appealed from is the initial zoning
ordinance of the Township and a Zoning Hearing Board has not
been previously established, the appeal raising procedural
questions shall be taken directly to court.
C. Appeals from the determination of the zoning officer, including, but
not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act
on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist
order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming
use, structure or lot.
D. Appeals from a determination by the Township engineer or the
zoning officer with reference to the administration of any floodplain
or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use
ordinance.
E. Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter and flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance,
pursuant to Section 910.2 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10910.2.
F. Applications for special exceptions under this chapter or floodplain
or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use
ordinance, pursuant to Section 912.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10912.1.
§ 705 KINGSTON CODE § 706
Ch:824
G. Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged
with the administration of any transfers of development rights or
performance density provisions of this chapter.
H. Appeals from the zoning officer's determination under Section
916.2 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
I. Appeals from the determination of the zoning officer or Township
engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or
provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
development not involving applications under Article V or VII of the
MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10501 et seq. and 10701 et seq.
2. The Board of Supervisors, shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
A. All applications for approvals of planned residential developments
under Article VII of the MPC pursuant to the provisions of Section
702 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10702.
B. All applications pursuant to Section 508 of the MPC, 53 P.S.
§ 10508, for approval of subdivisions or land developments under
Article V of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
C. Applications for conditional use under the express provisions of this
chapter.
D. Applications for curative amendment to this chapter or pursuant to
Sections 609.1 and 916.1(a) of the MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and
10916.1(a).
E. All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances, pursuant to
the procedures set forth in Section 609 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10609.
F. Appeals from the determination of the zoning officer or the
Township engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance
or provisions thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
applications for land development under Articles V and VII of the
MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10501 et seq. and 10701 et seq. Where such
determination relates only to development not involving an Article
V or VII application, the appeal from such determination of the
zoning officer or the Township engineer shall be to the Zoning
Hearing Board pursuant to this section. Where the applicable land
use ordinance vests jurisdiction for final administration of
subdivision and land development applications in the Planning
Commission, all appeals from determinations under this subsection
shall be to the Planning Commission and all appeals from the
decision of the Planning Commission shall be to court.
§ 706 HOME RULE CHARTER § 707
Ch:825
§ 707. Court Review. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. VII, § 5; as amended by
Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
Any party aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Luzerne County, by petition duly
verified, setting forth that such decision is arbitrary, capricious, an abuse
of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law, and specifying the
grounds on which he relies.
§ 708. Special Exceptions. [Ord. 1989-5, 11/8/1989]
Where the Board of Supervisors, in this chapter, has stated special
exceptions to be granted or denied by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant
to express standards and criteria, the Board shall hear and decide requests
for such special exceptions in accordance with such standards and criteria.
In granting a special exception, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter, as
it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter and the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 709. Conditional Uses. [Ord. 1989-5, 11/8/1989]
Where the Board of Supervisors, in this chapter, has stated conditional uses
to be granted or denied by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to express
standards and criteria, the Board of Supervisors shall hold hearings on
and decide requests for such conditional uses in accordance with such
standards and criteria. In granting a conditional use, the Board of
Supervisors may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 710. Time Limitations. [Ord. 1989-5, 11/8/1989]
1. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Zoning
Hearing Board later than 30 days after an application for development,
preliminary or final, has been approved by the Township if such
proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to limit the approval in any
manner unless such person alleges and proves that he had no notice,
knowledge or reason to believe that such approval had been given. If
such person has succeeded to his interest after such approval, he shall
be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in interest. The failure of
anyone other than the landowner to appeal from an adverse decision on
a tentative plan or from an adverse decision by the zoning officer on a
challenge to the validity of this chapter or an amendment hereto or map
or an amendment thereto shall preclude an appeal from a final approval
except in the case where the final submission substantially deviates
from the approved tentative approval.
§ 707 KINGSTON CODE § 710
Ch:826
§ 711. Stay of Proceedings. [Ord. 1989-5, 11/8/1989]
2. All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be filed
by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the determination is
issued.
1. Upon filing of any appeal proceeding before the Zoning Hearing Board
and during its pendency before the Board, all land development
pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the zoning
officer or of any agency or body, and all official action thereunder, shall
be stayed unless the zoning officer or any other appropriate agency or
body certifies to the Board facts indicating that such stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case the development or
official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order,
which may be granted by the Board or by the court having jurisdiction
of zoning appeals, on petition, after notice to the zoning officer or other
appropriate agency or body. When an application for development,
preliminary or final, has been duly approved and proceedings designed
to reverse or limit the approval are filed with the Board by persons
other than the applicant, the applicant may petition the court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order such persons to post bond as a
condition to continuing the proceedings before the Board.
2. After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to
determine if the filing of the appeal is frivolous. At the hearing,
evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It shall be the
burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous. After
consideration of all evidence presented, if the court determines that the
appeal is frivolous, it shall grant the petition for a bond. The right to
petition the court to order the appellants to post bond may be waived by
the appellee, but such waiver may be revoked by him if an appeal is
taken from a final decision of the court.
3. The question whether or not such petition should be granted and the
amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the court. An
order denying a petition for bond shall be interlocutory. An order
directing the responding party to post a bond shall be interlocutory.
4. If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from an
order of the court dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond
and the appellate court sustains the order of the court below to post a
bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon motion of the
petitioner and after hearing in the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals, shall be liable for all reasonable costs, expenses and attorney
fees incurred by the petitioner.
§ 710 HOME RULE CHARTER § 711
Ch:827

Part 8
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 801. Administration. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. VIII, § 1; as amended
by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
Zoning Officer. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by a
Zoning Officer, the office of which is hereby established.
Duties. The duties of the Zoning Officer shall be:
A. To receive and check all applications for zoning permits and certificates
of occupancy.
B. To issue zoning permits and certificates of occupancy only for
construction and uses which are in accordance with the regulations of
this chapter and subsequent amendments; or through Board or court
approval.
C. To record and file all applications for zoning permits and certificates of
occupancy together with accompanying plans and documents and keep
them for public record.
D. To immediately prepare and publish a complete list of all
nonconforming uses and occupations existing at the time of adoption of
this chapter or any amendment thereto. Such list shall contain the
names and addresses of the owner or owners of such nonconforming
uses and of any occupant other than the owner, the legal description or
descriptions of the land, to the degree reasonably attainable, and the
nature and extent of land use. Notification of this list shall be given by
at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
Township, indicating where and when such list may be examined.
Property owners and occupants shall be given one month to inspect the
list and suggest necessary changes. They shall be given opportunity to
appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board for such changes in the list, as they
request, but which are not made by the Zoning Officer. After any
necessary changes have been made by the Zoning Officer, copies of the
list shall be delivered to the Board of Township Supervisors for approval
and recording.
E. Issue certificates of occupancy for legal nonconforming uses. He shall
examine them periodically to determine that they do not expand beyond
the limitation prescribed in this chapter.
F. Upon specific request of the Planning Commission or Zoning Hearing
Board, to furnish such facts, records and similar information, which will
assist such body in reaching its decision.
G. To be responsible for keeping this chapter, including the Zoning Map,
up to date and to include any amendments thereto.
§ 801 HOME RULE CHARTER § 801
Ch:829
§ 802. Enforcement. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. VIII, § 3]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer of Kingston Township.
No permit or certificate of occupancy provided for in this chapter shall be
granted by him for any purpose except in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, or with a decision of the Zoning Hearing Board or the courts.
§ 803. Complaints Regarding Violations. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. VIII,
§ 4]
Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred,
any person may file a written complaint, stating fully the causes and basis
thereof, which shall be filed with the Zoning Officer. He shall acknowledge
such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon as
provided in this chapter.
§ 804. Schedule of Fees. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. VIII, § 5; as
amended by Ord. 1980-1, 7/9/1980; and by Ord. 1983-2, 4/13/1983;
as amended by Ord. 86-5, 1/14/1987]
Fees shall be paid in connection with applications under this chapter in
accordance with the Uniform Fee Resolution adopted from time to time by
the Board of Supervisors.
§ 805. Enforcement Notice. [Ord. 1989-5, 11/8/1989]
H. If the Zoning Officer shall find that any provisions of this chapter are
being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such
violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal uses of
land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures
or of additions, alterations or structural changes thereto; order
discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other
action authorized by this chapter to insure compliance with or prevent
violation of its provisions.
1. If it appears to the Township that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
2. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel,
and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.
3. An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
A. The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Township intends to take action.
B. The location of the property in violation.
§ 801 KINGSTON CODE § 805
Ch:830
§ 806. Causes of Action. [Ord. 1989-5, 11/8/1989]
In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed to be,
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used
in violation of this chapter, the Board of Supervisors or, with the approval
of the Board of Supervisors, an officer of the Township, or any aggrieved
owner or tenant of real property who shows that his property or person
will be substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent,
restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or
to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use
constituting a violation. When any such action is instituted by a landowner
or tenant, notice of that action shall be served upon the Township at least 30
days prior to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint
on the Board of Supervisors. No such action may be maintained until such
notice has been given.
§ 807. Enforcement Remedies. [Ord. 1989-5, 11/8/1989]
C. The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
D. The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
E. That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a period of 10 days.
F. That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the zoning hearing board, constitutes
a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
1. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the
district justice determining that there has been a violation further
determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership
or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was no
such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only
one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
§ 805 HOME RULE CHARTER § 807
Ch:831
determination of a violation by the district justice and thereafter each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
2. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
3. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
4. District justices shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings brought
under this section.
§ 807 KINGSTON CODE § 807
Ch:832
Part 9
AMENDMENTS TO MAP OR TEXT
§ 901. General. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. IX, § 1]
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning
practice require, the Board of Township Supervisors, by ordinance, may,
after receipt of recommendation thereon from the Planning Commission,
and subject to the procedures provided by law, amend, supplement, or
change the regulations, district boundaries or classifications of property,
now or hereafter established by this chapter or amendments thereof.
§ 902. Enactment of Zoning Ordinance Amendments. [Ord. 1989-5,
11/8/1989]
§ 903. Procedure for Landowner Curative Amendments. [Ord.
1989-5, 11/8/1989]
1. The Board of Supervisors may from time to time amend, supplement, or
repeal any of the regulations and provisions of this chapter. The
procedure for the preparation of a proposed zoning ordinance as set
forth in Section 607 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
53 P.S. § 10607, is hereby declared optional.
2. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Board of
Supervisors shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public
notice. In addition, if the proposed amendment involves a zoning map
change, notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by
the Township at points deemed sufficient by the Township along the
perimeter of the tract to notify potentially interested citizens. The
affected tract or area shall be posted at least one week prior to the date
of the hearing.
3. In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Planning
Commission the Board of Supervisors shall submit each such
amendment to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the
hearing on such proposed amendment to provide the Planning
Commission an opportunity to submit recommendations.
4. If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is changed substantially, or is revised, to include land
previously not affected by it, the Board of Supervisors shall hold
another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to
vote on the amendment.
5. At least 30 days prior to the public hearing on the amendment by the
Board of Supervisors, the Township shall submit the proposed
amendment to the county planning agency for recommendations.
6. Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this
chapter shall be forwarded to the county planning agency.
§ 901 HOME RULE CHARTER § 903
Ch:833
1. A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the
validity of this chapter or the Zoning Map or any provision thereof,
which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he
has an interest may submit a curative amendment to the Board of
Supervisors with a written request that his challenge and proposed
amendment be heard and decided as provided in Section 916.1 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (hereinafter "MPC"), 53 P.S.
§ 10916.1. The curative amendment and challenge shall be referred to
the Planning Commission and the county planning agency as provided
in Section 609 and notice of the hearing thereon shall be given as
provided in Sections 610 and 916.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10609,
10610, and 10916.1.
2. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Section 908 of the
MPC; and all references therein to the Zoning Hearing Board shall, for
purposes of this section, be references to the Board of Supervisors. If
the Township does not accept a landowner's curative amendment
brought in accordance with this subsection and a court subsequently
rules that the challenge has merit, the court's decision shall not result
in a declaration of invalidity for this entire chapter and Zoning Map, but
only for those provisions which specifically relate to the landowner's
curative amendment and challenge.
3. The Board of Supervisors, if it determines that a validity challenge has
merit, may accept a landowner's curative amendment, with or without
revision, or may adopt an alternative amendment which will cure the
challenged defects. The Board of Supervisors shall consider the
curative amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the
landowner and shall also consider:
A. The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
B. If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal
in providing housing units of a type actually available to and
affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by
the challenged provisions of this chapter or Zoning Map;
C. The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the
site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers,
natural resources and other natural features;
D. The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and natural
features, the degree to which these are protected or destroyed, the
tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse
environmental impacts; and
E. The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and
other land uses which are essential to public health and welfare.
§ 903 KINGSTON CODE § 904
Ch:834
§ 904. Procedure for Township Curative Amendments. [Ord. 1989-5,
11/8/1989]
1. If the Township determines that this chapter, or any portion hereof, is
substantially invalid, it shall take the following actions:
A. The Township shall declare by formal action, this chapter or
portions hereof substantially invalid and propose to prepare a
curative amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days
such declaration and proposal the Board of Supervisors shall:
(1) By resolution make specific findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of this chapter which may include:
(a) References to specific uses which are either not permitted
or not permitted in sufficient quantity;
(b) Reference to a class of use or uses which requires revision;
or
(c) Reference to this entire chapter which requires revisions.
(2) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to this
chapter to correct the declared invalidity.
2. Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the
Township shall enact a curative amendment to validate, or reaffirm the
validity of, this chapter pursuant to the provisions of Section 609 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (hereinafter "MPC"), 53 P.S.
§ 10609, in order to cure the declared invalidity of this chapter.
3. Upon the initiation of the procedures as set forth in Subsection 1, the
Board of Supervisors shall not be required to entertain or consider any
landowner's curative amendment filed under Section 609.1 of the MPC,
53 P.S. § 10609.1, nor shall the Zoning Hearing Board be required to
give a report requested under Sections 909.1 or 916.1 of the MPC, 53
P.S. § 10909.1 or 10916.1, subsequent to the declaration and proposal
based upon the grounds identical or substantially similar to those
specified by the resolution required by Subsection 1A. Upon completion
of the procedures set forth in Subsections 1 and 2, no rights to a cure
pursuant to the provisions of Section 609.1 and 916.1 of the MPC, 53
P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1, shall, from the date of the declaration and
proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis of the substantive
invalidity of this chapter for which there has been a curative
amendment pursuant to this section.
4. The Township having utilized the procedures set forth in this section
may not again utilize said procedure for a period of 36 months following
the date of enactment of a curative amendment, or reaffirmation of the
validity of this chapter; Provided, However, if after the date of
declaration and proposal there is a substantially new duty imposed
upon the Township by virtue of a change in statute or by virtue of a
§ 904 HOME RULE CHARTER § 904
Ch:835
Pennsylvania Appellate Court decision, the Township may utilize the
provisions of this section to propose a curative amendment to this
chapter to fulfill said duty or obligation.
§ 904 KINGSTON CODE § 904
Ch:836
Part 10
INTERPRETATION AND VALIDITY
§ 1001. Interpretation. [Ord. 6/11/1975A, Art. X, § 1]
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety,
health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is
not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any
ordinance, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued, and
not in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter, or which shall
be adopted or issued, pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or
premises and likewise not in conflict with this chapter; nor is it intended
by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements,
covenants, or other agreements between parties not in conflict with this
chapter.
§ 1001 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1001
Ch:837
Appendix
Appendix A
ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY
101. Annexation of Territory.
A-1. By vote of 1634 to 245, a section of land was annexed by
Swoyersville Borough from Kingston Township. (Ord. 6/11/1975)
Appendix B
BOND ISSUES AND LOANS
101. Bond Issues and Loans.
B-1. Borrowed $14,229 to purchase a traffic signal. (Res. 3/16/1965)
B-2. Borrowed $7,500 from the Wyoming National Bank. (Res. 1/13/
1971)
B-3. Borrowed $25,000 from the Wyoming National Bank. (Res. 11/9/
1977)
B-4. Resolving to comply with the requirements of § 1.150-2(e) of the
United States Treasury regulations in expectation of reimbursing
a debt in the amount of $3,500,000 for the construction of a
municipal building by the issuance of bonds. (Res. 1995-5, 10/11/
1995)
B-5. Authorizing the Board of Supervisors to do all things necessary
to initiate a general obligation bond issue in the approximate
amount of $3,000,000 for the proposed Kingston Township
Administration/Police Department Project and the Kingston
Township Road Department Addition/Renovation Building
Project. (Res. 1996-8, 3/19/1996)
B-6. Setting forth the intent to issue a series of general obligation
bonds, series of 1996, in the aggregate principal amount of
$3,000,000 for the planning, designing, acquisition and
construction of a new Township Administrative/Police Building,
Township Public Works Building. (Ord. 1996-2, 5/16/1996)
§ 1001 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:838
B-7. Setting forth the intent to issue a series of general obligation
bonds, series of 1998, in the aggregate amount of $3,140,000 to
provide funds for and towards certain projects of the Township,
determining that the bonds shall be offered at a private sale by
negotiation pursuant to the provisions of the Local Government
Unit Debt Act of the commonwealth, as reenacted and amended
(the "Act"), and determining that a private sale by negotiation is
in the best financial interests of the Township. (Ord. 1998-6, 6/17/
1998)
B-8. Increasing the indebtedness of the Township of Kingston, Luzerne
County, Pennsylvania, by the issue of a general obligation note in
the amount of $60,000 for sundry purposes. (Ord. 1998-9, 11/11/
1998)
B-9. Amending Ord. 1996-2, 5/16/1996, as reenacted, amended and
supplemented, by providing that the caption and § 3 be restated
to provide that the proceeds of the bonds shall be used for the
planning, designing, acquisition and construction of a new
Township Administrative/Police Building, Township Public Works
Building and certain capital projects of the Township. (Ord.
1999-9, 10/13/1999)
B-10. Setting forth the intent to issue a series of general obligation
bonds, series of 2003, in the aggregate principal amount of
$3,190,000. (Ord. 2003-3, 4/23/2003)
B-11. Setting forth the intent to issue a series of general obligation
bonds, series of 2010, in the aggregate principal amount of
$2,000,000. (Ord. 2010-1, 1/13/2010)
B-12. Authorizing the issuance of a federally taxable tax and revenue
anticipation note, Series of 2012, in the amount of $500,000.
(Res. 2012-10, 9/12/2012)
B-13. Approving a plan of financing of the Dallas Area Municipal
Authority ($35,000,000 bonds) in order for it to undertake a
project for the benefit of Misericordia University. (Res. No.
R-2018-14, 9/12/2018)
Appendix C
FRANCHISES AND SERVICES
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:839
101. Franchises and Services.
C-1. Granted the Commonwealth Telephone Company the right to use
streets to install poles and wires. (Ord. 5/28/1963)
C-2. Granting a franchise to Back Mountain Cable TV, Inc., a
Pennsylvania corporation, its successors and assigns, to operate
and maintain a cable television system in the Township; setting
forth conditions accompanying the grant of franchise; providing
for Township regulation and use of the cable television system;
and prescribing penalties for the violation of its provisions. (Ord.
1973-16, 2/13/1974)
C-3. Granted a franchise to the Verto Cable Company of West Wyoming
to provide cable television service to part of the Township. (Res.
4/14/1976)
C-4. Granting the Commonwealth Telephone Company the right to
install a paging tower in the Township. (Res. 7/14/1976)
C-5. Granting a nonexclusive CATV franchise to Tele-Media Company
of Luzerne County. (Ord. 99-2, 3/10/2000)
C-6. Consenting to the assignment of a community antenna television
system franchise. (Res. 2000-6, 11/8/2000)
C-7. Protesting the announced rate increase of Adelphia
Communications corporation. (Res. 2004-4, 2/11/2004)
C-8. Protesting the announced rate increase of Adelphia
Communications Corporation. (Res. 2005-4, 2/9/2005)
C-9. Consenting to cable television franchise assignment and change
of control. (Res. 2005-8, 8/10/2005)
C-10. Protesting the proposed rate increase of the Aqua Pennsylvania
Water Company. (Res. 2006-3, 1/11/2006)
C-11. Protesting the announced rate increase of Adelphia
Communications Corporation. (Res. 2006-4, 1/11/2006)
Appendix D
GOVERNMENTAL AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
101. Governmental and Intergovernmental Affairs.
D-1. Approved application for a grant from the Luzerne County
Planning Board. (Res. 11/8/1961)
D-2. Agreed to the contract for designing a new Township building.
(Res. 10/31/1962)
D-3. Agreed to apply for grant from the Housing and Home Finance
Agency to build Township building. (Res. 10/31/1962)
D-4. Agreed to cooperate with the Trucksville Fire Company to build a
Municipal Building on the Fire Company's land. (Res. 8/24/1963)
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:840
D-5. Repeated above (D-4) affirmation. (Res. 10/12/1968)
D-6. Agreed to mutual police protection within 20 miles of the
Township. (Res. 8/9/1967)
D-7. Agreed to join the Luzerne County Communication System. (Res.
8/14/1968)
D-8. Agreed to a mutual police protection plan with Dallas Township.
(Res. 2/12/1969)
D-9. Accepted the Joint Police Survey. (Res. 9/10/1969)
D-10. Agreed to join the Luzerne County Civil Defense Central
Communications System. (Res. 12/10/1969)
D-11. Agreed to an election for referendum on a two mill tax for the
Back Mountain Library. (Res. 6/10/1971)
D-12. Approved the Police Cooperation Agreement. (Res. 7/8/1970)
D-13. Merged the police department with that of Dallas Township. (Res.
11/11/1970)
D-14. Dissolved the merged police department with Dallas Township.
(Res. 6/16/1971)
D-15. Joined the Greater Wilkes-Barre Narcotics Investigation Unit.
(Res. 11/10/1971)
D-16. Agreed to take part in the Commonwealth Purchasing System of
Act 31, 7/9/1971. (Res. 1/12/1972)
D-17. Approved an election for a referendum on a Home Rule Study
Commission on 9/7/1972. (Res. 8/9/1972)
D-18. Agreed to place the issue of Home Rule on the ballot 5/21/1974.
(Res. 3/13/1974)
D-19. Authorized an election as to the annexation of a portion of
Kingston Township by Swoyersville Borough. (Res. 2/12/1975)
D-20. Approved the administrative code for the Township. (Ord. 6/11/
1975)
D-21. Approved the cooperative agreement with the Luzerne County
Housing Authority, with amendments. (Res. 8/10/1977)
D-22. Approved the Police Information Retrieval System of Luzerne
County. (Res. 9/14/1977)
D-23. Approved agreement with the U.S. Housing Department in regard
to the Meadowcrest Project. (Res. 9/16/1977)
D-24. Approved the cooperative purchase agreement with the state.
(Res. 6/14/1978)
D-25. Approved an agreement with the Luzerne County Community
Development Authority. (Res. 10/11/1978)
D-26. Approved the Police Training Resolution with the State. (Res.
1979-1, 10/10/1979)
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:841
D-27. Agreed to a Mutual Police Plan with Dallas Borough and Dallas
Township. (Res. 1/9/1980)
D-28. Established a Capital Reserve Fund for the Township. (Ord. 79-2,
3/12/1980)
D-29. Applied to the Resource Conservation and Development Council
for Flood Control Aid for Holcomb Creek. (Res. 2/11/1981)
D-30. An ordinance establishing a Personnel Manual for all Township
Employees. (Ord. 1981-4, 4/18/1981)
D-31. Authorizing the Township of Kingston to join with other local
government units as a settlor of the Pennsylvania Local
Government Investment Trust for the purpose of purchasing
shares of the Trust. (Ord. 1981-6, 6/10/1981)
D-32. Agreed to joint purchasing of road materials with Dallas
Township. (Res. 2/10/1982)
D-33. Authorized the Township Secretary to open a Community
Development Fund account at the Wyoming National Bank. (Res.
3/10/1980)
D-34. Agreed to participate in the Vector Control program of Luzerne
County. (Res. 5/12/1982)
D-35. Approved terminating the Luzerne County Municipal Police
Information and Retrieval System of the Joint Police Commission
and agree to its transfer to the County. (Ord. 1982-4, 12/8/1982)
D-36. Accepting the Police Arbitration Award, as decided by the
American Arbitration Association. (Res. 12/28/1982)
D-37. Agreed to have the State Department of Transportation maintain,
repair, and reconstruct, when necessary, the sidewalks along
Legislative Route 40124, also known as Carverton Road, except
that the State would not be responsible for the clearing and
removal of snow therefrom. (Res. 2/9/1983)
D-38. The Unit Clarification Order excluding the Police Chief from being
a member of the Kingston Township Police Officers Association for
bargaining purposes. (Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board, 2/14/
1983)
D-39. Authorizing the West Side Council of Governments to act as the
Code Enforcement Agency to enforce municipal, building, fire,
electrical, property maintenance and plumbing codes within the
municipal boundaries. (Res. 1983-3, 7/13/1983)
D-40. Setting forth the procedures for the destruction or transfer of
municipal records in conformance with the Municipal Records
Act, 53 P.S. § 13-11. (Ord. 85-8, 1/8/1986)
D-41. Exempting Kingston Township Police Officers from contributing to
the Township Police Pension Fund. (Res. 86-1A, 1/8/1986)
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:842
D-42. Signifying intent of Township to participate in an
intergovernmental purchasing program with the municipalities
of Kingston Township, Dallas Township, Lehman Township and
Dallas Borough, Luzerne County. (Res. 86-2, 1/8/1986)
D-43. Recognizing the Trucksville Volunteer Fire Company for the
purpose of participation in the Federal Surplus Property Program.
(Res. 86-3A, 4/9/1986)
D-44. Exempting Township Police Officers from contributions to the
Township Police Fund, retroactive to January 1, 1985. (Res. 86-4,
2/21/1986)
D-45. An agreement between the Kingston Township Board of
Supervisors and the Luzerne County Board of Commissioners;
a Capital Improvement Grant in the amount of $70,000 was
awarded for storm sewer and street improvements on Goeringer
Avenue and Spring Garden Street. (Res. 86-4A, 4/9/1986)
D-46. Statement of understanding between the Township of Kingston
and the Wyoming Valley Chapter of The American Red Cross, re:
the coordination of Emergency Services in the time of disaster.
(Res. 86-10)
D-47. Establishment of Community Public Service Program under
provisions of Section 1520 of Pa. Judicial Code. (Res. 86-11, 9/10/
1986)
D-48. Participation in Back Mountain Communications Center
Commission. (Res. 86-12, 11/12/1986)
D-49. Exempting Township Police Officers from contributing to the
Township Police Pension Fund. (Res. 87-4A, 2/11/1987)
D-49A. Establishing a nonuniformed employees' profit sharing plan and
trust. (Ord. 89-7, 11/8/1989)
D-50. Designating Dallas Area Authority as the provider of residential
solid waste and recycling collection and disposal services within
the Township. (Res. 91-2, 2/13/1991)
D-51. Designating Merchants Bank North as depository in which the
funds and moneys in the custody of Kingston Township Tax
Collector may be deposited. (Res. 91-4, 2/20/1991)
D-52. Protesting the announced rate increase of Tele-Media Company of
Luzerne County. (Res. 91-5, 3/13/1991)
D-53. Participating in an intergovernmental purchasing program with
the municipalities of Kingston Township, Dallas Township,
Lehman Township, Dallas Borough, Franklin Township and
Harveys Lake Borough. (Res. 91-6, 3/13/1991)
D-54. Authorizing the submission of an application to the Department
of Community Affairs for financial assistance for community
planning. (Res. 91-7, 4/10/1991)
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:843
D-55. Removing loan provisions from the Kingston Township
Nonuniformed (401-K) Pension Plan. (Res. 91-8, 6/12/1991)
D-56. Adopting rules and regulations and a schedule of fees of service
rates and charges, and ratifying an agreement between this
Township and Dallas Area Municipal Authority and Danella
Environmental Technologies, Inc., for collection, transportation
and disposal of residential solid waste and recyclable materials.
(Res. 91-9, 8/4/1991)
D-57. Exempting Kingston Township police officers from contributing to
the Kingston Township Police Pension Fund. (Res. 91-10, 12/11/
1991)
D-58. Appointing Jeffrey K. Box as chief administrative officer for the
Kingston Township Police Fund and for the certification of various
documents to the Department of the Auditor General and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (Res. 91-11, 12/11/1991)
D-59. Establishing a policy for the public use of the Kingston Township
Municipal Building. (Res. 1992-1, 1/8/1992)
D-60. Signifying intent to participate in an intergovernmental
purchasing program. (Res. 1992-2, 3/11/1992)
D-61. Protesting the announced rate increase of Tele-Media Company of
Luzerne County. (Res. 1992-3, 3/11/1992)
D-62. Requesting the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation to
revise the traffic signal permit regarding the intersection of State
Route 309, Carverton Road and Church Road. (Res. 1992-5, 5/13/
1992)
D-63. Protesting a proposed rate increase of the Shavertown Water
Company. (Res. 1992-6, 5/13/1992)
D-64. Adopting amendments to the Nonuniformed Employee 401-K
Pension Plan of the Township of Kingston. (Res. 1992-7, 6/10/
1992)
D-65. Approving the destruction of certain records based on the
retention and disposition schedule of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. (Res. 1992-8, 7/8/1992)
D-66. Authorizing and directing the Chairman of the Board of
Supervisors to execute an agreement on behalf of the Township.
(Res. 1992-9, 7/8/1992)
D-67. Requesting permission to participate in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Cooperative Purchasing Program. (Res. 1992-12, 9/
9/1992)
D-68. Authorizing and directing the Chairman of the Board of
Supervisors to execute a grant on behalf of the Township. (Res.
1992-13, 11/11/1992)
D-69. Protesting the announced rate increase of Tele-Media Company of
Luzerne County. (Res. 1992-15, 12/9/1992)
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:844
D-70. Appointing the Township Manager as Chief Administrative Officer
of the Kingston Township Police Pension Fund and for the
certification of various documents to the Department Auditor
General and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (Res. 1992-16, 12/9/
1992)
D-71. Exempting Kingston Township Police Officers from contributing to
the Kingston Township Police Pension Fund. (Res. 1992-17, 12/9/
1992)
D-72. Intergovernmental agreement between Kingston Township, the
Township of Dallas and the Borough of Dallas, designating and
delegating the Dallas Area Municipal Authority to perform and
enforce the requirements of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act within the Township of Kingston. (Ord. 1994-12, 9/14/1994)
D-73. Resolving that traffic signals be erected at State Route 309 and
the proposed driveway for G. Isaac's commercial development,
subject to the approval of the Secretary of Transportation. (Res.
1995-1, 2/8/1995)
D-74. Agreeing to participate in the 1995 Intergovernmental Purchasing
Program with the municipalities of Kingston Township, Dallas
Township, Lehman Township, Dallas Borough, Franklin Township
and Harvey's Lake Borough. (Res. 1995-2, 3/8/1995)
D-75. Exempting Kingston Township Police Officers from contributing to
the Kingston Township Police Pension Fund. (Res. 1995-3, 5/10/
1995)
D-76. Appointing Jeffrey K. Box, Township Manager, as chief
administrative officer to the Kingston Township Police Pension
Fund for 1995. (Res. 1995-4, 5/10/1995)
D-77. Approving a cost-of-living increase to eligible retired personnel of
the Township of Kingston Police Department beginning January 1,
1996. (Res. 1995-6, 10/11/1995)
D-78. Exempting Kingston Township Police Officers from contributing
to the Kingston Township Police Pension Plan. (Res. 1996-1, 1/10/
1996)
D-79. Appointing Jeffrey K. Box, Township Manager, as Chief
Administrative Officer for the Township police and nonuniformed
pension funds and for the certification of various documents to
the Department of the Auditor General and Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. (Res. 1996-2, 1/10/1996)
D-80. Declaring a disaster emergency due to excessive snowfall. (Res.
1996-3, 1/10/1996)
D-81. Conceptually approving all presently existing design and
schematic plans and specifications for the erection of a new
Administration/Police Department buildings and the renovation of
the Road Department building. (Res. 1996-4, 2/8/1996)
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:845
D-82. Signifying intent of the Township to participate in an
intergovernmental purchasing program with Dallas Township,
Lehman Township, Dallas Borough, Franklin Township, Harvey's
Lake Borough and Jackson Township. (Res. 1996-5, 3/13/1996)
D-83. Authorizing the Township Manager to execute all forms and
documents necessary for the purpose of obtaining financial
assistance under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and
Emergency Assistance Act. (Res. 1996-6, 3/19/1996)
D-84. Authorizing the Township Manager to execute all forms and
documents necessary for the purpose of obtaining financial
assistance under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and
Emergency Assistance Act. (Res. 1996-7, 3/13/1996)
D-85. Expressing approval of the creation of the Luzerne County Tourist
Promotion Agency, a single, intra-county tourist promotion agency
under the Tourist Promotion Law. (Res. 1996-9, 7/8/1996)
D-86. Authorizing the proper officers of the Township to execute an
agreement with the Department of Transportation to transfer
from state to municipal control a portion of State Route 1043.
(Res. 1996-10, 8/14/1996)
D-87. Authorizing the proper officers of the Township to execute an
agreement regarding winter maintenance to Overbrook. (Res.
1996-11, 11/13/1996)
D-88. Exempting Kingston Township police officers from contributing to
the Kingston Township Police Pension Fund, effective January 1,
1996. (Res. 1997-1, 2/12/1997)
D-89. Appointing Jeffery K. Box as chief administrative officer for the
Township Police and Nonuniformed Pension Funds and appointing
the chief administrative officer for the purpose of certifying any
and all documents filed with the Department of the Auditor
General and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (Res. 1997-2, 2/
12/1997)
D-90. Objecting to any consideration to consolidate, close, or to any
degree, impede the effectiveness of the State Police Crime Lab at
Wyoming Barracks and urging Governor Ridge to reject any such
proposal from the PRIME Laboratory Task Force. (Res. 1997-3, 3/
12/1997)
D-91. Establishing an anti-litter program known as "Adopt a Roadway"
program and providing for safety recommendations and safety
requirements. (Ord. 97-1, 8/13/1997)
D-92. Assigning Dallas Area Municipal Authority as the provider of a
Joint Yard Waste Composting Program. (Res. 1997-4, 10/8/1997)
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:846
D-93. Authorizing the Zoning Officer of the Township to execute all
documents required to be submitted to the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection in respect to any sewage
disposal systems or certifications of public sewage service
regarding land subdivision applications. (Res. 1997-5, 10/8/1997)
D-94. Supporting the plan and designation of the Upper Susquehanna/
Lackawanna Watershed as an American Heritage River. (Res.
1997-6, 12/10/1997)
D-95. Exempting Kingston Township police officers from contributing to
the Kingston Township Police Pension Fund. (Res. 1998-1, 1/14/
1998)
D-96. Appointing Jeffrey K. Box, Township Manager, as chief
administrative officer of the Kingston Township Police Pension
Fund and nonuniformed pension funds for 1996, for the purpose
of certifying any and all documents as from time to time must
be filed with Department of the Auditor General and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (Res. 1998-2, 1/14/1998)
D-97. Exploring the possibility of saving debt service by refunding
certain previously incurred debt of the Township (the "Project")
and resolving that William Runner, consultant to PNC Capital
Markets, Inc., Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania, is hired as underwriter
for the purpose of said project and Donald D. McFadden, of
Stevens and Lee, Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania, is hired as bond
counsel for said project. (Res. 1998-3, 1/28/1998)
D-98. Authorizing the Office of the Luzerne County Sheriff to make
application on the Township's behalf for grant to participate in a
Luzerne County Criminal Intelligence and Analysis Support Unit
operated by the Luzerne County Sheriff's Office. (Res. 1998-4, 4/
8/1998)
D-99. Proclaiming May 13, 1998, as "Poppy Day" and ask that all
citizens pay tribute to those who made the ultimate sacrifice in
the name of freedom by wearing the Memorial Poppy on this day.
(Res. 1998-5, 5/13/1998)
D-100. Resolving to support the efforts of the Pennsylvania Civil Justice
Coalition to restore fairness, common sense and personal
responsibility to Pennsylvania's legal system. (Res. 1998-6, 5/13/
1998)
D-101. Resolving to pledge support and cooperation to the Anthracite
Scenic Trails Association regarding the Black Mountain Trail.
(Res. 1998-8, 9//9/1998)
D-102. Appointing ASCO Financial Group, Inc., as pension management
consultant and Manulife Financial as successor custodian and
funding agent for said plan. (Res. 1998-9, 9/9/1998)
D-103. Exempting Kingston Township police officers from contributing
to the Kingston Township Police Pension Fund. (Res. 99-1, 1/13/
1999)
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:847
D-104. Appointing Jeffery K. Box as chief administrative officer for the
Township Police and Nonuniformed Pension Funds and appointing
the chief administrative officer for the purpose of certifying any
and all documents filed with the Department of the Auditor
General and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (Res. 1999-2, 1/
13/1999)
D-105. Establishing the process to develop the Township of Kingston Y2K
Action Plan. (Res. 1999-4,)
D-106. Providing for a cost of living increase for eligible retired
personnel of the Kingston Township Police Department. (Res.
1999-5, 7/14/1999)
D-107. Ratifying the contract between Dallas Area Municipal Authority
and Apex Waste Services, Inc., for the collection, transportation
and disposal of residential solid waste and recyclable materials
services within the Township of Kingston. (R-1999-6, 11/19/1999)
D-108. Indicating the support of the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Kingston for the Dallas Area Municipal Authority
(DAMA) to utilize whatever legal means available to force the
General Municipal Authority of Harvey's Lake Borough to pay
its outstanding debt to DAMA, and if necessary, to terminate
all service to the General Municipal Authority of Harvey's Lake
Borough. (Res. 1999-7, 11/10/1999)
D-109. Endorsing submission of an application by the Anthracite Scenic
Trails Association for design and engineering services of the Back
Mountain Trail under the Pennsylvania Department of
Conservation and Natural Resources' Community Conservation
Partnerships grant. (Res. 2000-5, 11/1/2000)
D-110. Exempting Kingston Township Police Officers from contributing to
the Kingston Township Police Pension Fund. (Res. 2001-1, 1/10/
2001)
D-111. Appointing a Chief Administrative Officer for the Township Police
and Nonuniformed Pension Funds and for the certification of
various documents to the Department of the Auditor General and
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (Res. 2001-2, 1/10/2001)
D-112. Authorizing the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors to execute
documents with PennDOT regarding the East Center Street
Bridge project. (Res. 2001-3, 5/9/2001)
D-113. Readopting an Emergency Management Services Plan. (Res.
2001-5, 6/13/2001)
D-114. Authorizing the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors to execute
documents with PennDOT regarding the emergency vehicle
transponder project and accepting ownership and maintenance of
the equipment. (Res. 2001-4, 5/9/2001)
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:848
D-115. Exempting Kingston Township Police Officers from contributing
to the Kingston Township Police Pension Fund. (Res. 2002-1, 1/9/
2002)
D-116. Appointing a Chief Administrative Officer for the Township Police
and Nonuniformed Pension Funds and for the certification of
various documents to the Department of the Auditor General and
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (Res. 2002-2, 1/9/2002)
D-117. Recommending that Edmund J. O'Neill be appointed as Township
Manager of the Township of Kingston, upon the condition that he
serve a probationary period of six months, commencing on May
15, 2002, before becoming fully vested with the powers and duties
of the Township Manager for an indefinite term. (Res. 2002-5, 5/
8/2002)
D-118. Recommending that the Board of Supervisors of the Township
of Kingston create a Township Long Range Planning Committee
(LRPC) composed of a volunteer from the Board of Supervisors,
Planning Commission, Zoning Board, Recreation Board, as well
as up to seven volunteer Township residents and, as ex-officio
members, the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and the
Township Manager. (Res. 2002-6, 5/8/2002)
D-119. Approving transfer of a liquor license owned by Buffy Won, Inc.,
trading as The Carriage Stop Inn, having a License Number R
14675 and LID number 29079, which is located in Plains
Township, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania, to a facility within the
limits of the Township of Kingston which will trade as Dino's
Pizzateria. (Res. 2002-4, 6/11/2002)
D-120. Authorizing the Township Manager to implement and enforce a
policy for the use of cellular phones issued to employees of the
Township by the Township Manager. (Res. 2002-7, 7/10/2002)
D-121. Authorizing the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors to execute
documents with PennDOT regarding the emergency vehicle
transponder project and accepting ownership and maintenance of
the equipment. (Res. 2002-8, 7/10/2002)
D-122. Appointing a Chief Administrative Officer for the Township police
and nonuniformed pension funds and for the certification of
various documents to the department of the Auditor General and
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (Res. 2002-9, 8/14/2002)
D-123. Approving participation in the organization of an association of
municipal governments known as the Back Mountain Area
Council of Governments for the purpose of intergovernmental
cooperation. (Ord. 2002-5, 10/21/2002)
D-124. Exempting Kingston Township police officers from contributing to
the Kingston Township Police Pension Fund. (Res. 2003-2, 2/12/
2003)
D-125. Amending Ord. 2002-5. (Ord. 2003-1, 3/5/2003)
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:849
D-126. Appointing a Chief Administrative Officer for the Township Police
and nonuniformed pension funds. (Res. 2003-3, 3/18/2003)
D-127. Appointing J. Carl Goodwin as the delegate for the Township of
Kingston to BMACOG and designating him as the Vice Chair of
BMACOG. (Res. 2003-4, 5/14/2003)
D-128. Authorizing Edmund J. O'Neill, Township Manager of the
Township of Kingston, to do all things required to complete a
draft of the DCED Land Use Planning and Technical Assistance
Program application for grants-in-aid assistance. (Res. 2003-7, 5/
14/2003)
D-129. Authorizing the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors, Paul M.
Sabol, to sign the Agility Agreement. (Res. 2003-8, 6/11/2003)
D-130. Authorizing the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors, Paul M.
Sabol to sign an agreement for traffic signal maintenance. (Res.
2003-10, 8/11/2003)
D-131. Authorizing the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors to sign
a supplemental reimbursement agreement regarding the
construction of the East Center Street Bridge. (Res. 2003-11, 8/
28/2003)
D-132. Authorizing the Township Recreation Commission to conduct a
fund-raising event upon specified conditions. (Res. 2003-13, 10/
27/2003)
D-133. Authorizing the transfer of funds of the Township involving the
Liquid Fuels Tax Fund and the General Fund. (Res. 2003-15, 1/14/
2004)
D-134. Authorizing the Township to appoint a Chief Administrative
Officer for the Township Police and Nonuniformed Pension Funds.
(Res. 2004-2, 2/11/2004)
D-135. Exempting the Township police officers from contributing to the
Township Police Pension Fund. (Res. 2004-3, 2/11/2004)
D-136. Authorizing the Township to transfer funds from the Capital
Reserve Fund to the General Fund (Res. 2004-6, 3/10/2004)
D-137. Authorizing the Township to transfer $196.04 from the Capital
Fund to the Liquid Fuels Fund. (Res. 2004-7, 5/12/2004)
D-138. Authorizing the Township Manager to allow Township employees
to donate sick time to Officer Frank Buckler due to his absence
from duty due to an illness incurred in February, 2004. (Res.
2004-8, 5/12/2004)
D-139. Authorizing the Township to participate cooperatively in a multimunicipal
land use plan under the auspices of the Back Mountain
Area Council of Governments. (Res. 2004-9, 6/9/2004)
D-140. Authorizing the Township to amend the Nonuniformed Employees
Pension Plan to appoint Trustees to the plan. (Res. 2004-10, 6/9/
2004)
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:850
D-141. Authorizing the Chair and the Secretary of the Board to sell or
liquidate 1,197 shares of Principal Financial Group, Inc. stock
held in book entry form by Mellon Investor Services. (Res.
2004-11, 7/15/2004)
D-142. Authorizing the transfer of funds of the Township involving the
Liquid Fuels Tax Fund and the General Fund. (Res. 2004-12, 7/15/
2004)
D-143. Ratifying the transfer of funds of Kingston Township involving the
Capital Fund and the General Fund. (Res. 2004-13, 9/8/2004)
D-144. Agreeing to participate cooperatively in a shared municipal
services program grant application under the auspices of the Back
Mountain Area Council of Governments. (Res. 2004-14, 11/10/
2004)
D-145. A settlement agreement between Kathleen Sebastian and
Kingston Township. (Res. 2004-15, 10/13/2004)
D-146. Declaring the Township's intent to adopt the schedules and
procedures for disposition of records as set forth in the Municipal
Records Manual. (Res. 2005-1, 3/9/2005)
D-147. Appointing a Chief Administrative Officer for the Township Police
and Nonuniformed Pension Funds. (Res. 2005-2, 1/12/2005)
D-148. Exempting Kingston Township police officers from contributing to
the Kingston Township Police Pension Fund. (Res. 2005-3, 1/12/
2005)
D-149. Authorizing the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors, Jeffrey
K. Box, to sign an agreement between the Township and the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. (Res. 2005-5, 3/9/
2005)
D-150. Changing the addresses of two residential properties to clarify
their locations. (Res. 2005-6, 3/9/2005)
D-151. Readopting an Emergency Management Services Plan. (Res.
2005-7, 6/8/2005)
D-152. Authorizing J P Harris Associates to impose and retain costs of
collection of delinquent taxes. (Res. 2005-9, 8/10/2005)
D-153. Adopting the Incident Command System (ICS) as the Township's
official incident response system. (Res. 2005-10, 9/14/2005)
D-154. Amending the nonuniformed employees pension plan by reducing
the involuntary cash-out threshold. (Res. 2005-11, 12/14/2005)
D-155. Approving an amendment to the Articles of Incorporation of the
Dallas Area Municipal Authority to increase its term of existence
to 2054.
D-156. Appointing a Chief Administrative Officer for the Township Police
and Nonuniformed Pension Funds and for the certification of
documents. (Res. 2006-1, 1/11/2006)
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:851
D-157. Exempting police officers from contributing to the Kingston
Township Police Pension Fund. (Res. 2006-2, 1/11/2006)
D-158. Appointing Berkheimer as collector of earned income taxes. (Res.
2006-5, 1/11/2006)
D-159. Authorizing Berkheimer as collector of delinquent earned income
taxes. (Res. 2006-6, 1/11/2006)
D-160. Appointing Edmund J. O'Neill as liaison between Township and
Berkheimer for sharing confidential information regarding the
collection of earned income taxes. (Res. 2006-7, 1/11/2006)
D-161. Appointing Edmund J. O'Neill as liaison between Township and
Berkheimer for sharing confidential information regarding the
collection of delinquent earned income taxes. (Res. 2006-8, 1/11/
2006)
D-162. Approving Berkheimer's cost of collection schedule for delinquent
taxes. (Res. 2006-9, 1/11/2006)
D-163. Appointing Berkheimer as tax hearing officer. (Res. 2006-10, 1/11/
2006)
D-164. Authorizing participation in PACC Automotive and Equipment
Contract for purchasing of supplies and services. (Res. 2006-11,
1/11/2006)
D-165. Appointing a designated agent to execute forms and documents
for obtaining disaster relief financial assistance. (Res. 2006-13, 8/
7/2006)
D-166. Appointing a Chief Administrative Officer for the Township Police
and Nonuniformed Pension Funds and for the certification of
documents. (Res. 2006-14, 10/2/2006)
D-167. Establishing a policy for the use and regulation of electronic
control weapons by police officers. (Res. 2006-15, 11/8/2006)
D-168. Repealing Ordinance Nos. 5-2002 and 2003-1 and withdrawing
from further participation in the Back Mountain Area Council of
Governments. (Ord. 2006-11, 11/8/2006)
D-169. Protesting the announced rate increase of Comcast Cable. (Res.
2006-16, 12/13/2006)
D-170. Appointing a Chief Administrative Officer for the Township Police
and Nonuniformed Pension Funds and for the certification of
documents (Res. 2007-2, 1/10/2007)
D-171. Exempting police officers from contributing to the Kingston
Township Police Pension Fund. (Res. 2007-3, 1/10/2007)
D-172. Updating existing traffic signals on Route 309, Roushey Street
and East Center Street. (Res. 2007-4, 3/14/2007)
D-173. Closing out the Community Conservation Partnerships Grant
Project (BRC-TAG-7-11). (Res. 2007-6, 8/8/2007)
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:852
D-174. Approving the application of Asaki, Inc., for the intermunicipal
transfer of Liquor License Number R-16447. (Res. 2007-7, 9/12/
2007)
D-175. Authorizing ad hoc police pension cost-of-living increases for
2007. (Res. 2007-8, 9/12/2007)
D-176. Authorizing the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors to execute
documents with PennDOT regarding Supplemental
Reimbursement Agreement 048105-B to add costs for right-ofway
and construction on the East Center Bridge. (Res. 2007-9, 11/
14/2007)
D-177. Protesting the announced rate increase of Comcast Cable. (Res.
2007-10, 11/14/2007)
D-178. Authorizing the Township to join with other political subdivisions
as a member of the Northeast Pennsylvania Municipal Insurance
Cooperative (NEPMIC) and the Pennsylvania Municipal Insurance
Cooperative (PMHIC). (Ord. 2007-9, 12/12/2007)
D-179. Authorizing the execution of assurances relating to real property
acquisition. (Res. 2007-11, 12/12/2007)
D-180. Appointing a chief administrative officer for the Township Police
and Nonuniformed Pension Funds. (Res. 2008-1, 1/9/2008)
D-181. Adopting guidelines for Kingston Township police officers when
making authorized warrantless arrests. (Res. 2008-2, 2/13/2008)
D-182. Protesting a proposed rate increase of the Aqua Pennsylvania
Water Company. (Res. 2008-3, 2/13/2008)
D-183. Appointing a chief administrative officer for the Township Police
and Non-Uniformed Pension Funds. (Res. R-2008-5, 8/13/2008)
D-184. Promulgating an increase in fees for Uniform Construction Code
(commercial structures) inspections. (Res. R-2008-6, 8/13/2008)
D-185. Authorizing Township participation in the PACC (PA Capital City)
Automotive and Equipment Contract administered by the City of
Harrisburg. (Res. R-2008-7, 9/10/2008)
D-186. Protesting the announced rate increase of Comcast Cable. (Res.
R-2008-8, 11/12/2008)
D-187. Authorizing execution of a master lease agreement with Bank
Capital Services Corporation for the lease of certain equipment.
(Res. R-2008-10, 12/10/2008)
D-188. Appointing a chief administrative officer for the Township Police
and Nonuniformed Pension Funds. (Res. R-2009-1, 1/14/2009)
D-189. Exempting Kingston Township police officers from contributing to
the Police Pension Fund. (Res. R-2009-2, 1/14/2009)
D-190. Authorizing electronic access to PennDOT systems. (Res.
R-2009-3, 3/11/2009)
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:853
D-191. Adopting a memorandum of understanding regarding the traffic
signal conversion program. (Res. R-2009-4, 3/11/2009)
D-192. Approving the Articles of Agreement between and among the
member municipalities of the Back Mountain Community
Partnership. (Ord. 2009-4, 4/8/2009)
D-193. Approving the intermunicipal transfer of a liquor license. (Res.
R-2009-5, 7/14/2009)
D-194. Authorizing the Northeastern Pennsylvania Alliance (NEPA) for
the BCMP to make application for a grant on the Township's
behalf. (Res. R-2009-8, 8/12/2009)
D-195. Appointing a delegate and an alternate delegate to participate
in the Act 32 Tax Collection Committee of Luzerne County. (Res.
R-2009-9, 8/12/2009)
D-196. Authorizing the adoption of a premium only plan. (Res. R-2009-10,
9/9/2009)
D-197. Adopting Luzerne County Ordinance 1-2009, providing standards
for the naming of streets, the fabrication, erection and
maintenance of street name signs, and establishing a
standardized street address numbering system for the County of
Luzerne. (Res. R-2009-11, 12/9/2009)
D-198. Adopting an amendment to the Kingston Township Nonuniformed
Pension Plan. (Res. R-2009-12, 12/9/2009)
D-199. Adopting the Bi-County Hazard Mitigation Plan for the Counties
of Luzerne and Lackawanna. (Res. R-2009-13, 12/9/2009)
D-200. Protesting a proposed rate increase of the Aqua Pennsylvania
Water Company. (Res. R-2009-14, 12/9/2009)
D-201. Appointing a chief administrative officer for the Township Police
and Nonuniformed Pension Funds. (Res. R-2010-1, 1/13/2010)
D-202. Exempting Kingston Township police officers from contributing to
the Police Pension Fund. (Res. R-2010-2, 1/13/2010)
D-203. Designating emergency medical service providers within the
Township. (Res. R-2010-3, 2/10/2010)
D-204. Adopting a supplemental municipal agreement between the
Township and the commonwealth in respect to the East Center
Street Bridge Project. (Res. R-2010-4, 3/10/2010)
D-205. Approving the financing by the Dallas Area Municipal Authority
of certain capital improvements for the benefit of Miseracordia
University. (Res. R-2010-5, 4/14/2010)
D-206. Declaring opposition to forced mergers and consolidation of local
governments in Pennsylvania. (Res. R-2010-7, 7/14/2010)
D-207. Modifying existing traffic signals on Memorial Highway, Center
Street and Roushey Street. (Res. R-2010-8, 8/16/2010
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:854
D-208. Modifying existing traffic signals on North Memorial Highway,
East Franklin Street and West Franklin Street. (Res. R-2010-9, 8/
16/2010)
D-209. Adopting the winter maintenance agreement 2010-2015 between
the Township and Commonwealth. (Res. R-2010-10, 9/27/2010)
D-210. Appointing a chief administrative officer for the Township Police
and Nonuniformed Pension Funds. (Res. R-2011-1, 1/12/2011)
D-211. Requiring Kingston Township police officers to contribute to the
Police Pension Fund. (Res. R-2011-2, 1/12/2011)
D-212. Authorizing Chairman to sign application. (Res. R-2011-3, 1/12/
2011)
D-213. Resolution of Back Mountain Community Partnership authorizing
NEPA to apply for grant. (Res. R-2011-4, 1/12/2011)
D-214. Resolution of Back Mountain Community Partnership supporting
Jackson Township's grant application. (Res. R-2011-5, 1/12/2011)
D-215. Resolution of Back Mountain Community Partnership regarding
the possible severance tax on natural gas extraction from
marcellus shale. (Res. R-2011-6, 1/12/2011)
D-216. Establishing a policy for public use of Township Municipal
Building. (Res. R-2011-7, 1/12/2011)
D-217. Authorizing Chairman to sign agreement with PennDOT. (Res.
R-2011-8, 3/9/2011)
D-218. Approving the intermunicipal transfer of a liquor license. (Res.
R-2011-9, 8/10/2011)
D-219. Designating first-due emergency medical service responders
within the Township. (Res. R-2011-10, 7/13/2011)
D-220. Protesting a proposed rate increase of the Pennsylvania American
Water Company. (Res. R-2011-11, 5/11/2011)
D-221. Waiving weight limits on Main Street and East Center Street
for vehicles making local deliveries or pickups during the
construction of the East Center Street bridge replacement and
related street construction. (Res. R-2011-12, 6/8/2011)
D-222. Transferring funds from the capital fund to the general fund to
meet financial obligations. (Ord. 2011-6, 9/14/2011)
D-223. Declaring November Pancreatic Cancer Awareness Month. (Res.
R-2011-13, 10/12/2011)
D-224. Designating the Township Manager as agent for the purpose of
obtaining financial assistance under the Robert T. Stafford
Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act for damages from
Hurricane Irene. (Res. R-2011-14, 10/25/2011)
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:855
D-225. Designating the Township Manager as agent for the purpose of
obtaining financial assistance under the Robert T. Stafford
Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act for damages from
Tropical Storm Lee. (Res. R-2011-15, 10/25/2011)
D-226. Adopting the Capital Program of the Township of Kingston for the
years 2012 through 2016. (Res. R-2011-17, 11/16/2011)
D-227. Authorizing the Northeastern Pennsylvania Alliance to make
application for a grant on the Township's behalf. (Res. R-2011-18,
10/26/2011)
D-228. Requiring Kingston Township police officers to contribute to the
Police Pension Fund. (Res. R-2012-1, 1/11/2012)
D-229. Appointing a chief administrative officer for the Township Police
and Nonuniformed Pension Funds. (Res. R-2012-21, 1/11/2012)
D-230. Adopting the Comprehensive Plan for the Township. (Res.
R-2012-3, 2/8/2012)
D-231. Initiating and sustaining participation in the Back Mountain
Regional Emergency Management Agency. (Res. R-2012-4, 3/14/
2012)
D-232. Urging the General Assembly to eliminate or amend the
Prevailing Wage Act. (Res. R-2012-5, 4/11/2012)
D-233. Grant agreement signature page for Center Street Park Security
grant from the Department of Conservation and Natural
Resources. (Res. R-2012-6, 4/11/2012)
D-234. Appointing Kathleen J. Sebastian as liaison between the Township
and Berkheimer for sharing confidential information regarding
the collection of earned income taxes. (Res. R-2012-7, 9/12/2012)
D-235. Authorizing Berkheimer to impose and retain costs of collection
on delinquent taxes. (Res. R-2012-8, 9/12/2012)
D-236. Adopting the Capital Program of the Township of Kingston for the
years 2013 through 2017. (Res. R-2012-9, 11/14/2012)
D-237. Adopting a memorandum of understanding regarding the fiveyear
update of the 2009 Bi-County Hazard Mitigation Plan. (Res.
R-2012-11, 11/14/2012)
D-238. Authorizing the Northeastern Pennsylvania Alliance on behalf of
the Back Mountain Community Partnership to make application
for a grant on the Township's behalf. (Res. R-2012-12, 12/12/2012)
D-239. Amending Charter of the Township following approval at
referendum by a majority of the electors. (Res. R-2012-13, 12/12/
2012)
D-240. Requiring Kingston Township police officers to contribute to the
Police Pension Fund. (Res. R-2013-1, 1/9/2013)
D-241. Authorizing execution of a master equipment lease purchase
agreement. (Res. R-2013-2, 1/31/2013)
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:856
D-242. Appointing a chief administrative officer for the Township Police
and Nonuniformed Pension Funds. (Res. R-2013-3, 2/13/2013)
D-243. Authorizing the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors to sign
an automated red light enforcement reimbursement agreement.
(Res. R-2013-4, 3/13/2013)
D-244. Urging the General Assembly to free the taxpayers from the
undue burden placed upon them by the Pennsylvania Prevailing
Wage Act of 1961. (Res. R-2013-8, 6/12/2013)
D-245. Adopting the capital program and providing for a capital
improvement plan budget. (Res. R-2013-9, 11/13/2013)
D-246. Authorizing application for a Local Share Assessment Fund
(gaming funds) grant. (Res. R-2013-10, 12/11/2013)
D-247. Suspending member contributions to the Police Pension Fund.
(Res. R-2013-11, 12/11/2013)
D-248. Repealing Res. R-2013-1, relating to contributions to the Police
Pension Fund. (Res. R-2013-12, 12/11/2013)
D-249. Approving financing by the Dallas Area Municipal Authority of
certain projects for the benefit of Misericordia University. (Res.
R-2013-13, 12/11/2013)
D-250. Suspending member contributions to the Police Pension Fund.
(Res. R-2014-1, 1/8/2014)
D-251. Adopting the schedules and procedures for disposition of records
set forth in the Municipal Records Manual approved on July 16,
1993. (Res. R-2014-2, 1/8/2014)
D-252. Appointing Karen A. Rose as liaison between the Township and
Berkheimer for sharing confidential tax information with the
district for official purposes. (Res. R-2014-3, 2/12/2014)
D-253. Authorizing participation in the Penn PRIME Trust's risk coverage
pool and entering into the member participation agreement for
the same. (Ord. 2014-1, 4/9/2014)
D-254. Granting the Board of Supervisors authority to execute an
intergovernmental cooperation agreement to create a regional
emergency management agency. (Res. R-2014-5, 4/9/2014)
D-255. Grant agreement signature page for Center Street Park
Revitalization project. (Res. R-2014-6, 4/9/2014)
D-256. Resolution page for Center Street Park Revitalization project.
(Res. R-2014-7, 4/9/2014)
D-257. Accountability of Township for safety and risk management goals.
(Res. R-2014-8, 6/4/2014)
D-258. Adopting the capital program and providing for a capital
improvement plan budget for fiscal years 2015 through 2019.
(Res. R-2014-11, 11/12/2014)
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:857
D-259. Approving the financing, refinancing and/or reimbursing by the
Dallas Area Municipal Authority of certain projects for the benefit
of King's College and designating the Chair of the Board as the
applicable elected representative. (Res. R-2014-12, 8/13/2014)
D-260. Authorizing the Township to enter into a "release and right of
entry agreement" to implement a program of the demolition of
qualifying vacant, derelict structures in furtherance of the
Luzerne County Community Development Spot Slum and Bright
Clearance Program and authorizing the Chairperson of the Board
to take any necessary action. (Res. R-2014-13, 8/13/2014)
D-261. Releasing and holding harmless Luzerne County from claims
related to the demolition of privately owned properties pursuant
to the Municipal Spot Slum and Blight Clearance Program. (Res.
R-2014-14, 8/13/2014)
D-262. Agreement for Harvey's Lake Borough to become a member of
the Back Mountain Community Partnership. (Res. R-2014-15, 9/
10/2014)
D-263. Authorizing the terms and conditions of the resignation and
general release agreement between the Township and James J.
Balavage upon the resignation of James J. Balavage as Chief of
Police. (Res. R-2014-17, 10/10/2014)
D-264. Providing for the compensation of an Acting Chief of Police during
the period preceding the appointment and service of a permanent
Chief. (Res. R-2014-18, 10/10/2014)
D-265. Amending the Police Pension Plan to comply with State laws and
regulations in effect as of May 20, 2014. (Ord. 2014-6, 12/10/
2014)
D-266. Authorizing application for a Local Share Assessment Fund
(gaming funds) grant. (Res. R-2014-19, 12/10/2014)
D-267. Authorizing application for a Local Share Assessment Fund
(gaming funds) grant. (Res. R-2014-20, 12/10/2014)
D-268. Authorizing application for a Local Share Assessment Fund
(gaming funds) grant. (Res. R-2014-21, 12/10/2014)
D-269. Suspending member contributions to the Police Pension Fund.
(Res. R-2015-1, 1/14/2015)
D-270. Amending job title from "Custodian" to "Janitorial Maintenance
Worker" and amending job description. (Res. R-2015-3, 2/11/
2015)
D-271. Designating emergency medical service providers within the
Township. (Res. R-2015-4, 2/18/2015)
D-272. Application for traffic signal approval. (Res. R-2015-6, 4/8/2015)
D-273. Requesting a GTRP grant from the Commonwealth Financing
Authority and authorizing the Township Manager to execute all
related documents and agreements. (Res. R-2015-8, 7/8/2015)
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:858
D-274. Adopting the capital program and providing for a capital
improvement plan budget for fiscal years 2016 through 2020.
(Res. R-2015-9, 11/11/2015)
D-275. Adopting the five-year update of the Luzerne County Hazard
Mitigation Plan. (Res. R-2015-11, 9/9/2015)
D-276. Adopting the winter maintenance agreement 2015-2020 between
the Township and Commonwealth. (Res. R-2015-12, 9/9/2015)
D-277. Approving a master installment purchase agreement with
Mercedes-Benz Financial Services. (Res. R-2015-13, 10/14/2015)
D-278. Authorizing application for a Local Share Assessment Fund
(gaming funds) grant. (Res. R-2015-14, 12/9/2015)
D-279. Authorizing application for a Local Share Assessment Fund
(gaming funds) grant. (Res. R-2015-15, 12/9/2015)
D-280. Authorizing application for a Local Share Assessment Fund
(gaming funds) grant. (Res. R-2015-16, 12/9/2015)
D-281. Authorizing application for a Local Share Assessment Fund
(gaming funds) grant. (Res. R-2015-17, 12/9/2015)
D-282. Suspending member contributions to the Police Pension Fund.
(Res. R-2016-1, 2/10/2016)
D-283. Authorizing application for a Local Share Assessment Fund
(gaming funds) grant. (Res. R-2016-2, 2/10/2016)
D-284. Adopting the document "The Township of Kingston Procedures for
Compliance with the Professional Services Contract Provisions of
Act 44 of 2009." (Res. R-2016-3, 3/9/2016)
D-285. Approving and authorizing the execution and delivery of the
Schedule of Equipment No. 01. (Res. R-2016-5, 4/13/2016)
D-286. Appointing Kathleen J. Sebastian as Chief Administrative Officer
of the Kingston Township Police Pension and Nonuniformed
Pension Funds. (Res. R-2016-6, 5/11/2016)
D-287. Agreement between Kingston Township and Luzerne Borough
regarding the Bunker Hill Road and North Street paving and
drainage contract with respect to LSA grant therefor. (Res.
R-2016-7, 6/8/2016)
D-288. Designating First National Community Bank (FNCB) as the
Township’s depository for county and municipal tax collections.
(Res. R-2016-8, 8/10/2016)
D-289. Designating First National Community Bank (FNCB) as the
Township’s depository for school tax collections. (Res. R-2016-9,
8/10/2016)
D-290. Designating First National Community Bank (FNCB) as the
Township’s depository for all general business Township accounts.
(Res. R-2016-10, 8/10/2016)
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:859
D-291. Approving a maintenance agreement with PennDOT for Township
to assume responsibility for maintenance of newly installed
surface water drainage system on Carverton Road. (Res.
R-2016-11, 9/7/2016)
D-292. Adopting the capital improvement plan budget for fiscal years
2017 through 2021. (Res. R-2016-12, 11/9/2016)
D-293. Providing for the retention of an alternate Zoning Officer and
Code Enforcement Officer when necessary. (Res. R-2016-13, 11/9/
2016)
D-294. Authorizing the Northeastern Pennsylvania Alliance (NEPA), on
behalf of the BMCP, to make application for a grant on the
Township's behalf. (Res. R-2016-14, 12/14/2016)
D-295. Requesting a Local Share Account grant. (Res. R-2016-15, 12/14/
2016)
D-296. Appointing Kathleen J. Sebastian as Chief Administrative Officer
of the Kingston Township Police Pension and Nonuniformed
Pension Funds. (Res. R-2017-1, 1/11/2017)
D-297. Suspending member contributions to the Police Pension Fund.
(Res. R-2017-2, 1/11/2017)
D-298. Amending the Municipal Facilities/Meeting Room Use Policy.
(Res. R-2017-3, 3/8/2017)
D-299. Approving and authorizing the execution and delivery of Schedule
of Equipment No. 01 and Schedule of Equipment No. 02. (Res.
R-2017-4, 4/12/2017)
D-300. Supporting Senate Bill 22 that would assign legislative
redistricting and congressional reapportionment to an
independent citizen's redistricting commission. (Res. R-2017-5, 4/
12/2017)
D-301. Adopting amendments to the Kingston Township Police Pension
Plan as a result of the 1/1/2017 collective bargaining agreement.
(Ord. 2017-1, 5/10/2017)
D-302. Requesting a Greenways, Trails, and Recreation Program (GTRP)
grant for a new playground at Center Street Park. (Res. R-2017-6,
5/10/2017)
D-303. Adopting an amendment to the Articles of Incorporation of the
Dallas Area Municipal Authority. (Res. R-2017-7, 8/9/2017)
D-304. Approving an intergovernmental agreement with the Dallas Area
Municipal Authority for the creation and implementation of a
stormwater management and pollution reduction program. (Ord.
2017-8, 10/11/2017)
D-305. Adopting the Capital Program of the Township and providing for
a capital improvement plan budget for fiscal years 2018 through
2022. (Res. R-2017-9, 11/8/2017)
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:860
D-306. Honoring the valiant efforts of several firefighters in saving a life.
(Res. R-2017-10, 11/8/2017)
D-307. Authorizing the Township Manager to submit an application for
traffic signal approval to the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation. (Res. R-2017-11, 11/8/2017)
D-308. Prohibiting the location of a Category 4 licensed casino within the
Township. (Res. R-2017-12, 11/8/2017)
D-309. Requesting a Local Share Account grant. (Res. R-2017-13, 12/13/
2017)
D-310. Requesting a Local Share Account grant. (Res. R-2017-14, 12/13/
2017)
D-311. Authorizing the Northeastern Pennsylvania Alliance (NEPA), on
behalf of the BMCP, to make application for a grant to purchase
police equipment. (Res. R-2017-15, 12/13/2017)
D-312. Appointing a Chief Administrative Officer for the Township Police
and Nonuniformed Pension Funds. (Res. R-2018-1, 1/2/2018)
D-313. Suspending member contributions to the Police Pension Fund.
(Res. R-2018-2, 1/2/2018)
D-314. Amending the Municipal Facilities/Meeting Room Use Policy.
(Res. R-2018-3, 1/2/2018)
D-315. Opposing House Bill 1620 (PN 2146), entitled the "Wireless
Infrastructure Deployment Bill." (Res. R-2018-4, 1/15/2018)
D-316. Urging Pennsylvania legislators to introduce and support
anticorruption legislation in Harrisburg, PA, and Washington, D.C.
(Res. R-2018-5, 2/14/2018)
D-317. Repeal of Resolution R-2017-14. (Res. R-2018-6, 1/10/2018)
D-318. Requesting a Local Share Account grant. (Res. R-2018-7, 1/15/
2018)
D-319. Grant agreement signature page for the Center Street Park
project. (Res. R-2018-9, 2/14/2018)
D-320. Designating First National Community Bank (FNCB) as a
depository for funds of the Township. (Res. R-2018-10, 4/11/2018)
D-321. Requesting a Greenways, Trails, and Recreation Program (GTRP)
grant for the Center Street Park improvements project. (Res.
R-2018-11, 5/9/2018)
D-322. Authorizing execution of a master equipment lease purchase
agreement. (Res. R-2018-12, 5/9/2018)
D-323. Adopting an amendment to the Articles of Incorporation of the
Dallas Area Municipal Authority. (Res. No. R-2018-13, 6/13/2018)
D-324. Adopting the Capital Program for the Township for improvements
for Fiscal Years 2019 through 2023. (Res. No. R-2018-15, 11/14/
2018)
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:861
D-325. Authorizing the Northeastern Pennsylvania Alliance (NEPA), on
behalf of the BMCP, to make application for a grant for the BMCP
Infrastructure Improvement Project. (Res. No. R-2018-16, 12/12/
2018)
D-326. Authorizing the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors of the
Municipal Authority to sign an automated red light enforcement
reimbursement agreement. (Res. No. R-2018-17, 12/12/2018)
D-327. Requesting a Local Share Account grant of $62,438, to be used
for public safety equipment. (Res. No. R-2018-18, 12/12/2018)
D-328. Requesting a Local Share Account grant of $638,963, to be used
for a new pavilion at Center Street Park. (Res. No. R-2018-19, 12/
12/2018)
D-329. Appointing a Chief Administrative Officer for the Township Police
and Nonuniformed Pension Funds. (Res. No. R-2019-1, 1/7/2019)
D-330. Suspending member contributions to the Police Pension Fund for
calendar year 2019. (Res. No. R-2019-2, 1/7/2019)
D-331. Entering into a grant agreement with the DEP for support of
municipal recycling program activities. (Res. No. R-2019-4, 1/9/
2019)
D-332. Approving the transfer of a restaurant liquor license. (Res. No.
R-2019-5, 2/27/2019)
D-333. Executing Schedule of Equipment No. 1 to a master equipment
lease purchase agreement. (Res. No. R-2019-6, 2/13/2019)
D-334. Signing the grant agreement for the Center Street Park
Improvements Phase II project. (Res. No. R-2019-7, 3/13/2019)
D-335. Greeways, Trails, and Recreation Program grant request. (Res.
No. R-2019-9, 5/8/2019)
D-336. Executing Schedule of Equipment No. 1 to a master equipment
lease purchase agreement. (Res. No. R-2019-10, 5/8/2019)
D-337. Urging the State Legislature to amend the Right To Know Law.
(Res. No. R-2019-12, 5/8/2019)
D-338. Executing Schedule of Equipment No. 1 to a master equipment
lease purchase agreement. (Res. No. R-2019-13, 7/10/2019)
D-339. Accepting the Dallas Area Municipal Authority’s PADEP Act 537
Sewage Facilities Plan Task Activity Report (TAR) as submitted
and authorizing DAMA to complete the Act 537 Plan on the
Township’s behalf. (Res. No. R-2019-14, 7/10/2019)
D-340. Adopting the Capital Program of the Township and providing for
a capital improvement plan budget for fiscal years 2020 through
2024. (Res. No. R-2019-15, 11/13/2019)
D-341. Honoring the valiant efforts of several firefighters in saving a life.
(Res. No. R-2019-16, 10/9/2019)
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:862
D-342. Requesting a Local Share Account grant of $355,633, to be used
for a new pavilion and sensory garden at Center Street Park. (Res.
No. R-2019-17, 12/11/2019)
D-343. Approving the Township’s participation in the Back Mountain
Community Partnership’s LSA grant application for digital radio
equipment for emergency services. (Res. No. R-2019-18, 12/11/
2019)
D-344. Appointing a Chief Administrative Officer for the Township Police
and Nonuniformed Pension Funds. (Res. No. R-2020-1, 1/6/2020)
D-345. Suspending member contributions to the Police Pension Fund for
calendar year 2020. (Res. No. R-2020-2, 1/6/2020)
D-346. Amending the Municipal Facilities/Meeting Room Use Policy.
(Res. No. R-2020-3, 1/6/2020)
D-347. Approving the Township’s participation in the Back Mountain
Community Partnership’s LSA grant application for digital radio
equipment for emergency services. (Res. No. R-2020-4, 1/8/2020)
Appendix E
PLAN APPROVAL
101. Plan Approval.
E-1. Vanguard Subdivision. (Res. 8/9/1961)
E-2. Midway Manor Subdivision. (Res. 2/1/1962)
E-3. Jarrett property on Holcomb Road. (Res. 2/12/1975)
E-4. Harris Hills Acres Subdivision. (Ord. 11/10/1982)
E-5. Parkhurst Subdivision. (Res. 91-3, 2/13/1991)
E-6. Revoking the approval of the Maplecrest Subdivision, Phase II,
(Res. 1992-11, 7/8/1992)
E-7. Maplecrest Subdivision, Phase II. (Res. 1992-14, 11/11/1992)
E-8. Rescinding the denial of the proposed Windsor Farms Subdivision
plan and granting an extension. (Res. 2002-3, 4/25/2002)
E-9. Revoking the final approval of the minor subdivision of Katherine
M. Donnelly dated February 11, 2004. (Res. 2006-12, 2/15/2006)
Appendix F
PUBLIC PROPERTY
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:863
101. Public Property.
F-1. Agreed to accept Trucksville Veterans Association Building. (Res.
9/9/1959)
F-2. Agreed to sell Township building and property on Memorial
Highway to the State Highway Department. (Res. 11/8/1961)
F-3. Agreed to bids for construction of new Township building. (Res.
12/18/1963)
F-4. Agreed to sign documents to receive grant from the U.S. Home
and Housing Finance Agency for the building (F-3). (Res. 12/18/
1963)
F-5. Agreed to accept land from the Trucksville Fire Company for the
Township building. (Res. 12/18/1963)
F-6. Agreed to contracts for the new Township building. (Res. 1/6/
1964)
F-7. Agreed to pay the Trucksville Fire Company $588.42 for the land
for the Township Building. (Res. 4/8/1964)
F-8. Agreed to accept the return of the above money (F-8) to pay the
architect for fees for the design of the fire company sector in the
Township building. (Res. 4/8/1964)
F-9. Agreed to accept a gift of $2600 from Myrtle and John Funke to
brick face the Township building. (Res. 5/13/1964)
F-10. Purchased lot behind the Township building from the Lehigh
Valley Railroad for $100. (Res. 11/11/1964)
F-11. Agreed to accept a plot of land from the State (the "Big Bend" of
Harvey Lake Road). (Res. 9/26/1968)
F-12. Agreed to a twenty feet (20') easement three hundred and ten
feet (310') long from Carverton Road to the rear of the Township
property for use by the Municipal Authority. (Res. 3/10/1971)
F-13. Sold land under Township warehouse to the State for $14,400.
The Township is to remove the building. (Res. 5/12/1971)
F-14. Agreed to the bids to construct the Township Services Building.
(Res. 4/26/1972)
F-15. Transfer of land purchased from PennDot to Kingston Township
Association. (Res. 12/12/1973)
F-16. Approved a lease agreement from the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for a mini-park in Carverton Road, Trucksville, for
five years. (Res. 7/13/1977)
F-17. Approved contract for enlarging the Township building. (Res. 1/3/
1978)
F-18. Agreed to sell Township property on Route 309 to the Ambulance
Association for one dollar ($1.00). (Res. 11/29/1979)
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:864
F-19. Granting Kingston Township to acquire the North Lehigh Street
parcel, which land is to be held and used for permanent park and
recreations purposes. (Res. 85-4)
F-20. Authorizing the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Kingston
to appropriate, by eminent domain, a permanent easement over,
upon and along the following piece or parcel of land, being
premises owned by Edward Sherlinski and Susan Sherlinski, his
wife, as described in the Luzerne County Deed Book Volume No.
2026 at page 762, etc., for the purposes of the installation and
maintenance of a stormwater management facility. (Ord. 1998-3,
4/8/1998)
Appendix G
SEWERS
101. Sewers.
G-1. Authorized an agreement with Dallas Borough and Dallas
Township for a feasibility study for a sewer system. (Res. 7/13/
1960)
G-2. Authorized an agreement with Dallas Borough, and Dallas
Township for a revised sewer plant study. (Res. 3/9/1966)
G-3. Agreed to form the Back Mountain Municipal Authority for a
sewer system with Dallas Borough and Dallas Township. (Res. 4/
17/1967)
G-4. Agreed to support County-wide sewer planning in accordance
with Act 537, the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act. (Res. 7/12/
1967)
G-5. Authorizing and directing the execution and delivery of a service
agreement dated as of January 1, 1971 with Dallas Area Municipal
Authority; approving the provisions thereof; consenting to and
approving assignment thereof. (Ord. 1970-5, 12/9/1970)
G-6. Authorizing Dallas Area Municipal Authority, for purposes of its
sewer facilities, to enter in, under and upon any and all public
streets or other ways and prescribing conditions of entry;
granting the authority the right and easement to construct and
maintain such facilities under such streets and ways. (Ord.
1970-7, 12/9/1970)
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:865
G-7. Approving the plan of construction in respect of sanitary sewage
collection and treatment facilities to be constructed by Dallas
Area Municipal Authority to serve certain areas of the
Municipality and approving the estimated cost thereof as a limit
on the amount to be assessed by the Authority according to the
foot-front rule; providing that such approvals shall not preclude
benefit assessments in appropriate cases. (Ord. 1970-8, 12/9/
1970)
G-8. Approve the Sewer Authority bond issue. (Res. 12/9/1970)
G-9. Approved the plan of the Authority for sewer system. (Res. 12/21/
1970)
G-10. Approved the feasibility report for sewering: Dug Road- Carverton
Crossroads, Powder Horn West Machill Avenue, Stoneledge,
Orchard View Terrace, and White Buck Trailer Park. (Res. 8/9/
1972)
G-11. Approved the Sewer Authority Master Plan. (Res. 10/11/1972)
G-12. Approved increase in sewer rates by the Dallas Area Municipal
Authority. (Res. 12/11/1974)
G-13. Approving the report required by section 206 of the Local
Government Unit Debt Act; directing the filing of such report with
the Department of Community Affairs to qualify that portion of the
gross lease rental debt of the Township securing bonds proposed
to be issued which may be excluded from such gross lease rental
debt as self-liquidating debt for the purposes of establishing the
net lease rental debt of the Township and determining its debt
limit. (Ord. 1977-45, 8/30/1977)
G-14. Approving Step I Sewage Facility Plan of the Dallas Area
Municipal Authority as prepared by Roy F. Weston, Inc. (Res. 87-9,
8/12/1987)
G-15. Adopting and submitting to DER the official sewage facilities plan
of the Kachmar subdivision, prepared by Andrew Kachmar. (Res.
1992-4, 4/8/1992)
G-16. Adopting and submitted to DER the official sewage facilities plan
of the Hillbrook Farms subdivision, prepared by Hillbrook Farms
Corp. (Res. 1992-10, 8/12/1992)
G-17. Adopting and submitting to DER the official sewage facilities plan
of the Medowcrest Re-plat lots. (Res. 1995-7A, 11/8/1995)
G-18. Adopting and submitting to Department of Environmental
Protection a revision to the "Official Sewage Facilities Plan" of the
Brown Manor Sewer System, prepared by Dallas Area Municipal
Authority. (Res. 1998-7, 8/12/1998)
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:866
G-19. Adopting the Land Development Sewage Facilities Agreement as
promulgated by the Dallas Area Municipal Authority on 9/14/2006
as applicable to and binding on the development and construction
of residential structures in the Township and repealing a prior
Developers' Sewage Facilities Agreement. (Res. 2007-1, 1/10/
2007)
Appendix H
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
101. Streets and Sidewalks.
Street Activity
Ordinance or
Resolution
Alfred Road Laying cut/paving 91-14
Armstrong Drive Acceptance 9/8/1976
Atherholt Drive
(formerly Cutten
Road)
Avalon Court Acceptance 2013-1
Beech Street Acceptance 4/4/1925
Widening, grading 7/13/1960
Repaving 3/14/1973
Accepting from Goeringer
Avenue to Hillcrest Avenue for a
length of 557 feet and 20-foot
width declared to be a public
road of the Township with a
right-of-way of 33 feet
1998-4
Accepting from Franklin Street to
Glenview Avenue for a length of
515 feet and 20-foot width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
of 33 feet
1998-4
Belford Street Accepting from Lehigh Street to
end for a length of 500 feet and
20-foot width declared to be a
public road of the Township with
a right-of-way of 33 feet
1998-4
Beverly Avenue Acceptance 10/9/1968
Acceptance 8/11/1971
Acceptance 5/21/1973
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:867
Street Activity
Ordinance or
Resolution
Repaving 6/12/1974
Bramblewood
Drive
Laying out/opening 92-5
Breeze Way Opening 89-2
Brook Street Changed to Laurel Lane 1/3/1961
Bunker Hill Road Paving 5/10/1961
Paving 5/9/1962
Accepting from Carverton Road
to Dug Road for a length of
12,140 feet and 20-foot width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
width of 33 feet
1998-4
Butternut Road Acceptance 10/9/1963
Acceptance 12/8/1982
Carverton Road Agreed to state plan 11/8/1967
Sidewalk construction/
maintenance
R-1984-1
Cedar Avenue Acceptance 4/4/1925
Accepting from Wood Street to
Beech Street for a length of 980
feet and 19-foot width declared
to be a public road of the
Township with a right-of-way of
33 feet
1998-4
Center Street Returned by state 11/12/1975
Center Street,
East
Acceptance 95-1
Chestnut Street Changed to Hill Street 9/9/1959
Church Road Resurfacing 7/13/1960
Surfacing 10/12/1960
Paving 5/9/1962
Vacating 8/3/1964
Paving 7/1/1971
Renaming to West Church Road R-2010-6, 4/14/2010
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:868
Street Activity
Ordinance or
Resolution
Church Road
(Carver)
Accepting from D.T. Line to Mt.
Olivet Road for a length of 7,630
feet and 20-foot width declared
to be a public road of the
Township with a right-of-way of
33 feet
1998-4
Church Road
(Trucks)
Accepting from Route 209 to
Hillside for a length of 2,880 feet
and 20-foot width declared to be
a public road of the Township
with a right-of-way of 33 feet
1998-4
Church Street Resurfacing 8/28/1963
Circle Drive 1 Acceptance 3/12/1975
Circle Drive 2 Acceptance 3/12/1975
Clearview
Avenue
Acceptance 5/14/1975
Cliffside Avenue Widening, grading 7/13/1960
Opening 90-2
Clover Lane Acceptance 12/8/1982
Collins Avenue Acceptance 9/8/1976
Coon Road Accepting from F.T. Line to
Church Road for a length of
2,430 feet and 18-foot width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
of 33 feet
1998-4
Country Road Laying out/opening 92-3
Crane Road Acceptance 10/16/1974
Cutten Road Paving 5/10/1961
Changed to Atherholt Drive 10/11/1961
Davis Street Paving portion 8/9/1961
Repaving 5/9/1962
Accepting from Pioneer Avenue
to end for a length of 1,455 feet
and 18-foot width declared to be
a public road of the Township
with a right-of-way of 33 feet
1998-4
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:869
Street Activity
Ordinance or
Resolution
Division Street
(formerly Maple
Street, in
Shaverstown)
Accepting from Main Street to
end for a length of 830 feet and
18-foot width declared to be a
public road of the Township with
a right-of-way of 33 feet
1998-4
Dolores Road Acceptance 2/11/1981
Elinore Street Acceptance 4/27/1966
Ellen Drive Acceptance 3/10/1965
Paving 7/1/1971
Ellen Street Acceptance 4/27/1966
Elm Terrace Paving 5/9/1962
Evergreen Street Acceptance 8/2/1930
Accepting from W. Center Street
to Pioneer Avenue for a length of
541 feet and 20-foot width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
of 33 feet
1998-4
Fern Ridge
Court
Acceptance, in the Fern Ridge
Subdivision
99-12
Field Ridge
Drive
Laying out/opening 92-13
Fire Cut Road Acceptance 11/7/1973
Vacating 8/13/1975
Acceptance 11/10/1976
Width (by court order) R-87-14
Accepting from Bunker Hill Road
to end for a length of 4,160 feet
and 18-foot width declared to be
a public road of the Township
with a right-of-way of 33 feet
1998-4
Frangorma Drive Acceptance 12/14/1960
Acceptance 2/1/1962
Acceptance 12/12/19962
Franklin Street Acceptance 8/2/1930
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:870
Street Activity
Ordinance or
Resolution
Paving 5/10/1961
Repaving 5/9/1962
Franklin Street
Bridge
Plans approved 1/28/80
Repaired 5/14/1980
Franklin Street,
(East)
Accepting from Wood Street to
Route 309 for a length of 3,040
feet and 20-foot width declared
to be a public road of the
Township with a right-of-way of
33 feet
1998-4
Franklin Street,
(West)
Accepting from Route 309 to
Ferguson Avenue for a length of
245 feet and 20-foot width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
of 33 feet
1998-4
Genoa Lane Opening 89-2
Opening 90-15
Glenview Avenue Acceptance 4/9/1975
Acceptance as boundary with
Dallas Township
10/12/1977
Goeringer
Avenue
Acceptance 4/4/1925
Paving 5/10/1961
Accepting from Glenview Avenue
to Center Street for a length of
1,945 feet and 20-foot width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
width of 33 feet
1998-4
Grace Street Changed to Vine Street 1/3/1961
Grandview
Avenue
Acceptance 7/13/1976
Green Road
Street
Accepting from Mt. Olivet Road
to Manor Drive for a length of
7,400 feet and 18-foot width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
of 33 feet
1998-4
Greenpond Road Acceptance 1/16/1974
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:871
Street Activity
Ordinance or
Resolution
Acceptance 1/3/1979
Greystone Road Acceptance 2/11/2003
Harford Road Acceptance 1/10/1979
Harford Street Acceptance 12/21/1970
Repaving 6/12/1974
Harris Hill Road Surfacing 9/9/1959
Paving portion 8/9/1978
Acceptance 95-1
Accepting from Route 309 to
Manor Drive for a length of
11,580 feet and 20-foot width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
of 33 feet
1998-4
Hazeltine Street Accepting from Lehigh Street to
end for a length of 440 feet and
18-foot width declared to be a
public road of the Township with
a right-of-way of 33 feet
1998-4
Heights Drive Acceptance 10/11/1972
Repaving 3/14/1973
Repaving 6/12/1974
Hellers Grove
Street
Acceptance 4/27/1966
Repaving 3/14/1973
Hickory Street Acceptance 8/14/1968
Taken over by state 2/11/1970
Highland Avenue Acceptance 2/4/1931
Paving 7/19/1961
Paving 5/9/1962
Returned by state 11/12/1975
Hill Street
(formerly
Chestnut Street)
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:872
Street Activity
Ordinance or
Resolution
Accepting from Staub Road to
Carverton Road for a length of
565 feet and 19-foot width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
of 33 feet
1998-4
Hillcrest Avenue Acceptance 4/4/1925
Repaving 3/14/1973
Street Accepting from Beech Street to
Wood Street for a length of 1,110
feet and 20-foot width declared
to be a public road of the
Township with a right-of-way of
33 feet
1998-4
Hillside Road Acceptance 4/3/1926
Hillside Street Acceptance 2/4/1931
Hillside Returned by state 11/12/1975
Hilltop Circle Acceptance 12/21/1970
Holcomb Road Resurfacing 7/13/1960
Accepting from Pioneer Avenue
to Route 309 for a length of 615
feet and 20-foot width declared
to be a public road of the
Township with a right-of-way of
33 feet
1998-4
Holly Street Accepting from Carverton Road
to Staub Road for a length of 700
feet and 20-foot width declared
to be a public road of the
Township with a right-of-way of
33 feet
1998-4
Howell Road Repaving portion 3/14/1973
Inman Street Acceptance 4/9/1975
Irving Avenue Acceptance 8/5/1922
Ivy Drive Opening 1996-1
James Street
(formerly
Orchard Street)
James Street Repaving 5/9/1962
Resurfacing 8/28/1963
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:873
Street Activity
Ordinance or
Resolution
Accepting from Center Street to
end for a length of 740 feet and
10-foot width declared to be a
public road of the Township with
a right-of-way of 33 feet
1998-4
Johnson Avenue Repaving 5/9/1962
Kenilsworth
Road
Acceptance 11/8/1978
Knob Hill Repaving 5/9/1962
Krispin Hill Paving 7/1/1971
Repaving 6/12/1974
Accepting from Mt. Olivet Road
to D.T. Line for a length of 4,915
feet and 20-foot width declared
to be a public road of the
Township with a right-of-way of
33 feet
1998-4
Lawn Street Acceptance 12/21/1970
Repaving 3/14/1973
Repaving 6/12/1974
Lakeview Drive Acceptance 1/11/1978
Lantern Hill
Road
Opening 90-17
Laurel Lane
(formerly Brook
Street)
Layaou Street Acceptance 1/11/1978
Paving 5/9/1979
Legend Road,
North
Accepting the dedication of
rights-of-way in accordance with
the subdivision plans of Sleepy
Hollow plot of lots
2002-3
Legend Road,
South
Accepting the dedication of
rights-of-way in accordance with
the subdivision plans of Sleepy
Hollow plot of lots
2002-3
Lehigh Street Surfacing 9/9/1959
Resurfacing 8/28/1963
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:874
Street Activity
Ordinance or
Resolution
Accepting from Harris Hill Road
to Center Street for a length of
5,750 feet and 19-foot width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
of 33 feet
1998-4
Lewis Road Paving 5/9/1962
Limewood Road Acceptance 10/9/1963
Lincoln Drive Paving 5/10/1961
Accepting from Mt. Airy Road to
end for a length of 975 and
20-foot width declared to be a
public road of the Township with
a right-of-way of 33 feet
1998-4
Lohman Street Acceptance 11/8/1972
Repaving 3/14/1973
Main Street Accepting from Route 309 to D.T.
Line for a length of 5,535 feet
and 19-foot width declared to be
a public road of the Township
with a right-of-way of 33 feet
1998-4
Longdale Avenue Repaving 3/14/1973
Louise Road Acceptance 2/11/1981
Manor Drive
(formerly Dug
Road)
Maple Leaf Road Opening 1996-1
Maple Street Acceptance 3/7/1925
Surfacing 9/9/1959
Surfacing 11/9/1960
Maple Street
(Shavertown)
Changed to Division Street 1/3/1961
Surveyed, grading 6/8/1960
Paving 5/9/1962
Mary Street Acceptance 12/13/1972
Mathers Drive Named 1/3/1961
Acceptance 12/21/1970
Meadowcrest Returned by state 11/12/1975
Melrose Drive Paving 5/10/1961
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:875
Street Activity
Ordinance or
Resolution
Moorgan Ridge
Circle
Opening 90-17
Mt. Airy Road Resurfacing 7/13/1960
Mt. Airy Road
(East)
Accepting from Perrin Avenue to
Pioneer Avenue for a length of
435 feet and 19-foot width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
of 33 feet
1998-4
Mt. Airy Road
(West)
Accepting from Pioneer Avenue
to William Avenue for a length of
2,445 feet and 18-foot width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
of 33 feet
1998-4
Mt. Greenwood
Road
Changed to Pioneer Avenue 3/7/1960
Oak Drive Acceptance 5/14/1975
Oak Lane Changed to Oak Street 1/11/1961
Oak Street
(Trucksville)
Changed to Doran Drive 1/3/1961
Oak Street
(formerly Oak
Lane)
Repaving 5/9/1962
Oak Street Accepting from Carverton Road
to Harris Hill Road for a length of
760 feet and 20-foot width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
of 33 feet
1998-4
Old Carverton
Road
Acceptance 11/11/1981
Accepting from Carverton Road
to Carverton Road for a length of
1,135 feet and 20 feet width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
of 33 feet
1998-4
Old Dug Road Vacating 2016-3
Ondish Road Acceptance 95-1
Orchard Road Acceptance 6/4/1927
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:876
Street Activity
Ordinance or
Resolution
Orchard Street Changed to James Street 1/3/1961
Orchard Street Accepting from Lehigh Street to
Harris Hill Road for a length of
875 feet and 18-foot width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
of 33 feet
1998-4
Perrin Avenue
(formerly
Terrace Drive)
Acceptance 12/14/1960
Acceptance 11/8/1961
Pine Circle Drive Acceptance 4/10/1974
Pine Drive Acceptance 5/14/1975
Pioneer Avenue
(formerly Mt.
Greenwood
Road)
Post Road Repaving 3/14/1973
Accepting from Cliffside Avenue
to Pave Ends for a length of 500
feet and 19-foot width declared
to be a public road of the
Township with a right-of-way of
33 feet
1998-4
Railroad Street Name changed to Franklin 8/4/1923
Reynolds Street Acceptance 8/15/1922
Rice Street Accepting from Orchard Street to
end for a length of 1,165 feet and
20-foot width declared to be a
public road of the Township with
a right-of-way of 33 feet
1998-4
Ridge Street Acceptance 6/4/1927
Accepting from Center Street to
end for a length of 575 feet and
19-foot width declared to be a
public road of the Township with
a right-of-way of 33 feet
1998-4
Route 40-056 Vacating 3/25/1964
Route LR-936 Accept portion (Sta. 69+99 to
147+78)
R-1986-13 & 14
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:877
Street Activity
Ordinance or
Resolution
Roushey Street Paving 5/10/1961
Accepting from Pioneer Avenue
to W. Center Street for a length
of 875 feet and 20-foot width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
of 33 feet
1998-4
Seghi Street Acceptance 9/4/1925
Shadetree Road Acceptance 1/18/1961
Acceptance 1/6/1974
Shaver Avenue Acceptance 5/6/1922
Accepted additional 3/7/1925
Accepting from Main Street to
Main Street for a length of 2,170
feet and 20-foot width declared
to be a public road of the
Township with a right-of-way of
33 feet
1998-4
Sickler Hills Repaving 6/12/1974
Sickler Road Accepting from Mt. Olivet Road
to F.T. Line for a length of 2,820
feet and 20-foot width declared
to be a public road of the
Township with a right-of-way of
33 feet
1998-4
Skyline Drive
(formerly
Summit Street)
Acceptance 1/11/1978
Somersfield
Drive
Opening 90-16
Somersfield
Lane
Opening 90-16
Spring Garden
Street
Acceptance 2/4/1931
Spring Road Acceptance 10/16/1974
Springs Street Repaving 5/9/1962
Stafford Street Acceptance 8/5/1922
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:878
Street Activity
Ordinance or
Resolution
Stang Street Accepting from Shagbark Drive
to Lehigh Street for a length of
400 feet and 20-foot width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
of 33 feet
1998-4
Staub Street Surfacing 9/9/1959
Summit Street Acceptance 4/4/1925
Changed to Skyline Drive 1/3/1961
Sutton Road Repaving 5/9/1962
Accepting from Pioneer Avenue
to J.T. Line for a length of 2,470
feet and 18-foot width declared
to be a public road of the
Township with a right-of-way of
33 feet
1998-4
Tamanini Drive Acceptance 2/11/1981
Laying out/paving 91-14
Terrace Avenue Acceptance 12/14/1960
Acceptance 11/8/1961
Repaving 5/9/1962
Acceptance 12/12/1962
Resurfacing 8/28/1963
Terrace Drive Widening, grading 7/13/1960
Changed to Perrin Avenue 1/3/1961
Tiller Road Opening 89-2
Opening 90-21
Timber Grove
Road
Opening 90-17
Timothy Road Acceptance 12/8/1982
Unnamed
streets, Midway
Manor
Adoption 10/9/1963
Unnamed streets
(10)
Taken over by state 9/9/1970
Unnamed streets
in Shavertown
(3)
Acceptance 6/3/1922
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:879
Street Activity
Ordinance or
Resolution
Valley View
Drive
Acceptance 8/7/1963
Acceptance 10/9/1963
Valley View
Drive
(Extension)
Vacating 90-24
Vacating 91-12
Village Drive Acceptance 9/8/1976
Vine Street
(formerly Grace
Street)
Repaving 5/9/1962
Vine Street Accepting from Lehigh Street to
Shaver Avenue for a length of
510 feet and 20-foot width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
of 33 feet
1998-4
Vonderheid Paving 5/10/1961
Accepting from Pioneer Avenue
to Stafford Street for a length of
480 feet and 19-foot width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
of 33 feet
1998-4
Wakefield Road Acceptance 2/11/2003
Warden Avenue Acceptance 7/7/1923
Repaving 5/9/1962
Accepting from Pioneer Avenue
to Pioneer Avenue for a length of
1,970 feet and 18-foot width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
of 33 feet
1998-4
Wellington Road Acceptance 11/8/1978
William Avenue Accepting from Mt. Airy Road to
end for a length of 1,310 feet and
18-foot width declared to be a
public road of the Township with
a right-of-way of 33 feet
1998-4
William Street Acceptance 12/21/1970
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:880
Street Activity
Ordinance or
Resolution
Acceptance 9/13/1972
Repaving 6/12/1974
Windy Drive Acceptance 2013-1
Wood Avenue Acceptance 4/4/1925
Woodbine Road Acceptance 11/8/1961
Woodbine Road Accepting the dedication of
rights-of-way in accordance with
the subdivision plans of Sleepy
Hollow plot of lots
2002-3
Woodtip Drive Acceptance 4/27/1966
Youngblood
Avenue
Acceptance 4/4/1925
Repaving 3/14/1973
Zinn Street Widening, grading 7/13/1960
Accepting from Pioneer Avenue
to Stafford Street for a length of
470 feet and 20-foot width
declared to be a public road of
the Township with a right-of-way
of 33 feet
1998-4
Appendix I
STREET LIGHTING
101. Street Lighting.
I-1. Agreement with Luzerne County Gas and Electric Corporation
to provide streetlights for the villages of Shavertown and
Trucksville. (11/5/1927)
I-2. Agreement for a five year streetlighting contract with the U.G.I.
Corporation. (Res. 6/6/1963)
I-3. Agreement for a five year streetlighting contract with the U.G.I.
Corporation. (Res. 3/12/1969)
I-4. Agreement for a ten (10) year streetlighting contract with the
U.G.I. Corporation, Luzerne Electric Division, Kingston. (12/8/
1980)
Appendix J
WATER
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:881
101. Water.
J-1. Approved the plans of the Water Commission to survey water
systems of the Back Mountain. (Ros. 5/12/1971)
J-2. Protesting a proposed rate increase of the Pennsylvania Suburban
Water Company. (Res. 2004-1, 1/14/2004)
J-3. Protesting a proposed rate increase of the Aqua Pennsylvania
Water Company. (Res. 2011-19, 12/14/2011)
Appendix K
ZONING, PRIOR ORDINANCES
101. Zoning, Prior Ordinances.
K-1. Zoning ordinance. (Ord. 8/8/1962)
K-2. Amending above. (Res. 12/12/1962)
K-3. Re-zoned Carverton Road area from Commercial to Residential.
(Res. 6/15/1964)
K-4. Re-zoned land of K-3 to refer to only north side of Carverton Road.
(Res. 7/8/1964)
K-5. Re-zoned land on the south side of Carverton Road from A-1 to
R-1 and the lot of Therm-O-Tek from R-1 to Industrial. (Res. 5/12/
1966)
K-6. Re-zoned 10-1/4 acres in vicinity of Crane Road and Harris Hill
Road from A-1 to R-1. (Res. 7/10/1968)
K-7. Amending the zoning ordinance. (Res. 6/30/1969)
K-8. Approved an R-3 zone for multiple dwellings. (Res. 10/8/1969)
K-9. Amending the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 1970-4, 10/14/1970)
K-10. Re-zoned Main Street of Shavertown as R-3. (Res. 2/9/1972)
K-11. Re-zoned the Isaac Plot from R-1 to R-3. (Res. 4/12/1972)
K-12. Re-zoned the property at 29 West Center Street, Shavertown,
from R-2 to B-2. (Res. 4/12/1972)
K-13. Re-zoned area bordering Memorial Highway and Franklin Street
from R-2 to B-2. (Res. 9/13/1972)
K-14. Approved a new zoning ordinance. (Res. 6/13/1973)
K-15. Re-zoned Donnelly Plot from A-1 to R-1. (Res. 7/11/1973)
K-16. Approved Study of Land Use by Wilbur Smith and Associates.
(Res. 9/12/1973)
K-17. Re-zoned property of John Gorda, East Center Street from A-1 to
B-2. (Res. 2/13/1974)
K-18. Re-zoned property of William DeAngelo on Rowley Street from R-2
to R-3. (Res. 4/10/1974)
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:882
K-19. Re-zoned 64 acres of Dr. Lombardo from A-1 to R-1. (Res. 9/11/
1974)
K-20. Re-zoned property on Roushey Road (former Laux Property) from
R-2 to B-1. (Res. 2/21/1975)
Appendix L
ZONING, RECLASSIFICATION
101. Zoning, Reclassification.
L-1. Re-zoned two R-1 areas near Conyingham Farm on Hillside Road
to be A-1 except for an area near Unclaimed Freight. (Res. 10/13/
1976)
L-2. Re-zoned 37 acres — Carverton Road from A-1 to R-1. (Res. 11/
10/1976)
L-3. Re-zoned 3.5 acres of the corner of Dug Road and Carverton Road
from R-1 to B-1. (Res. 6/8/1977)
L-4. Re-zoned property of Mr. Mathers on North Memorial Highway
from R-2 to B-1. (Res. 7/13/1977)
L-5. Re-zoned 12.8 acres on Green Road for Charles Gelso from A-1 to
R-1. (Res. 7/12/1978)
L-6. Re-zoned F. Gordon Matthews Memorial Highway Property from
R-2 to B-2. (Res. 10/10/1979)
L-7. Re-zoned the property at 30 Carverton Road as B-1. (Res. 1/25/
1982)
L-8. Re-zoned the Hickory Corner Mall section to allow entertainment
— electronic machines. (Res. 2/22/1982)
L-9. Re-zoned Carverton Road on both sides of Route 309 to include
the Roux Property as B-1. (Res. 3/10/1982)
L-10. Re-zoned to extend the present R-2 zone from its present location
on North Lehigh Street south to the intersection of North Lehigh
Street and Stang Street, east on Stang Street to Shagbark, north
on Shagbark to the present R-2 zone. (Res. 9/16/1982)
L-11. Re-zoned property of Kenzakaski Brothers in the Bunker Hill
section from C-1 Conservation to M-1 Mining. (2/23/1983)
L-12. Re-zoned of Lot #15, 73 N. Memorial Highway, from a R-2 to a
B-2. (Ord. 86-1, 3/12/1986)
L-13. Re-zoned property of Parmalee, 325 Howell Road from A-1 to R-1.
(Ord. 86-5B)
L-14. Rezoning of 8.5 acres known and designated as a portion of the
Gelso Estate from an A-1 to a R-1. (Ord. 87-1, 2/13/1987)
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:883
L-15. Rezoned forty-two (42) acres of land, more or less, owed by Althea
Spencer Crane and situate on Crane Road is hereby redesignated
on the official zoning map of the Township of Kingston as a single
family Residential zone (R-1) from its previous designation as an
A-1. (Ord. 87-3, 6/10/1987)
L-16. Rezoning the land of Eugene F. Phillips from C-1 and R-1 to A-1.
(Ord. 87-7, 12/19/1987)
L-17. Rezoning the land of Thomas H. and Florence A. Zimmerman from
A-1 to R-1. (Ord. 88-7, 6/15/1988)
L-18. Rezoning the land of Sheldon T. and Almenia R. Evans from R-1 to
B-2. (Ord. 88-8, 7/13/1988)
L-19. Rezoning the land of Richard D. Culver from C-1 to A-1. (Ord.
88-9, 7/13/1988)
L-20. Rezoning the land of Sheldon E. and Ethel S. Mac Avoy from R-2
to B-1. (Ord. 88-12, 9/14/1988)
L-21. Rezoning the land of John A. and Leona G. Mikina from R-2 to B-1.
(Ord. 88-13, 9/14/1988)
L-22. Rezoning the land of James G. Haughwout from A-1 to R-1. (Ord.
88-14, 12/14/1988)
L-23. Rezoning the land of John P. Brdaric, Jr. and Anne L. Brdaric from
C-1 to M-1. (Ord. 90-4, 5/9/1990)
L-24. Rezoning the land of Louis A. Mikolaichik, Sharon Kowalek, Albert
Vitonovec, Frank Manusky, William Smith and Mark Mikolaichik
from C-1 to R-1. (Ord. 90-23, 1/9/1991)
L-25. Rezoning the land of Emeline Smith, Earl Folk, Dale Folk, Harry
and Anna Folk, and Samuel J. Latona from a C-1 to A-1. (Ord. 91-3,
3/13/1991)
L-26. Redrafting the Zoning Map to provide for two (2) areas along
South Memorial Highway to be included within a General
Commercial District (B-2). (Ord. 91-4, 6/12/1991)
L-27. Rezoning the land of Michael D. Lolesar, et ux from a C-1 to R-1.
(Ord. 91-4, 3/13/1991)
L-28. Rezoning the land of Robert McLaughlin, et ux from a R-2 to B-2.
(Ord. 91-8, 11/13/1991)
L-29. Rezoning the land of Joseph Gallagher and Kay Warden from a B-2
to R-1. (Ord. 91-9, 11/13/1991)
L-30. Rezoning the land of the estate of Sheldon T. Evans from a
Residential (R-1) District to a General Commercial (B-2) District.
(Ord. 92-16, 1/13/1993)
L-31. Rezoning the land of Arthur Kerpovich, et ux. from an Agricultural
(A-1) District to a Residential (R-I) District. (Ord. 93-2, 7/14/1993)
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:884
L-32. Rezoning of certain premises known as the land of Kenneth
Lembke and Victoria Lembke, his wife, from a Conservation (C-1)
District to an Agricultural (A-1) District. (Ord. 95-7, 11/8/1995)
L-33. Rezoning of certain premises known and designated as the lands
of Pizza Perfect, Inc., from a Neighborhood Commercial (B-1) and
Residential (R-2) Districts to a Neighborhood Commercial (B-1)
District. (Ord. 97-6, 11/12/1997)
L-34. Rezoning the land of Peter Kerdesky and Joyce A. Kerdesky from
an R-3 to a B-1. (Ord. 99-10, 11/10/1999)
L-35. Rezoning of certain premises known as the lands of Dale P. Culver
from their previous designation of General Commercial (B-2) and
Conservation (C-1) Districts to an entirely General Commercial
(B-2) District. (Ord. 99-11, 11/10/1999)
L-36. Rezoning of certain premises known and designated as the lands
of Ben M. Ortega and Elizabeth H. Ortega, from a Single-Family
Residential (R-1) District to an Agricultural (A-1) District. (Ord.
2001-3, 8/8/2001)
L-37. Rezoning of certain premises known and designated as the lands
of Raymond Yagolski from a Conservation (C-1) District to an
Agricultural (A-1) District. (Ord. 2001-4, 10/10/2001)
L-38. Rezoning of certain premises known and designated as lands of
William Zukosky from Two-Family Residential District (R-2) to
General Commercial District (B-2). (Ord. 2005-4, 9/14/2005)
L-39. Rezoning of certain premises known and designated as lands of
Edward McCabe and Diane McCabe from Two-Family Residential
District (R-2) to General Commercial District (B-2). (Ord. 2005-4,
9/14/2005)
L-40. Rezoning of certain premises known and designated as lands of
Dallas Design, Inc., from Single-Family Residential District (R-1)
to Neighborhood Commercial District (B-2). (Ord. 2006-4, 7/12/
2006)
L-41. Rezoning of certain premises known and designated as lands of
the Township of Kingston from Single-Family Residential District
(R-1) to Neighborhood Commercial District (B-2). (Ord. 2006-5, 7/
12/2006)
L-42. Rezoning of certain premises known and designated as lands of
the estate of Elizabeth Wardan from a Two-Family Residential
District (R-2) to a General Commercial District (B-2). (Ord.
2008-5, 12/10/2008)
L-43. Rezoning of certain premises known and designated as the lands
of Dallas Design, Inc., from a Single- Family Residential District
(R-1) to a Neighborhood Commercial District (B-1). (Ord. No.
2019-4, 11/13/2019)
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:885
L-44. Rezoning of certain premises known and designated as lands of
Edward and Diane McCabe from a Two-Family Residential District
(R-2) to a General Commercial District (B-2). (Ord. No. 2020-1, 2/
12/2020)
Keys
Chapter KO
KEY TO THE DISPOSITION OF ALL ORDINANCES AND
RESOLUTIONS
101. Key to the Disposition of All Ordinances and Resolutions.
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
3/20/1922 Tax Rate 1922
5/6/1922 Appendix H
6/3/1922 Appendix H
8/5/1922 Appendix H
—/—/—— Appendix H
3/17/1923 Tax Rate 1923
7/7/1923 Appendix H
8/4/1923 Appendix H
3/7/1925 Appendix H
4/4/1925 Appendix H
3/6/1926 Tax Rate 1926
4/3/1926 Appendix H
9/4/1926 Appendix H
3/5/1927 Tax Rate 1927
6/4/1927 Appendix H
11/5/1927 Appendix I-1
11/5/1927 Appendix I-1
3/3/1928 Tax Rate 1928
3/4/1929 Tax Rate 1929
12/28/1929 Superseded by 1985-1
3/22/1930 Tax Rate 1930
4/19/1930 Expired
8/2/1930 Appendix H
2/4/1931 Appendix H
3/2/1931 Tax Rate 1931
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:886
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
3/5/1932 Tax Rate 1932
12/6/1950 Superseded by 1985-1
12/6/1950 Superseded by 6/11/1975A
10/7/1953 Superseded by 73-10
R-10/7/1953 Chapter 1 § 1220
10/7/1953 Superseded by 4/14/1965
3/27/1957 Chapter 24 §§ 201 to 209
9/9/1959 Appendix H
9/9/1959 Superseded by 1985-1
R-9/9/1959 Appendix F-1
10/14/1959 Superseded by 1985-1
10/14/1959 Appendix H
3/9/1960 Appendix H
3/23/1960 Superseded by 1985-1
4/13/1960 Trailer Tax 1960
4/14/1960 Superseded by 1985-1
4/13/1960 Chapter 24 §§ 301 to 303
4/13/1960 Superseded by 1985-1
4/13/1960 Superseded by 1985-1
5/12/1960 Chapter 1 §§ 1231 to 1233
6/8/1960 Appendix H
7/13/1960 Appendix H
7/13/1960 Appendix H
7/13/1960 Superseded by 1985-1
7/13/1960 Appendix G-1
7/13/1960 Appendix H
8/10/1960 Superseded by 1985-1
10/12/1960 Appendix H
10/12/1960 Superseded by 1985-1
11/9/1960 Appendix H
12/14/1960 Appendix H
12/14/1960 Chapter 1 §§ 419 to 421
12/14/1960 Repealer
1/3/1961 Superseded by 6/11/1975
Appendix H
1/11/1961 Appendix H
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:887
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
2/8/1961 Per Capita Tax 1961
4/1/1961 Superseded by 1985-1
4/12/1961 Superseded by 70-3
4/12/1961 Superseded by 1985-1
4/12/1961 Superseded by 1985-1
5/10/1961 Appendix H
6/14/1961 Superseded by 6/11/1975B
7/19/1961 Appendix H
R-8/9/1961 Appendix E-1
8/9/1961 Appendix H
8/9/1961 Superseded by 1985-1
9/13/1961 Superseded by 1985-1
10/11/1961 Superseded by 1985-1
Appendix H
11/8/1961 Appendix F-2
11/8/1961 Appendix H
1/10/1962 Appendix H
R-2/1/1962 Appendix E-2
2/1/1962 Appendix H
5/9/1962 Superseded by 1985-1
5/9/1962 Appendix H
8/8/1962 Appendix K-1
R-10/31/1962 Appendix D-2
R-10/31/1962 Appendix D-3
11/14/1962 Superseded by 3/13/1963
12/12/1962 Repealed by 1985-1
12/12/1962 Appendix K-2
12/12/1962 Appendix H
3/13/1962 Repealed by 1985-1
3/20/1963 Chapter 24 § 501
5/8/1963 Superseded by 1985-1
5/28/1963 Appendix C-1
6/6/1963 Appendix I-2
7/24/1963 Superseded by 1985-1
8/7/1963 Appendix H
8/14/1963 Superseded by 1985-1
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:888
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
8/28/1963 Appendix H
8/24/1963 Appendix D-4
9/25/1963 Superseded by 1985-1
10/9/1963 Chapter 21 § 305
10/9/1963 Appendix H
10/9/1963 Appendix H
10/12/1963 Appendix D-5
11/13/1963 Superseded by 81-9
12/18/1963 Appendix F-3
12/18/1963 Appendix F-4
12/18/1963 Appendix F-5
1/6/1964 Superseded by 6/11/1975
1/6/1964 Appendix F-6
3/25/1964 Appendix H
4/8/1964 Appendix F-7
4/8/1964 Appendix F-8
5/13/1964 Appendix F-9
R-6/15/1964 Appendix K-3
R-7/8/1964 Appendix K-4
8/3/1964 Appendix H
11/11/1964 Appendix F-10
1/4/1965 Superseded by 1985-1
2/10/1965 Superseded by 1985-1
3/10/1965 Appendix B-1
3/10/1965 Appendix H
4/14/1965 Superseded by 1985-1
6/8/1965 Superseded by 1985-1
12/8/1965 Superseded by 1985-1
1/26/1966 Repealed by 2/9/1966
2/9/1966 Chapter 24 § 301
2/9/1966 Repealer
R-3/9/1966 Appendix G-2
4/27/1966 Appendix H
R-5/12/1966 Appendix K-5
10/12/1966 Superseded by 1985-1
11/9/1966 Superseded 86-2
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:889
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
11/28/1966 Superseded by 77-46
R-4/6/1967 Appendix G-3
R-4/17/1967 Appendix K-6
R-7/12/1967 Appendix G-4
R-8/9/1967 Appendix D-6
11/8/1967 Appendix H
2/14/1968 Superseded by 1985-1
2/21/1968 Superseded by 1985-1
6/12/1968 Superseded by 1985-1
R-7/10/1968 Appendix K-6
8/14/1968 Appendix H
R-8/14/1968 Appendix D-7
R-9/26/1968 Appendix F-11
10/9/1968 Repealed by 2017-2
10/9/1968 Superseded by 83-4
10/9/1968 Appendix H
11/13/1968 Superseded by 1985-1
11/15/1968 Superseded by 6/11/1975
12/11/1968 Chapter 1 § 428
12/26/1968 Tax Rate 1969
2/12/1969 Appendix D-8
3/12/1969 Appendix I-3
6/30/1969 Appendix K-7
7/30/1969 Chapter 1 §§ 1201 to 1212, 1214,
1215
§ 1213 Superseded by 2004-1
9/10/1969 Appendix D-9
10/8/1969 Appendix K-8
10/8/1969 Superseded by 74-21
12/10/1969 Appendix D-10
1/6/1970 Superseded by 6/11/1975
2/11/1970 Repealer
2/11/1970 Appendix H
2/11/1970 Superseded by 6/11/1975
3/11/1970 Superseded by 6/11/1975
4/8/1970 Missing
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:890
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
R-6/10/1970 Appendix D-11
7/8/1970 Appendix D-12
70-2 Repealed by 94-11
9/9/1970 Appendix H
70-3 Repealed by 1985-1
70-4 Appendix K-9
11/11/1970 Superseded by 1985-1
R-11/11/1970 Appendix D-13
R-5, 12/9/1970 Appendix G-5
R-6, 12/9/1970 Chapter 18 §§ 101 to 108
R-7, 12/9/1970 Appendix G-6
R-8, 12/9/1970 Appendix G-7
R-12/9/1970 Appendix G-8
12/21/1970 Appendix G-9
12/21/1970 Appendix H
12/21/1970 Chapter 1 § 428
1/13/1971 Superseded by 6/11/1975
1/13/1971 Appendix B-2
3/10/1971 Appendix H
R-3/10/1971 Appendix G-9
4/14/1971 Superseded by 1985-1
4/14/1971 Chapter 1 §§ 481 to 483
5/12/1971 Appendix F-13
R-5/12/1971 Appendix J-1
R-6/16/1971 Appendix G-14
7/1/1971 Appendix H
8/11/1971 Appendix H
11/10/1971 Superseded by 1985-1
R-11/10/1971 Appendix D-15
1/3/1972 Repealed by 1985-1
1/12/1972 Appendix D-16
2/9/1972 Appendix K-10
4/12/1972 Appendix K-11
4/12/1972 Appendix K-12
4/26/1972 Appendix F-14
72-1 Chapter 1 §§ 1204, 1210 to 1212
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:891
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
§ 1213 Superseded by 2004-1
8/9/1972 Appendix G-10
8/9/1972 Appendix D-17
9/13/1972 Appendix H
1972-3 Repealed by 1985-1
9/13/1972 Chapter 26 §§ 101, 102
9/13/1972 Appendix K-13
9/13/1972 Superseded by 1985-1
10/11/1972 Appendix H
10/11/1972 Superseded by 6/11/1975B
R-10/11/1972 Appendix G-11
11/8/1972 Appendix H
72-8 Chapter 6 §§ 101 to 105
12/13/1972 Appendix H
1/10/1973 Repealed by 1985-1
73-9 Superseded by 77-47
73-10 Superseded by 1985-1
3/14/1973 Appendix H
5/9/1973 Repealed by 1985-1
5/91973 Repealed by 1985-1
5/21/1972 Appendix H
6/13/1973 Chapter 27 K-14
7/11/1973 Superseded by 1985-1
R-7/11/1973 Appendix K-15
8/8/1973 Repealed by 1985-1
Superseded by 1985-1
8/8/1973 Superseded by 1985-1
R-9/12/1973 Appendix K-16
10/10/1973 Appendix H
11/7/1973 Superseded by 1985-1
—/—/—— Superseded by 1985-1
73-11 Chapter 1 §§ 1206, 1207
—/—/—— Appendix H
73-12 Repealed by 1985-1
12/12/1973 Appendix F-15
73-14 Superseded by 86-2
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:892
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
12/12/1973 Tax Rate 1974
1/16/1974 Appendix H
1/16/1974 Superseded by 83-5
73-16 Appendix C-2
R-2/13/1974 Appendix K-17
R-3/13/1974 Appendix D-18
4/10/1974 Repealed by 1985-1
R-4/10/1974 Appendix K-18
4/10/1974 Appendix H
74-17 Chapter 21 §§ 201 to 206
6/12/1974 Superseded by 8/11/1976
6/12/1974 Appendix H
8/14/1974 Superseded by 1985-1
74-21 Repealed by 92-8
74-20 Chapter 1 §§ 1204, 1209 to 1212
§ 1213 Superseded by 2004-1
R-9/11/1974 Appendix K-19
10/16/1974 Appendix H
12/11/1974 Appendix G-12
1/6/1975 Tax Rate 1975
1/15/1975 Superseded by 1985-1
2/12/1975 Appendix E-3
2/12/1975 Appendix D-19
R-2/21/1975 Appendix K-20
3/12/1975 Appendix H
4/9/1975 Appendix H
4/9/1975 Appendix H
4/9/1975 Superseded by 76-40
5/14/1975 Appendix H
6/11/1975A Chapter 27 §§ 101-1001
6/11/1975B Repealed by 86-5
6/11/1975C Repealed by 1985-1
6/11/1975D Repealed by 1985-1
6/11/1975 Appendix D-20
6/11/1975 Appendix A-1
8/13/1975 Appendix H
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:893
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
11/12/1975 Appendix H
4/14/1976 Appendix C-3
R-6/9/1976 Appendix C-4
7/14/1976 Repealed by 86-5
76-33 Chapter 5 §§ 101 to 103
76-35 Superseded by 90-10
76-36 Repealed by 2017-3
8/11/1976 Superseded by 83-3
8/11/1976 Superseded by 76-39
9/8/1976 Appendix H
10/13/1976 Repealed by 86-5
R-10/13/1976 Appendix L-1
11/10/1976 Superseded by 1985-1
11/10/1976 Appendix H
76-38 Repealed by 1985-1
76-39 Repealed by 5/12/1982
76-40 Chapter 6 §§ 401 to 412
11/10/1976 Appendix L-2
12/81976 Tax Rate 1977
77-42 Superseded by 83-5
77 43 Chapter 24 § 502
6/8/1977 Appendix L-3
7/13/1977 Appendix H
R-7/13/1977 Appendix F-16
7/13/1977 Appendix L-4
R-8/10/1977 Appendix D-21
77-45 Appendix G-13
R-9/14/1977 Appendix D-22
R-9/16/1977 Appendix D-23
10/12/1977 Appendix H
77-46 Chapter 24 §§ 101 to 107
R-11/9/1977 Appendix B-3
1/3/1978 Appendix F-17
1/11/1978 Appendix H
1/11/1978 Appendix H
77-47 Repealed by 2011-4
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:894
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
R-1/14/1978 Appendix D-24
R-7/12/1978 Appendix L-5
8/9/1978 Appendix H
8/9/1978 Appendix H
78-51 Repealed by 92-8
78-52 Repealed by 5/12/1982
R-10/11/1978 Appendix D-25
11/8/1978 Appendix H
78-54 Repealed by 94-11
11/8/1978 Superseded by 1985-1
1/3/1979 Tax Rate 1979
1/3/1979 Appendix H
1/10/1979 Appendix H
79-8 Chapter 7 §§ 101 to 103
5/9/1979 Superseded by 86-2
5/9/1979 Appendix H
5/29/1979 Superseded by 83-5
R-10/10/1979 Appendix L-6
R 79-1 Appendix D-26
11/29/1979 Appendix F-18
12/19/1979 Tax Rate 1980
1/9/1980 Appendix D-27
1/28/1980 Appendix H
79-2 Appendix D-28
5/14/1980 Appendix H
80-1 Superseded by 83-2
80-2 Chapter 27 § 343
12/8/1980 Appendix I-4
12/10/1980 Tax Rate 1981
81-1 Repealed by 2012-5
2/11/1981 Appendix H
81-2 Chapter 24 §§ 203, 208
2/11/1981 Appendix D-29
1981-4 Appendix D-30
81-6 Appendix D-31
6/10/1981 Superseded by 1985-1
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:895
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
81-8 Repealed by 86-5
81-9 Repealed by 2018-5
11/11/1981 Appendix H
12/9/1981 Tax Rate 1982
1/25/1982 Appendix L-7
2/10/1982 Superseded by 1985-1
2/10/1982 Appendix D-32
2/22/1982 Appendix L-8
2/22/1982 Appendix L-9
3/10/1982 Appendix D-33
5/12/1982 Chapter 21 §§ 101 to 107
5/12/1982 Appendix D-34
8/11/1982 Superseded by 1985-1
9/16/1982 Appendix L-10
10/13/1982 Repealed by 1985-1
11/10/1982 Appendix E-4
R-11/24/1982 Tax Rate 1983
12/8/1982 Appendix H
82-4 Appendix D-35
R-12/28/1982 Appendix D-36
R-83-1 Chapter 24 § 304
R-2/9/1983 Appendix D-37
2/14/1983 Appendix D-38
2/23/1983 Appendix L-11
3/9/1983 Superseded by 1985-1
83-2 Chapter 27 § 805
83-3 Superseded by 90-11
R-83-3 Repealed by 2017-3
Appendix D-39
83-4 Superseded by 90-13
83-5 Superseded by 90-10
7/13/1983 Chapter 18 § 201
83-6 Superseded by 85-7
R-84-1 Appendix H
84-1 Superseded by 1985-1
84-2 Superseded by 1985-1
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:896
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
84-3 Chapter 21 §§ 301 to 302
R-4-85 Appendix F-19
85-1 Adopting Ordinance
85-2 Chapter 10 §§ 301 to 304
85-3 Superseded by 90-11
Chapter 7, Part 3 Repealed by 2017-2
85-4 Chapter 15 § 108
85-5 Chapter 13 §§ 401 to 410
85-6 Chapter 15 § 403
85-7 Tax Rate 1986
85-8 Appendix D-40
R-86-1 Appendix L-12
R-86-1A Appendix D-41
R-86-2 Appendix D-42
R-86-3 Appendix C-5
R-86-3A Appendix D-43
R-86-4 Appendix D-44
R-86-4A Appendix D-45
R-86-10 Appendix D-46
R-86-11 Appendix D-47
R-86-12 Appendix D-48
R-86-13 Appendix H
R-86-14 Appendix H
86-1 No Ordinance
86-2 Chapter 6 §§ 201-206
86-3 Superseded by 2013-2
86-4 Chapter 15 § 214
86-5 Land Use A.O.
Chapter 14 §§ 101 — 114
Chapter 22 §§ 101 — 901
86-5B Appendix L-13
86-6 Chapter 6 §§ 501 — 506
86-7 Superseded by 91-6
86-8 Repealed by 2007-5
86-9 No Ordinance
R-87-1 Superseded by R-2001-2
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:897
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
R-87-4A Appendix D-49
R-87-5 Chapter 16 § 110
R-87-14 Appendix H
R-87-19 Appendix G-14
87-1 Appendix L-14
87-2 Chapter 10 §§ 401 — 402
87-3 Appendix L-15
R-87-20 Superseded by R-2001-2
87-4 Chapter 15 § 108
87-5 Chapter 15 § 403
87-6 Chapter 21 §§ 201 — 208
87-7 Appendix L-16
87-8 Chapter 15, § 201 Repealed by 2014-2
Chapter 15 § 214
88-1 Superseded by 90-10
88-2 Superseded by 90-12
88-3 Repealed by 2017-3
88-4 Superseded by 90-11
88-5 Superseded by 90-14
88-6 Missing
88-7 Appendix L-17
88-8 Appendix L-18
88-9 Appendix L-19
88-10 Chapter 1 Part 13
88-11 Chapter 26 §§ 201 — 207
88-12 Appendix L-20
88-13 Appendix L-21
88-14 Appendix L-21
88-15 Chapter 15 § 304
89-1 Chapter 1 § 1216
89-2 Appendix H
89-3 Missing
89-4 Chapter 13 §§ 203, 206
Chapter 19 Repealed by 2018-5
Chapter 22 §§ 202, 301, 504, 505,
506, 508, 605
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:898
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
Chapter 27 §§ 201, 303, 322
89-5 Chapter 27 §§ 201, 511, 701, 702,
704, 705, 706, 708, 709,
710, 711, 805, 806, 807,
902, 903, 904
89-6 Chapter 22 §§ 202, 302, 402, 403,
612, 613, 614, 801, 805,
901
89-7 Appendix D
90-1 Superseded by R-2001-2
90-2 Appendix H
90-3
Chapter 15, § 201 Repealed by 2014-2
Chapter 15 §§ 210, 214
90-4 Appendix L-23
90-5 See Ch. 1, Part 11
90-6 Chapter 16 §§ 103, 110
90-7 Chapter 1 § 423
90-8 Chapter 27 §§ 402, 403, 503, 505,
506, 511, 607
90-10 Repealed by 94-1
90-11 Repealed by 94-5
90-12 Repealed by 94-4
90-13 Repealed by 94-3
90-14 Repealed by 94-2
90-15 Appendix H
90-16 Appendix H
90-17 Appendix H
90-18 Budget 1991
90-19 Tax Rate 1991
90-20 Superseded by R-2001-2
90-21 Appendix H
90-22 Chapter 10 §§ 501 – 504
90-23 Appendix L-24
90-24 Appendix H
91-1 Chapter 15, § 201 Repealed by 2014-2
Chapter 15 §§ 214, 403, 404
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:899
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
91-2 Chapter 21 §§ 401-403
R-91-1 Superseded by R-2001-2
R-91-2 Appendix D-50
R-91-3 Appendix E-5
R-91-4 Appendix D-51
91-3 Appendix L-25
R-91-5 Appendix D-52
R-91-6 Appendix D-53
R-91-7 Appendix D-54
91-4 Chapter 27 §§ 309, 503, 504
Appendix L-26
91-5 Appendix L-27
91-6 Chapter 20 §§ 101-110
R-91-8 Appendix D-55
R-91-9 Appendix D-56
91-7 Chapter 15 §§ 214, 404
91-8 Appendix L-28
91-9 Appendix L-29
91-10 Budget 1992
91-11 Tax Rate 1992
91-12 Appendix H
91-13 Chapter 27 § 318
91-14 Appendix H
R-91-10 Appendix D-57
R-91-11 Appendix D-58
R-92-1 Appendix D-59
92-1 Chapter 2 § 204
Chapter 2, § 101 Repealed by 94-11
92-2 Repealed by 94-1
92-3 Appendix H
92-4 Superseded by R-2001-2
92-5 Appendix H
92-6 Chapter 1 § 1209
R 92-2 Appendix D-60
R 92-3 Appendix D-61
R-92-4 Appendix G-15
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:900
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
92-7 Chapter 6 §§ 202, 204
R-92-5 Appendix D-62
R-92-6 Appendix D-63
R-92-7 Appendix D-64
R-92-8 Appendix D-65
R-92-9 Superseded by 2004-1
92-8 Repeals §§ 74-21, 78-51, Ch. 20,
§ 104 of 1985-1
R-92-10 Appendix G-16
R-92-11 Appendix E-6
R-92-12 Appendix D-67
92-9 Superseded by 2004-1
92-10 Chapter 15 § 214
R-92-13 Appendix D-68
R-92-14 Appendix E-7
92-11 Budget 1993
92-12 Tax Rate 1993
R-92-15 Appendix D-69
R-92-16 Appendix D-70
R-92-17 Appendix D-71
92-13 Appendix H
92-14 Chapter 13 §§ 401, 403, 403.1, 404,
408.1
92-15 Chapter 10 § 601 – 605
92-16 Appendix L-30
93-1 Chapter 22 §§ 403, 506, 507, 605,
609, 610, 611
93-2 Appendix L-31
93-3 Chapter 15, § 201 Repealed by 2014-2
Chapter 15 §§ 205, 207, 214, 603
93-4 Repealed by 2018-5
93-5 Budget 1994
93-6 Tax Rate 1994
93-7 Superseded by R-2001-2
94-1 Superseded by 99-3
94-2 Superseded by 99-4
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:901
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
94-3 Superseded by 99-6
94-4 Superseded by 99-7
94-5 Superseded by 99-5
94-6 Chapter 21 § 402
94-7 Chapter 14 §§ 404, 404A
94-8 Chapter 10 § 301
94-9 Chapter 27 §§ 347, 507, 508
94-10 Chapter 15 §§ 215, 403, 603
94-11 Chapter 2 §§ 101-106
94-12 Appendix D-72
94-13 Repealed by 2012-4
94-14 Repealed by 2015-1
94-15 Chapter 26 § 351, 361
94-16 Chapter 22 § 302, 506
94-17 Budget 1995
94-18 Tax Rate 1995
95-1 Appendix H
95-2 Chapter 6 § 105
R-95-1 Appendix D-73
R-95-2 Appendix D-74
95-3 See Ch. 1, Part 11
R-95-3 Appendix D-75
R-95-4 Appendix D-76
R-95-5 Appendix B-4
R-95-6 Appendix D-77
95-4 Not Adopted
95-5 Budget 1996
95-6 Tax Rate 1996
95-7 Appendix L-32
R-95-7A Appendix G-17
R-95-7B Chapter 1 §§ 1401 – 1415
95-8 Chapter 6 §§ 601 – 608
95-9 Chapter 18 §§ 401 – 403
R-96-1 Appendix D-78
R-96-2 Appendix D-79
R-96-3 Appendix D-80
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:902
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
R-96-4 Appendix D-81
R-96-5 Appendix D-82
R-96-6 Appendix D-83
R-96-7 Appendix D-84
R-96-8 Appendix B-5
96-1 Appendix H
96-2 Appendix B-6
R-96-9 Appendix D-85
96-3 Chapter 13 §§ 201, 203, 206, 209
96-4 Superseded by R-2001-2
R-96-10 Appendix D-86
96-5 Chapter 1 § 602
R-96-11 Appendix D-87
96-6 Budget 1997
96-7 Earned Income Tax 1997
Realty Transfer Tax 1997
R-97-1 Appendix D-88
R-97-2 Appendix D-89
R-97-3 Appendix D-90
97-1 Appendix D-91
R-97-4 Appendix D-92
R-97-5 Appendix D-93
97-2 Chapter 15, § 201 Repealed by 2014-2
Chapter 15 §§ 205, 214, 403, 404
97-3 Chapter 5, § 102 Superseded by 99-3
Chapter 5, § 402 Superseded by 99-7
Chapter 5, § 502 Superseded by 99-6
Chapter 5, § 702 Repealed by 2017-3
Chapter 5, § 802 Superseded by 99-4
Chapter 6 §§ 105, 205, 308, 412,
504, 607
Chapter 7, §§ 207, 304 Repealed by 2017-2
Chapter 8, § 210 Repealed by 2012-5
Chapter 10, § 107 Repealed by 2009-8
Chapter 10 §§ 207, 304, 403, 605
Chapter 13, Part 1 Repealed by 2011-4
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:903
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
Chapter 13 §§ 209, 311, 408.1
Chapter 16 §§ 109, 110
Chapter 18 §§ 108, 357
Chapter 19 Repealed by 2018-5
Chapter 20 § 110
Chapter 21 §§ 106, 208, 302, 403
Chapter 26 §§ 102, 207
97-6 Appendix L-33
97-4 Budget 1998
97-5 Tax Rate 1998
R-97-6 Appendix D-94
R-98-1 Appendix D-95
R-98-2 Appendix D-96
R-98-3 Appendix D-97
98-1 Superseded by R-2001-2
98-2 Chapter 15 §§ 214, 409
98-3 Appendix F-20
R-98-4 Appendix D-98
R-98-5 Appendix D-99
R-98-6 Appendix D-100
98-4 Appendix H
98-5 Superseded by R-2001-2
98-6 Appendix B-7
R-98-7 Appendix G-18
R-98-8 Appendix D-101
R-98-9 Appendix D-102
98-7 Budget 1999
98-8 Tax Rate 1999
98-9 Appendix B-8
98-10 See Ch. 1, Part 11
R-99-1 Appendix D-103
R-99-2 Appendix D-104
R-99-3 Chapter 24 §§ 601-612
R-99-4 Appendix D-105
R-99-5 Appendix D-106
R-99-6 Appendix D-107
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:904
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
R-99-7 Appendix D-108
99-1 See Ch. 1, Part 11
99-2 Appendix C
99-3 Repealed by 2017-3
99-4 Repealed by 2017-3
99-5 Repealed by 2017-3
99-6 Repealed by 2005-1
99-7 Repealed by 2017-3
99-8 Chapter 15 § 408A
99-9 Appendix B
99-10 Appendix L
99-11 Appendix L
99-12 Appendix H
99-13 Budget 2000
99-14 Tax Rate 2000
99-15
Chapter 15, § 201 Repealed by 2014-2
Chapter 15 § 214
99-16 See Ch. 1, Part 11
2000-1 Chapter 11 § 101
2000-2 Chapter 20 § 104
2000-3 Chapter 27 §§ 201, 348, 501, 502,
503, 504, 505, 506, 507,
508, 509, 510, 601
2000-4 Chapter 15 § 214
2000-5 Repealed by 2014-2
R-2000-5 Appendix D-109
R-2000-6 Appendix C-6
2000-6 Budget 2001
2000-7 Tax Rate 2001
2000-8 Chapter 7 §§ 401-404
R-2001-1 Appendix D-110
R-2001-2 Appendix D-111
2001-1 Not Codified
2001-2 Superseded by 2004-2
R-2001-3 Appendix D-112
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:905
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
R-2001-4 Appendix D-114
R-2001-5 Appendix D-113
2001-3 Appendix L-36
2001-4 Appendix L-37
2001-5 Budget 2002
2001-6 Tax Rate 2002
2001-7 Chapter 15 § 403
R-2002-1 Appendix D-115
R-2002-2 Appendix D-116
2002-1 Chapter 15 § 214
2002-2 Repealed by 2004-8
R-2002-3 Appendix E-8
R-2002-5 Appendix D-117
R-2002-6 Appendix D-118
R-2002-4 Appendix D-119
R-2002-7 Appendix D-120
R-2002-8 Appendix D-121
R-2002-9 Appendix D-122
2002-3 Appendix H
2002-4 Not used
2002-5 Repealed by 2006-11
2002-6 Budget 2003
2002-7 Tax Rate 2003
2002-8 Chapter 15 § 403
R-2003-1 Chapter 1 §§ 1501-1504
R-2003-2 Appendix D-124
2003-1 Repealed by 2006-11
2003-2 Superseded by 2004-2
R-2003-3 Appendix D-126
2003-3 Appendix B-10
2003-4 Chapter 27 §§ 502, 512
2003-5 Chapter 22 §§ 202, 304, 305, 402,
504, 505, Appendix A
2003-6 Chapter 1 § 1601
R-2003-4 Appendix D-127
R-2003-5 Not used
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:906
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
R-2003-6 Chapter 1 §§ 1501-1504
R-2003-7 Appendix D-128
2003-7 Repealed by 2018-5
2003-8 Chapter 22 § 605
R-2003-8 Appendix D-129
R-2003-9 Missing
R-2003-10 Appendix D-130
R-2003-11 Appendix D-131
R-2003-12 Withdrawn
R-2003-13 Appendix D-132
R-2003-14 Not Codified
R-2003-15 Appendix D-133
2003-9 Chapter 20 §§ 104, 105, 111
2003-10 Repealed by 2009-8
2003-11 Chapter 22 § 504
2003-12 Budget 2004
2003-13 Taxes 2004
2003-14 Appendix H
2003-15 Real Estate Tax 2004
R-2003-15 Appendix D-133
R-2004-1 Appendix J-2
R-2004-2 Appendix D-134
R-2004-3 Appendix D-135
R-2004-4 Appendix C-7
R-2004-5 Not Adopted
R-2004-6 Appendix D-136
2004-1 Chapter 1 §§ 1210, 1213
2004-2 Chapter 1 § 1301
2004-3 Chapter 5 §§ 1001-1006
2004-4 Repealed by 2017-3
2004-5 Chapter 27 § 701
R-2004-7 Appendix D-137
R-2004-8 Appendix D-138
R-2004-9 Appendix D-139
R-2004-10 Appendix D-140
R-2004-11 Appendix D-141
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:907
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
R-2004-12 Appendix D-142
2004-6 Chapter 5 §§ 901-910
2004-7 Chapter 21 §§ 101, 103
2004-8 Repealer
R-2004-13 Appendix D-143
R-2004-14 Appendix D-144
R-2004-15 Appendix D-145
2004-9 Budget 2005
2004-10 Tax Rate 2005
2004-11 Real Estate Tax 2005
2004-12 Superseded by 2005-2
R-2005-1 Appendix D-146
R-2005-2 Appendix D-147
R-2005-3 Appendix D-148
2005-1 Chapter 5 §§ 501 - 503
R-2005-4 Appendix C-8
R-2005-5 Appendix D-149
R-2005-6 Appendix D-150
2005-2 Repealed by 2007-1
2005-3 Not Adopted Yet
R-2005-7 Appendix D-151
R-2005-8 Appendix C-9
R-2005-9 Appendix D-152
R-2005-10 Appendix D-153
2005-4 Appendix L-38
2005-5 Budget 2006
2005-6 Tax Rate 2006
2005-7 Number not used
R-2005-11 Appendix D-154
2005-8 Appendix D-155
2005-9 Appendix L-39
2005-10 Chapter 1 § 610
R-2006-1 Appendix D-156
R-2006-2 Appendix D-157
R-2006-3 Appendix C-10
R-2006-4 Appendix C-11
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:908
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
R-2006-5 Appendix D-158
R-2006-6 Appendix D-159
R-2006-7 Appendix D-160
R-2006-8 Appendix D-161
R-2006-9 Appendix D-162
R-2006-10 Appendix D-163
R-2006-11 Appendix D-164
2006-1 Chapter 5 § 503
R-2006-12 Appendix E-9
2006-2 See Ch. 1, Part 11
2006-3 Chapter 27 §§ 201, 509
2006-4 Appendix L-40
2006-5 Appendix L-41
2006-6 Not adopted
2006-7 Chapter 1 §§ 301, 303, 1701-1706
2006-8 Budget 2007
2006-9 Tax Rate 2007
2006-10 Chapter 13 §§ 601 - 608
R-2006-13 Appendix D-165
R-2006-14 Appendix D-166
R-2006-15 Appendix D-167
2006-11 Appendix D-168
2006-12 Chapter 22 § 504
R-2006-16 Appendix D-169
2006-13 Chapter 22 § 504
2006-14 Repealed by 2017-12
R-2007-1 Appendix G-19
R-2007-2 Appendix D-170
R-2007-3 Appendix D-171
2007-1 Superseded by 2008-6
2007-2 Chapter 11 §§ 201 - 214
R-2007-4 Appendix D-172
R-2007-5 Not Adopted
2007-3 Repealed by 2017-12
2007-4 Chapter 24 Part 2
2007-5 Repealer only Chapter 24, Part 2
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:909
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
R-2007-6 Appendix D-173
R-2007-7 Appendix D-174
R-2007-8 Appendix D-175
R-2007-9 Appendix D-176
R-2007-10 Appendix D-177
2007-6 Budget 2008
2007-7 Tax Rate 2008
2007-8 Not Adopted
2007-9 Appendix D-178
R-2007-11 Appendix D-179
R-2008-1 Appendix D-180
R-2008-2 Appendix D-181
R-2008-3 Appendix D-182
2008-1 Chapter 10 §§ 701 - 710
2008-2 Not Adopted
R-2008-4 Not Adopted
R-2008-5 Appendix D-183
R-2008-6 Appendix D-184
R-2008-7 Appendix D-185
R-2008-8 Appendix D-186
2008-3 Budget 2009
2008-4 Tax Rate 2009
2008-5 Appendix L-42
2008-6 Repealed by 2010-2
R-2008-9 Chapter 1 Part 15B
R-2008-10 Appendix D-187
R-2009-1 Appendix D-188
R-2009-2 Appendix D-189
2009-1 Chapter 1 Part 12A
2009-2 See Ch. 1, Part 11
R-2009-3 Appendix D-190
R-2009-4 Appendix D-191
2009-3 Not Adopted
2009-4 Appendix D-192
2009-5 Chapter 7 §§ 401, 403
2009-6 Not Adopted
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:910
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
2009-7 Not Adopted
R-2009-5 Appendix D-193
R-2009-6 Not Adopted
R-2009-7 Chapter 1 § 1509
R-2009-8 Appendix D-194
R-2009-9 Appendix D-195
2009-8 Chapter 10 Part 1
R-2009-10 Appendix D-196
2009-9 Chapter 16 § 111
2009-10 Budget 2010
2009-11 Tax Rate 2010
R-2009-11 Appendix D-197
R-2009-12 Appendix D-198
R-2009-13 Appendix D-199
R-2009-14 Appendix D-200
2010-1 Appendix B-11
R-2010-1 Appendix D-201
R-2010-2 Appendix D-202
R-2010-3 Appendix D-203
R-2010-4 Appendix D-204
2010-2 Repealed by 2011-1
2010-3 Chapter 27 § 701
2010-4 Chapter 1 § 1201 (history only)
R-2010-5 Appendix D-205
R-2010-6 Appendix H
R-2010-7 Appendix D-206
2010-5 Chapter 1 § 1601
2010-6 See Ch. 1, Part 11
R-2010-8 Appendix D-207
R-2010-9 Appendix D-208
R-2010-10 Appendix D-209
2010-7 Chapter 27 § 350
2010-8 Chapter 27 § 349
2010-9 Not Adopted
2010-10 Tax Rate 2011
2010-11 Budget 2011
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:911
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
R-2011-1 Appendix D-210
R-2011-2 Appendix D-211
R-2011-3 Appendix D-212
R-2011-4 Appendix D-213
R-2011-5 Appendix D-214
R-2011-6 Appendix D-215
R-2011-7 Appendix D-216
2011-1 Repealed by O-2012-1
R-2011-8 Appendix D-217
2011-2 Chapter 27 §§ 502, 510, 603
2011-3 Repealed by 2015-1
2011-4 Chapter 13 Part 1
2011-5 Superseded by 2011-8
R-2011-9 Appendix D-218
R-2011-10 Appendix D-219
R-2011-11 Appendix D-220
R-2011-12 Appendix D-221
2011-6 Appendix D-222
R-2011-13 Appendix D-223
R-2011-14 Appendix D-224
R-2011-15 Appendix D-225
R-2011-16 Tabled
2011-7 Chapter 1 § 1201 (history only)
2011-8 Chapter 24 Part 4
2011-9 Budget 2012
2011-10 Tax Rate 2012
R-2011-17 Appendix D-226
R-2011-18 Appendix D-227
R-2011-19 Appendix J-3
2012-1 Repealed by R-2014-4
R-2012-1 Appendix D-228
R-2012-2 Appendix D-229
R-2012-3 Appendix D-230
R-2012-4 Appendix D-231
2012-2 Ch. 13 §§ 401, 402, 404
R-2012-5 Appendix D-232
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:912
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
R-2012-6 Appendix D-233
2012-3 Charter §§ 401, 402, 1101, 1104
2012-4 Chapter 18 §§ 301 - 381
R-2012-7 Appendix D-234
R-2012-8 Appendix D-235
R-2012-10 Appendix B-12
2012-5 Chapter 8 §§ 101 - 514
2012-6 Budget 2013
2012-7 Tax Rate 2013
R-2012-9 Appendix D-236
R-2012-11 Appendix D-237
R-2012-12 Appendix D-238
R-2012-13 Appendix D-239
R-2013-1 Appendix D-240
R-2013-2 Appendix D-241
R-2013-3 Appendix D-242
R-2013-4 Appendix D-243
2013-1 Appendix H
R-2013-5 Chapter 15 § 214
R-2013-6 Chapter 15 § 207
R-2013-7 Chapter 15 § 214
R-2013-8 Appendix D-244
2013-2 Chapter 13 Part 5
2013-3 Budget 2014
2013-4 Tax Rate 2014
R-2013-9 Appendix D-245
R-2013-10 Appendix D-246
R-2013-11 Appendix D-247
R-2013-12 Appendix D-248
R-2013-13 Appendix D-249
R-2014-1 Appendix D-250
R-2014-2 Appendix D-251
R-2014-3 Appendix D-252
R-2014-4 Repealed by R-2018-8
2014-1 Appendix D-253
R-2014-5 Appendix D-254
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:913
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
R-2014-6 Appendix D-255
R-2014-7 Appendix D-256
2014-2 Chapter 15 Part 2
R-2014-8 Appendix D-257
R-2014-9 See Ch. 1, Part 11
R-2014-10 Chapter 1 Part 17
R-2014-11 Appendix D-258
R-2014-12 Appendix D-259
R-2014-13 Appendix D-260
R-2014-14 Appendix D-261
R-2014-15 Appendix D-262
R-2014-16 Tabled
R-2014-17 Appendix D-263
R-2014-18 Appendix D-264
2014-3 Budget 2015
2014-4 Tax Rate 2015
2014-5 Chapter 10 Part 8
2014-6 Appendix D-265
2014-7 Chapter 15 Part 2
R-2014-19 Appendix D-266
R-2014-20 Appendix D-267
R-2014-21 Appendix D-268
R-2015-1 Appendix D-269
R-2015-2 Repealed by R-2018-8
R-2015-3 Appendix D-270
R-2015-4 Appendix D-271
R-2015-5 Not adopted
R-2015-6 Appendix D-272
R-2015-7 Rescinded
2015-1 Stormwater
management
Chapter 17
Repealer only Chapter 26, Parts 3 and
4
R-2015-8 Appendix D-273
R-2015-9 Appendix D-274
R-2015-10 Chapter 1 §§ 1401, 1402
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:914
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
R-2015-11 Appendix D-275
R-2015-12 Appendix D-276
R-2015-13 Appendix D-277
2015-2 Budget 2016
2015-3 Tax Rate 2016
R-2015-14 Appendix D-278
R-2015-15 Appendix D-279
R-2015-16 Appendix D-280
R-2015-17 Appendix D-281
2015-4 Chapter 20 Part 2
R-2016-1 Appendix D-282
R-2016-2 Appendix D-283
R-2016-3 Appendix D-284
R-2016-4 Rescinded
R-2016-5 Appendix D-285
R-2016-6 Appendix D-286
R-2016-7 Appendix D-287
R-2016-8 Appendix D-288
R-2016-9 Appendix D-289
R-2016-10 Appendix D-290
R-2016-11 Appendix D-291
2016-1 Budget 2017
2016-2 Tax Rate 2017
R-2016-12 Appendix D-292
R-2016-13 Appendix D-293
2016-3 Appendix H
R-2016-14 Appendix D-294
R-2016-15 Appendix D-295
R-2017-1 Appendix D-296
R-2017-2 Appendix D-297
R-2017-3 Chapter 16 §§ 105, 110
Appendix D-298
R-2017-4 Appendix D-299
R-2017-5 Appendix D-300
2017-1 Appendix D-301
R-2017-6 Appendix D-302
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:915
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
2017-2 Repealer only Chapter 7, Parts 2 and 3
2017-3 Repealer only Chapter 5, Parts 1
through 4 and 6 though
8
R-2017-7 Appendix D-303
2017-4 Pending
2017-5 Pending
2017-6 Pending
2017-7 Chapter 18 Part 5
R-2017-8 See Ch. 1, Part 11
2017-8 Appendix D-304
2017-9 Chapter 25 Part 1
2017-10 Chapter 15 Part 9
2017-11 Chapter 15 §§ 207, 209, 214
2017-12 Repealer only Chapter 15, Part 9
2017-13 Budget 2018
2017-14 Tax Rate 2018
R-2017-9 Appendix D-305
R-2017-10 Appendix D-306
R-2017-11 Appendix D-307
R-2017-12 Appendix D-308
R-2017-13 Appendix D-309
R-2017-14 Appendix D-310
R-2017-15 Appendix D-311
R-2018-1 Appendix D-312
R-2018-2 Appendix D-313
R-2018-3 Chapter 16 §§ 105, 110
Appendix D-314
R-2018-4 Appendix D-315
R-2018-5 Appendix D-316
R-2018-6 Repealer Only D-317
R-2018-7 Appendix D-318
R-2018-8 Chapter 1 Part 13
R-2018-9 Appendix D-319
R-2018-10 Appendix D-320
R-2018-11 Appendix D-321
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:916
Ord./Res. Disposition Number
R-2018-12 Appendix D-322
R-2018-13 Appendix D-323
R-2018-14 Appendix B-13
2018-1 Tax Rate 2019
2018-2 Budget 2019
R-2018-15 Appendix D-324
R-2018-16 Appendix D-325
R-2018-17 Appendix D-326
R-2018-18 Appendix D-327
R-2018-19 Appendix D-328
2018-3 Chapter 22 Pt. 2; Pt. 3; Pt. 4; Pt. 5;
Pt. 6; Pt. 8; Pt. 9; Pt. 10
2018-4 Chapter 27 Pt. 1; Pt. 2; Pt. 3; Pt. 5;
Pt. 8
2018-5 Chapter 19 Pt. 1
R-2019-1 Appendix D-329
R-2019-2 Appendix D-330
R-2019-3 Chapter 16 Pt. 1
R-2019-4 Appendix D-331
R-2019-5 Appendix D-332
R-2019-6 Appendix D-333
R-2019-7 Appendix D-334
R-2019-8 Chapter 1 Pt. 13
R-2019-9 Appendix D-335
R-2019-10 Appendix D-336
R-2019-12 Appendix D-337
2019-1 Chapter 18 Pt. 6
2019-2 Chapter 7 Pt. 2
2019-3 Chapter 5 Pt. 5
R-2019-11 Chapter 1 Pt. 9
101 HOME RULE CHARTER 101
Ch:917
Ord./Res.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
R-2019-13 7/10/2019 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix
D-338
48
R-2019-14 7/10/2019 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix
D-339
48
2019-4 11/13/2019 Zoning,
Reclassification
Appendix
L-43
48
2019-5 11/13/2019 Tax Rate 2020 NCM 48
2019-6 11/13/2019 Budget 2020 NCM 48
R-2019-15 11/13/2019 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix
D-340
48
R-2019-16 10/9/2019 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix
D-341
48
R-2019-17 12/11/2019 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix
D-342
48
R-2019-18 12/11/2019 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix
D-343
48
R-2020-1 1/6/2020 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix
D-344
48
R-2020-2 1/6/2020 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix
D-345
48
R-2020-3 1/6/2020 Parks and
Recreation: Park
Regulations;
Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Ch. 16, Pt. 1;
Appendix
D-346
48
R-2020-4 1/8/2020 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix
D-347
48
2020-1 2/12/2020 Zoning,
Reclassification
Appendix
L-44
48
101 KINGSTON CODE 101
Ch:918