Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[An ordinance adopting the Code of the City of Lock Haven and
making certain substantive changes to existing ordinances of the
City is presently proposed before the City Council. Upon final
adoption, it will be included here as Article I of this chapter.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:3
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 81.
LOCK HAVEN CODE
1:4
ARTICLE I
Title and Definitions
§ 7-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative Code
of the City of Lock Haven, Pennsylvania."
§ 7-2. Definitions.
The words and phrases defined below shall have the meanings herein
specified unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE — Those departments and agencies in the
administrative organization under the authority of the Manager.
CHARTER LAW — The Optional Third Class City Charter Law (Council-
Manager Plan), Act of 1957, July 15, P.L. 901.1
CITY — The City of Lock Haven, Pennsylvania.
COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Lock Haven, Pennsylvania.
MANAGER — The City Manager of the City of Lock Haven, Pennsylvania.
1. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 41101 et seq.
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2
1:5

ARTICLE II
City Council
§ 7-3. General powers.
The legislative power and all matters of policy of the City government shall
be vested in and exercised by the Council.
§ 7-4. Mayor.
The powers and duties of the Mayor shall be such as are expressly conferred
on him by Article V, § 508, of the Charter Law.2
§ 7-5. Organization.
At the first meeting in January each year, Council shall organize by:
§ 7-6. Meetings. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
Regular meetings of Council shall be held at least twice a month on such
date and at such time and place as shall be established by resolution of
Council, except the months of July, August and September, when meetings
shall be held at least once each month. All meetings shall be open to the
public and notice of regular, special and adjourned meetings shall be given
as prescribed by law.
A. Choosing one of their number as Vice President of Council, who shall
have the powers and duties of Mayor during the absence or disability of
the Mayor.
B. Designating from their number individuals to serve as liaison between
Council and appointed City advisory boards and commissions and other
agencies with which the City is involved or has an interest.
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 41508.
§ 7-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-6
1:7

ARTICLE III
City Manager
§ 7-7. Qualifications.
The qualifications of the Manager shall be as set forth in Article V, § 513, of
the Charter Law.3
§ 7-8. Bond. [Amended 3-6-1972 by Ord. No. 818A]
The Manager shall furnish a bond to the City, with corporate surety
satisfactory to Council, in the sum of $5,000, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of his duties as Manager. The premium on such bond shall be
paid by the City.
§ 7-9. Powers and duties. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City and shall
have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in the Charter Law.
In addition thereto, the Manager shall:
A. Be responsible to Council for the direction and supervision of the affairs
of the City in accordance with policies established by Council and in a
manner satisfactory to a majority thereof.
B. Appoint competent, qualified officers and employees to the
administrative service and have the power to dismiss, suspend and
discipline in accordance with the Charter Law.
C. Designate himself or some other officer or employee to perform the
duties of any office or position in the administrative service during a
vacancy, absence or disability of an incumbent.
D. Have the power to assign any employee of the City under his authority
to any department or branch thereof requiring services appropriate to
the personnel classification of the employee so assigned and subject to
the limitations of civil service laws.
E. Have the power to prescribe rules and regulations as he shall deem
necessary or expedient for the conduct of administrative agencies
under his authority and to revoke, suspend or amend any rule or
regulation of the administrative service.
F. Have the power to investigate, examine or inquire into the affairs or
operations of any department, division, bureau or office under his
authority.
G. Have the power to set aside any action taken by a department director
under his authority and supersede him in the functions of his office.
3. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 41513.
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-9
1:9
H. Have the power to direct any department, division, bureau or office
under his authority to perform the work of any other department,
division, bureau or office.
I. Have the power to designate from the administrative service such
committees and the officers thereof as he shall find necessary for the
proper consideration of administrative problems.
J. Establish a uniform accounting system in accordance with Article V of
the Charter Law throughout the City government.4 Such system shall
be designed to reflect accurately the assets and liabilities and the
income and expenses of the City and shall control all expenditures by an
encumbrance system.
K. Prepare and present to Council an annual budget as provided by this
chapter.
L. Prepare and present to Council a monthly financial report of City
revenues and expenditures for all departments and funds. The report
shall include the amounts budgeted, current monthly expenditures,
year-to-date receipts and expenditures and the remaining balances.
M. Prepare and present to Council an annual report on the operating
performance of all departments and City agencies.
N. Should the position of Director of any department be vacant, the duties
of that position shall be assigned to the City Manager.
4. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 41501 et seq.
§ 7-9 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 7-9
1:10
ARTICLE IV
Administrative Departments
§ 7-10. Departments.
The City shall have the following administrative departments under the
supervision of the Manager:
§ 7-11. Appointment, qualifications and removal of directors.
Department directors, except the Director of the Department of Finance,
shall be chosen by the Manager solely on the basis of executive and
administrative qualifications appropriate to the duties of their respective
departments and shall be subject to removal at the discretion of the
Manager, as provided by Article V, § 516, of the Charter Law.5
§ 7-12. Duties of directors.
Under the direction of the Manager, each department Director shall:
A. Department of Administration.
B. Department of Finance.
C. Department of Public Safety.
D. Department of Public Works.
A. Direct the performance of all duties and responsibilities required by his
department or its subordinate agencies as provided by statute, this
Administrative Code or other ordinance of the City and such other
duties as may be required by the Manager which are not in conflict with
law or ordinances.
B. Be immediately responsible to the Manager for the effective
administration of his department and all activities assigned to it.
C. Subject to the provisions of Chapter 144 of the Third Class City Code,
11 Pa.C.S.A. § 14401 et seq., as to civil service, department directors
shall, with the approval of the Manager, appoint and remove
subordinate officers and employees within their respective
departments.
D. Prescribe the internal organization of the department and the duties of
subordinate officers and employees of the department with the
approval of the Manager.
E. Assign functions, powers and duties to subordinate officers and
employees within the department and modify such assignments as
needs appear.
5. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 41516.
§ 7-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-12
1:11
F. Supervise the work of the department through the provisions provided
by the Administrative Code and such other organization units as the
director may find necessary or desirable and supervise and direct the
work of the employees of the department.
G. Delegate such of his powers as he may deem necessary for efficient
administration.
H. Provide, under the direction and with the approval of the Manager, to
any department or subordinate agency such service, labor, materials
and equipment as may be requisitioned by such department or
subordinate agency and, as its own facilities permit, through the same
procedure and subject to the same audit as other expenditures
incurred.
I. Submit monthly and annual reports to the Manager of programs and
accomplishments of his department and such other reports as the
Manager may require.
J. Keep informed on advances in administrative and operational practices
in his respective field and institute within his department those
practices he deems in the best interest of the City.
K. Establish and supervise such in-service training programs as he deems
desirable or necessary for the improvement of services to the public.
§ 7-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 7-12
1:12
ARTICLE V
Department of Administration
§ 7-13. Functions. [Amended 6-7-1976 by Ord. No. 956A]
The Department of Administration shall be headed and supervised by the
Manager. The Department shall perform the administrative service
functions for the City, its departments and agencies not otherwise provided
in this Administrative Code. The areas of responsibility of the Department
of Administration shall include:
A. Recording, filing, indexing and safekeeping of all proceedings of
Council.
B. Maintenance of records and files of general application to City
operations, its departments and agencies.
C. Supervision of personnel policies and practices as established by
Council.
D. Administration of a centralized purchasing system for all departments
of City government.
E. Development of the fiscal aspects of the capital improvement and
development programs of the City.
F. Preparation of the annual operating budget.
G. Tabulation of all departmental reports.
H. Such other functions as shall be assigned to this department by general
law or by Council.
I. The administration, direction and supervision of City engineering
services.
J. The administration, direction and supervision of City planning and
community developments services and activities.
§ 7-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-13
1:13

ARTICLE VI
Department of Finance
§ 7-14. Functions. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
The Department of Finance shall be headed and supervised by a Director
of Finance, who may be the elected Treasurer of the City. The Department
shall act to promote, secure and preserve the financial and property
interests of the City in all cases where the duty is not expressly charged
to any other department or office. The areas of responsibility of the
Department of Finance, to the extent consistent with general law, shall
include:
A. General supervision over all officers of the City regarding the proper
management of the fiscal concerns of their respective offices.
B. Maintenance of separate and distinct records of all City assets,
property, trusts, debts owing to the City and other resources
whatsoever.
C. Issuance of such financial reports as are deemed appropriate and
necessary by Council or the Manager.
D. Performance of such other functions and duties as may be required by
Council.
§ 7-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-14
1:15

ARTICLE VII
Department of Public Safety
§ 7-15. Functions.
The Department of Public Safety shall be headed and supervised by a
Director of Public Safety. The Department shall supervise the services
provided by Council to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the City and to those outside the City to whom such services are
extended to the extent that such services are not expressly charged to any
other department or office. The areas of responsibility of the Department of
Public Safety shall include:
A. The administration, direction and supervision of City police services,
which includes traffic control and safety and City parking facilities.
B. The administration, direction and supervision of the City fire services to
the extent deemed advisable by Council and in cooperation with the
Board of Directors of the City volunteer fire organizations.
C. The administration, direction and supervision of City code enforcement
and inspection services except such services directly related to the
Department of Public Works.
D. The administration, direction and supervision of City health services.
E. Performance of such other functions and duties as may be required by
Council.
§ 7-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-15
1:17

ARTICLE VIII
Department of Public Works
§ 7-16. Functions. [Amended 6-7-1976 by Ord. No. 956A; 2-24-2003
by Ord. No. 670]
The Department of Public Works shall be headed and supervised by a
Director of Public Works. The Department shall be responsible for all
matters relating to the construction, maintenance and operation of the
physical properties of the City to the extent that such responsibilities are
not expressly charged to any other department or office. The areas of
responsibility of the Department of Public Works shall include:
A. The administration, direction and supervision of City street and
highway operations.
B. The administration, direction and supervision of City water operations.
C. The administration, direction and supervision of City sanitary sewer
and storm sewer operations.
D. The administration, direction and supervision of City parks and
recreational facilities.
E. The administration, direction and supervision of City buildings and
property.
F. The administration, direction and supervision of City flood protection
operations.
G. Performance of such other functions and duties as may be required by
Council.
§ 7-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-16
1:19

ARTICLE IX
Legal Services
§ 7-17. Solicitor. [Amended 3-7-1977 by Ord. No. 31B]
The City Solicitor shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of Council.
The Council may appoint such assistant solicitor or solicitors as it deems
necessary. The areas of responsibility of the Solicitor shall be to:
A. Advise Council and the Manager or any City officer, when thereto
requested, upon all legal questions arising in the conduct of City
business.
B. Prepare or revise ordinances so requested by Council, the Manager or
any officer thereof.
C. Give his written opinion on any legal matter or question submitted to
him by Council or the Manager or any of its committees or by any City
officer.
D. Attend such Council meetings as requested by Council or the City
Manager for the purpose of giving Council and the Manager any legal
advice requested.
E. Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the City is
a party and approve as to form all bonds required to be submitted to the
City.
F. Represent the City in all legal actions brought by or against the City.
G. Have the power to adjust, settle, compromise or submit to arbitration
any action or causes of action, accounts, etc., in which the City is
concerned, as directed by Council.
H. Make an annual report to Council and the Manager of all pending
litigation in which the City has an interest and the condition thereof.
I. Keep records and deliver all records and documents and property of
every description in his possession, belonging in his office or to the City,
to his successor in office, who shall give duplicate receipts therefor, one
of which he shall file with the Manager.
§ 7-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-17
1:21

ARTICLE X
City Clerk
§ 7-18. Appointment.
Council shall appoint a City Clerk, who shall be the Manager and who shall
carry out the duties assigned to him by the statutes of Pennsylvania.
§ 7-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-18
1:23

ARTICLE XI
Advisory Agencies
§ 7-19. Authorities, boards and committees.
Unless prohibited by statute, authorities, boards and commissions shall be
attached to an appropriate City department for administrative purposes
as provided by Council. Council may also provide for the appointment
of the Manager as ex officio member of various authorities, boards and
commissions.
§ 7-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-19
1:25

ARTICLE XII
City Treasurer
§ 7-20. Bond.
The City Treasurer shall furnish such fidelity bond and insurance as is
required by general law. The fidelity bond shall be in the amount of
$200,000 or shall be included in the blanket bond covering all City officers
and employees. The Treasurer shall furnish insurance protection in the
amount of $3,000 against the loss of funds through fire, burglary, larceny,
theft, robbery or forgery. The premiums of such bond and insurance shall
be paid by the City to the extent required by law.
§ 7-21. Duties.
The City Treasurer shall carry out such duties and exercise such powers
with respect to the receipt and disbursement of public monies as are
provided by general law and, in addition thereto, shall receive for deposit
from the departments of the City all City monies collected by such
departments. The Treasurer shall disburse all such funds in accordance
with warrants issued to him therefor and duly signed by the City Controller
and the head of the City department or office listing said disbursement.
§ 7-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21
1:27

ARTICLE XIII
City Controller
§ 7-22. Bond.
The City Controller shall give bond to the City as required by general law in
the sum of $100,000 and the premium therefor shall be paid by the City.
§ 7-23. Duties.
The City Controller shall review all warrants for the expenditure of City
monies and, if satisfied that such expenditure is within the budget allotment
pertaining thereto, shall sign said warrant before it is presented to the
City Treasurer for payment. In so doing, he shall also preaudit all claims
and demands against the City prior to payment and shall approve warrants
for payment thereof only if satisfied that such payment is in accordance
with law. The City Controller shall be responsible for the control of an
encumbrance system of the City budget operation. He shall receive from
the Manager and Directors such information regarding City properties and
obligations and City income and expenditures as he deems necessary to
carry out these duties. He shall furnish Council and the Manager a report
concerning these matters at such times as he deems necessary.
§ 7-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-23
1:29

ARTICLE XIV
Personnel
§ 7-24. Policy. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
The Manager shall be responsible for the establishment and maintenance
of a merit system personnel program which is to include a position
classification system and pay plan covering all City employees as provided
by the Charter Law. The basic personnel policy of the City shall be:
§ 7-25. Blanket bond.
Any officer or employee of the City who is or may be required to give bond
to the City conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties, except
such officers and employees who are required by law to give individual
bonds, may be covered by a public employees blanket bond, the amount and
coverage thereof to be determined by Council on the advice of the Manager.
A. Employment by the City shall be based upon merit and fitness, free
from sexual, personal, racial, religious and political considerations.
B. Recruitment shall be conducted on a broad basis in order to secure an
adequate field of selection.
C. Just and equitable conditions of employment shall be established and
maintained in order to promote efficiency and economy in the operation
of the City.
D. Positions having similar duties and responsibilities shall be classified
and compensated on a uniform basis.
E. Appointments, promotions and other personnel actions shall be made
on merit, systematic tests and evaluations.
F. Tenure of employees and appointive officers shall be subject to good
behavior, satisfactory performance of work, requirements of the City
and availability of funds.
§ 7-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-25
1:31

ARTICLE XV
Finance
§ 7-26. Budget.
The City budget shall be submitted in accordance with Article V, §§ 517
and 518, of the Charter Law,6 and shall include a complete detail of all
City operating funds and a capital budget. On or before April 1 of each
year, the Manager shall submit a proposed six-year capital improvement
program. The program submitted may be modified by the affirmative vote of
a majority of Council. Passage of the six-year capital improvement program
shall be subject to annual revision.
§ 7-27. Appropriations. [Amended 2-20-1984 by Ord. No. 192B]
A. No monies shall be paid out of the City Treasury, except upon
appropriation previously made by Council and upon warrant pursuant
thereto, which warrant shall explicitly state the purpose for which the
money is to be drawn. No work shall be hired to be done, no materials
purchased, no contracts made and no order issued for the payment of
any monies in any amount which will cause the sums appropriated to
specific activities to be exceeded, except as herein provided. The
Council may make supplemental appropriations for any lawful purpose
from funds on hand or estimated to be received during the fiscal year
and not appropriated to any other purpose.
B. The Manager shall have the power to transfer from or incur expenses
against any account or activity; provided, that the cumulative total of
such transfers or incurred expenses which have not been approved by a
majority of Council at a public meeting thereof shall never exceed 5% of
the original allocation for the activity from which the transfer or
expense is made or $5,000, whichever is less, except in those situations
where the safety and welfare of the citizens of the City shall be
jeopardized by strict adherence to this requirement. The authority of
the Manager to transfer funds may be exercised within the expenditure
categories of the same activity or from one activity within the same
operating fund. In the event the Manager shall at any time transfer or
incur expenses against any account or activity in an amount of $1,000
or more, he shall, within 24 hours of such transfer or expense, notify
members of Council, in writing, of such transfer or expense at such
place within City Hall as shall be accessible to the general public.
C. The term "activity" used in this section shall mean the sum of all line
item amounts constituting the total appropriation for each of the
specific budget divisions identified below: [Amended 1-16-2017 by
Ord. No. 966]
(1) General fund: administration, finance/accounting, tax collection,
engineering, buildings/property, police protection, fire protection,
6. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 41517 and 41518.
§ 7-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-27
1:33
§ 7-28. Budget operation.
The Manager shall supervise the administration of each annual budget.
Immediately after the budget has been enacted and after consultation with
the Directors, he shall establish quarterly or such other periodic allotments
of appropriations to each department. At the beginning of each allotment
period, the amount specified shall become available to each department
for obligations during that period. Such allotments for any department may
be modified by the Manager upon request of the Director. The Manager
shall file with the Controller a copy of each allotment and modification
thereof. If at any time during the budget year the Manager shall ascertain
the probability of a cash deficit, he shall reconsider the work programs and
allotments of the several officers, departments and agencies. Upon such
reconsideration, the Manager shall revise the allotments so as to forestall,
as far as possible, the making of commitments and expenditures in excess
of the revenue to be realized during the fiscal year.
§ 7-29. Purchasing. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
In accordance with the Third Class City Code,7 the Manager shall be
responsible for the establishment and maintenance of a centralized
purchasing system. The system shall establish a requisitioning procedure
and adopt rules governing emergency purchases. It shall also include an
internally accurate perpetual inventory of all City property and shall provide
for an annual physical inventory.
§ 7-30. Contracts.
Contract administration for the City shall be vested in the City Manager.
§ 7-31. Depositories of City funds. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
The City Treasurer shall deposit all City funds and all City taxes collected
by him in such banks or other financial depositories as are designated by
Council. All such deposits shall be made in the name of the City.
code enforcement/planning/health, streets/storm sewers, parking/
parking lots/traffic safety, recreation/parks, levee maintenance,
debt service and employee benefits/insurance.
(2) Water fund: collection, purification, pumping, distribution,
administration, employee benefits/insurance and transfers.
(3) Sewer fund: collection, treatment, administration, debt service,
employee benefits/insurance and transfers.
(4) Highway aid fund: streets/storm sewers.
(5) Airport fund: operating expenses and capital expenses.
7. Editor's Note: See 11 Pa.C.S.A. § 10101 et seq.
§ 7-27 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 7-32
1:34
§ 7-32. Temporary investments.
The Manager and the City Treasurer jointly shall have power to provide
for the temporary investment of City funds and for the disposal of such
securities when the monies may be needed. Such investments shall be made
in accordance with the Third Class City Code, 11 Pa.C.S.A. § 11804.1.
§ 7-33. Annual audit.
Pursuant to § 520 of the Charter Law,8 all accounts of the City shall be
audited following the close of each fiscal year by an outside certified public
accountant selected by resolution of Council.
8. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 41520.
§ 7-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-33
1:35

ARTICLE XVI
General Provisions
§ 7-34. Rules and regulations.
No rule or regulation made by any department, office, agency or authority of
the City, except such as relates to the organization or internal management
of the City, shall take effect until it has been approved as to form and legality
by the Solicitor and approved by the Manager. City Council shall receive all
such rules and regulations and they shall be filed with the Manager.
§ 7-35. Sundays and holidays.
Whenever any time established by this chapter for the taking of any action
expires on a Sunday or any legal holiday, such time shall not expire on said
day but shall expire on the next workday.
§ 7-36. Constitutional construction.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional or illegal, the validity of any of the
remaining provisions of the chapter shall not be affected thereby. It is
hereby expressly declared as the intent of the Council that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional or illegal provision or
provisions not been included herein.
§ 7-37. Municipal claims.
The City Solicitor shall be furnished by the Directors of the various
departments with statements of claims which remain due and unpaid within
30 days from the date said claim became due and payable. The City Solicitor
shall enter such claim in the City lien docket. Upon payment of any claim so
entered, it shall be the duty of the City Solicitor to cause satisfaction to be
entered upon the proper record.
§ 7-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-37
1:37

ARTICLE XVII
Transitional Provisions
§ 7-38. References and prior ordinances.
Whenever in any statute of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or resolution
or ordinance of the City there is a reference to the Department of Accounts
and Finance, the reference shall be construed to mean the Department
of Finance. Where there is a reference to the Department of Streets and
Public Improvements or Department of Parks and Public Property, it shall
be construed to mean the Department of Public Works. Where there is
a reference to the Department of Public Affairs, the reference shall be
construed to mean the Department of Public Safety.
§ 7-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-38
1:39
Chapter 18
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
§ 7-38 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 7-38
1:40
ARTICLE I
Lock Haven City Authority
[Adopted 4-10-1952 by Ord. No. 312A (Ch. 1, Part 4A, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 18-1. Intention to organize City authority.
The Council hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an
authority under the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act of May
1945, as amended.9
§ 18-2. Articles of Incorporation.
The Mayor and City Clerk are hereby authorized and directed to execute on
behalf of the City of Lock Haven Articles of Incorporation for said Authority,
in substantially the following form:
Articles of Incorporation
To the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of May 2, 1945, P. L. 382,
known as "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as amended, the City
of Lock Haven, Clinton County, Pennsylvania, desiring to incorporate an
Authority thereunder, does hereby certify:
1. The name of the Authority is "Lock Haven City Authority."
2. Said Authority is formed under the provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945,
P.L. 382, as amended.
3. No other Authority organized under the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382,
as amended, is in existence in or for the incorporating municipality, the
City of Lock Haven.
4. The name of the incorporating municipality is City of Lock Haven,
Clinton County, Pennsylvania.
5. The names and addresses of its municipal authorities are as follows:
[Here followed the names, offices and addresses of the principal
officers of the City at the time of enactment of this article.]
6. The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the
Board of Authority to be formed hereby are as follows:
[Here followed the names, addresses and terms of office of the first
persons appointed to the Board of the Authority.]
7. The ordinance authorizing the creation of said Authority certified from
the records of the Council of the City of Lock Haven, together with
advertisement of notice of filing these Articles of Incorporation, are
each submitted herewith.
9. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 18-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-3
1:41
§ 18-3. Sewer project to be undertaken.
The initial project to be undertaken by the Authority is to acquire, hold,
construct, improve, maintain, operate, own, lease, either in the capacity
of lessor or lessee, sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof and sewage
treatment works, including works for treating and disposing of industrial
waste in and for the City of Lock Haven and for such other territory as it
may be authorized to serve.
§ 18-3 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 18-3
1:42
ARTICLE II
Redevelopment Authority of City of Lock Haven
[Adopted 5-29-1973 by Ord. No. 850A (Ch. 1, Part 4B, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 18-4. Declaration of need.
The Council of the City of Lock Haven does hereby specifically find and
declare that there is need for a redevelopment authority to function within
the territorial limits of the City of Lock Haven.
§ 18-5. Operation contingent upon issuance of incorporation.
The Redevelopment Authority of the City of Lock Haven shall immediately
become operative upon the issuance of the aforesaid Certificate of
Incorporation by the Secretary of the Commonwealth.
§ 18-6. Membership; appointments. [6-17-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-04]
The Redevelopment Authority of the City of Lock Haven shall consist of five
members, a majority of whom shall be residents of the City of Lock Haven,
and the remainder may be nonresidents who own and operate businesses
in the City in which the authority is to operate who shall be appointed by
the City Manager with the advice and consent of City Council for terms of
five years or until their successors are appointed and qualified; except that
members who are first appointed shall serve for terms of one, two, three,
four, and five years, respectively, from the date of their appointments.
§ 18-7. Powers and duties.
The Redevelopment Authority of the City of Lock Haven shall be organized
according to and shall have such powers and duties as are provided by the
provisions of the Urban Redevelopment Law of 1945, as from time to time
amended, May 24, P.L. 991.10
10.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1701 et seq.
§ 18-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-7
1:43
Chapter 30
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 81. Personnel — See Ch. 105.
§ 18-7 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 18-7
1:44
ARTICLE I
Planning Commission
[Adopted 3-20-1972 by Ord. No. 819A (Ch. 1, Part 5C, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 30-1. Commission established.
A planning commission, to be officially known as the "Planning Commission
of the City of Lock Haven," is hereby established and created.
§ 30-2. Purpose and function.
The purposes and the function of said Planning Commission shall be to
protect and promote the safety, health and the morals of the citizens of the
City of Lock Haven; to guide use of land and structures, type and location
of streets, public grounds and other facilities and to accomplish the other
purposes set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.11
§ 30-3. Composition; compensation; appointments. [Amended
2-19-1973 by Ord. No. 844A; 8-3-2009 by Ord. No. 840]
The Planning Commission of the City of Lock Haven shall consist of seven
members, all of whom shall serve without compensation; who shall be
appointed by the Council of the City of Lock Haven, and whose terms shall
be for a period of four years or until their successors are appointed and
qualified; except that all terms of the members first appointed pursuant to
this article, or appointed by virtue of any amendment hereto, shall be so
fixed that no more than three shall be reappointed or replaced during any
future calendar year.
§ 30-4. Powers, duties and administration.
Powers and duties of the Planning Commission of the City of Lock Haven
shall be as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
from time to time amended, and the administration of said Commission shall
be governed by the terms of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
11.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 30-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:45

ARTICLE II
Watershed Management Committee
[Adopted 1-21-1974 by Ord. No. 871A (Ch. 1, Part 5F, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 30-5. Committee established.
A watershed advisory committee to be officially known as the "Lock Haven
Watershed Management Committee" is hereby created.
§ 30-6. Purpose.
The purpose of the Committee shall be to provide technical assistance
and recommendations and to develop and implement a comprehensive
watershed management plan including, but not limited to, water quality,
forest management, erosion control, soil conservation and utilization, fish
and game management, recreational usage, fire protection, enforcement
and public information.
§ 30-7. Composition of Committee. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
The Committee shall be composed of one representative from each of the
following organizations, if possible:
§ 30-8. Annual report.
The Committee shall meet no less than once annually for an inspection
of the watershed and shall prepare an annual report of findings and
recommendations for submission to the City Manager.
A. Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Water Supply
Management.
B. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service.
C. Department of Environmental Protection, North Central Region.
D. Department of Conservation and Natural Resources.
E. Clinton County Agricultural Extension Service.
F. National Fish Hatchery, Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife.
G. Lock Haven University, Biological Sciences.
H. City of Lock Haven, Department of Public Works.
I. One public member.
§ 30-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-8
1:47

ARTICLE III
Civil Service Commission
[Adopted 2-4-1974 by Ord. No. 873A (Ch. 1, Part 5B, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 30-9. Commission established.
A civil service commission, to be officially known as the "Civil Service
Commission of the City of Lock Haven," is hereby established and created.
§ 30-10. Purpose and function.
The purposes and the function of said Civil Service Commission shall be to
conduct examinations of applicants for all positions which are to be filled
within the City government as required by the Civil Service Act(s) and to
advise City Council of the results of said examinations.
§ 30-11. Membership; compensation; appointment.
The Civil Service Commission of the City of Lock Haven shall consist of
three members, all of whom shall serve without compensation, who shall be
appointed by the Council of the City of Lock Haven and whose terms shall
be for a period of four years or until their successors are appointed and
qualified.
§ 30-12. Powers and duties.
Powers and duties of the Civil Service Commission of the City of Lock
Haven shall be as set forth in the Civil Service Act(s), as from time to time
amended, and the administration of said Commission shall be governed by
the terms of the Civil Service Act(s).
§ 30-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-12
1:49

ARTICLE IV
Code Enforcement Board of Appeals and Review
[Adopted 10-21-1974 by Ord. No. 894A (Ch. 1, Part 5A, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 30-13. Board of Appeals and Review established.
There is hereby established in the City of Lock Haven a board to be called
the "Code Enforcement Board of Appeals and Review," hereafter referred to
as "the Board."
§ 30-14. Functions. [Amended 3-17-1977 by Ord. No. 17B]
§ 30-15. Membership. [Amended 3-7-1977 by Ord. No. 17B]
A. The Board shall receive and decide upon all appeals from any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the City's authorized Code
Enforcement Officer rendered in the administration of the City's duly
adopted housing code, building code, plumbing code, electrical code,
fire prevention code or nonresidential property maintenance code.
B. At least twice yearly, the Board shall meet with the chief executive and
the Code Enforcement Officer(s) to review such codes to insure their
currency and adequacy in meeting the City's needs and shall
recommend to Council any changes, deletions or additions which they
may deem appropriate.
A. Appointment. The Board shall consist of five members who are qualified
by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to law,
building construction, health and safety, plumbing and electricity.
Members shall be appointed by the Council of the City of Lock Haven.
B. Terms of office. One member of the Board shall be appointed for a term
of one year, one member for a term of two years, one member for a term
of three years, one member for a term of four years, and one member
for a term of five years. Upon expiration of the term of office of a
member, his successor shall be appointed for a term of five years. A
vacancy shall be filled for an expired term in the same manner in which
the original appointment was made. Continued absence of any member
from regular meetings of the Board shall, at the discretion of the
Council, render any such member liable to immediate removal from
office by the Council.
C. Quorum. Three members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. In order to amend, modify or rescind any
provision of any code over which the Board has jurisdiction, or to
amend, modify or rescind any order of the City's authorized Code
Enforcement Officer, affirmative votes of at least three members of the
Board shall be required. No member of the Board shall pass upon any
question before the Board in which he, or any enterprise by which he is
employed, has a vested interest.
§ 30-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-16
1:51
§ 30-16. Duties and responsibilities. [Amended 3-17-1977 by Ord.
No. 17B]
§ 30-17. Appeal procedure. [Amended 3-7-1977 by Ord. No. 17B]
A. Meetings and records. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of
the Chairman and at other times as the Board may determine. All
hearings before the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall
keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon
every question or, if absent or otherwise failing to vote, indicating such
fact and other official actions. The minutes and records of all Board
meetings shall be public records.
B. Rules and regulations. The Board shall establish such rules and
regulations for its own procedures as it deems necessary, providing that
such rules and regulations are not inconsistent with provisions of the
codes over which it has jurisdiction.
C. Code review functions. In formulating recommendations for changes in,
deletions from or additions to any code under its jurisdiction, the
Board's consideration shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
(1) The currency of the latest adopted code or supplement thereof.
(2) The appropriateness of strict or lenient code standards.
(3) The adequacy of fee schedules.
(4) The utilization of new materials and techniques.
(5) The applicability of new standards.
(6) The adequacy and efficiency of administrative procedures.
(7) The adequacy of code provisions and standards to meet various
state and federal program requirements.
D. Code application functions. The Board may vary the application by the
Code Enforcement Officer of any provision of any code under its
jurisdiction in any particular case when, in its opinion, the
determination of the Code Enforcement Officer should be modified or
reversed. A decision by the Board to vary the application of any
provision of any code under its jurisdiction, and to affirm, modify or
rescind any order of the Code Enforcement Officer, shall specify in what
manner such variation or modification is to be made, the conditions
under which it is to be made and the reasons therefor.
A. Any appeal from the provisions of any code over which the Board has
jurisdiction shall be registered by the aggrieved party by filing with the
Code Enforcement Officer whose determination is being appealed and
with the Board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds upon which
the appeal is based. The Code Enforcement Officer with whom the
§ 30-16 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 30-17
1:52
appeal is filed shall forthwith transmit to the Board all documentary
material constituting the record upon which the action appealed was
taken.
B. Any person, firm, corporation or agency may register an appeal for the
review of any decision of any authorized Code Enforcement Officer of
the City of Lock Haven; provided, that such appeal is made in writing
within 10 days after such person, firm, corporation or agency has been
officially notified of such decision by the City's authorized Code
Enforcement Officer. Any such official notification shall include a
statement informing the addressee of his right to appeal and a
description of the procedure to be followed, and shall be accompanied
by all forms required to file such appeal.
C. Upon receipt of an appeal, the Board shall meet within a reasonable
period of time, not to exceed 35 days, to consider the merits of the
appeal and shall reach a decision without unnecessary or unreasonable
delay. Every decision of the Board shall be in writing and shall indicate
the vote on the decision. The Board's decision shall be promptly filed in
the appropriate code enforcement office and be a public record. A
certified copy of the decision shall be delivered to the person, firm,
corporation or agency by whom the appeal was filed.
D. Any person, firm, corporation or agency aggrieved by any decision of
the Board, or any administrative officer or agent affected thereby may
appeal such a decision within 30 days to the Court of Common Pleas, as
provided by law.
E. No action on any case under appeal shall be taken by any Code
Enforcement Officer, except as directed by the Board, until a decision is
rendered by the Board.
§ 30-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-17
1:53

ARTICLE V
Board of Health
[Adopted 3-7-1977 by Ord. No. 19B (Ch. 1, Part 5G, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 30-18. Creation; duties and powers.
A Board of Health is hereby created in and for the City of Lock Haven. The
said Board shall be constituted as provided by the Third Class City Code,
Act of 1931, June 23, P.L. 932, Article XXIII, §§ 2301 to 2304 and 2307 to
2311, as amended, 53 P.S. § 37301 et seq.,12 and shall perform all the duties
and may exercise all the powers conferred by law upon boards of health of
cities of the third class.
12.Editor's Note: See now 11 Pa.C.S.A. § 12301 et seq.
§ 30-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-18
1:55

ARTICLE VI
Shade Tree Commission
[Adopted 3-7-1977 by Ord. No. 24B (Ch. 1, Part 5E, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 30-19. Commission established.
A Shade Tree Commission is hereby created in and for the City of Lock
Haven. Said Commission shall be constituted as provided by the Third Class
City Code, Act of 1931, June 23, P.L. 932, Article XXXVIII, as amended, 53
P.S. § 38801 et seq.,13 and shall perform all the duties and may exercise all
the powers conferred by law upon shade tree commissions of cities of the
third class.
§ 30-20. Authority to assess penalties.
The Shade Tree Commission may assess penalties of not more than $25 for
each and every violation of any regulation of such Commission or of any
of the provisions of Article XXXVIII of the Third Class City Code, cited in
§ 30-19, so far as it relates to shade trees.
13.Editor's Note: See now 11 Pa.C.S.A. § 12416.
§ 30-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-20
1:57

ARTICLE VII
Appointment of Council Members to Boards and Commissions
[Adopted 12-29-1988 by Ord. No. 309B (Ch. 1, Part 11, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 30-21. Ineligibility of members.
§ 30-22. Appointment to Pension Funds Boards.14
Members of City Council shall continue to be eligible for appointment to
the Board of the Police Pension Fund and the Board of the City Employees
Retirement Fund.
A. Members of City Council shall not be eligible for or appointed to the:
(1) Planning Commission of the City of Lock Haven.
(2) Code Enforcement Board of Appeals and Review.
(3) Civil Service Commission of the City of Lock Haven.
(4) Board of Health.
(5) Annie Halenbake Ross Library Board of Directors.
(6) Zoning Hearing Board.
(7) Recreation and Parks Board.
B. Any member of Council presently serving as a member on one of these
agencies shall continue for the balance of the current term of office.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 30-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-22
1:59

ARTICLE VIII
Recreation and Parks Board
[Adopted 4-17-1995 by Ord. No. 492B (Ch. 1, Part 5D, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 30-23. Recreation and Parks Board established.
A Recreation and Parks Board in and for the City of Lock Haven be and the
same is hereby established and created to have, exercise and discharge the
powers and duties given unto said Recreation and Parks Board by the Act
of assembly approved June 23, 1931, P.L. 932, and the various amendments
and supplements made thereto.
§ 30-24. Appointment of members.
Said Board shall consist of seven members, appointed by Council.
§ 30-25. Term of office.
The members of the Board shall serve for a term to extend no longer
than five years or until their successors are appointed; members shall be
appointed for such terms as to cause the terms of not more than two
members to expire in any one calendar year.
§ 30-26. Compensation; vacancy.
The members of the Board shall serve without compensation, and vacancies
on the Board occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be for
the unexpired terms of the person formerly holding office, and such vacancy
shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments.
§ 30-27. Election of officers.
The members of the Board shall, at the annual reorganization meeting,
elect from its membership their own chairman, vice chairman and secretary,
and select all other necessary officers to serve for a period of one year.
Said Board shall have power to recommend the policy, maintenance and
promotion of public parks and recreation under the jurisdiction of the City
of Lock Haven. The Board shall have the power to adopt such rules and
regulations as may be necessary for the conduct of all business in its
jurisdiction.
§ 30-28. Chief Executive Officer.
The Director of Recreation and Parks shall be the chief executive of the
Board, but shall not be a member of the Board. He shall be entitled to attend
all regular meetings of the Board and participate in discussions, but shall
not be entitled to vote.
§ 30-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-28
1:61
Chapter 59
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firemen's Relief Association — See Ch. 68. Police Department — See Ch. 116.
§ 30-28 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 30-28
1:62
ARTICLE I
Organization
§ 59-1. Fire Department organization.
The Lock Haven Fire Department shall consist of three companies, each
of which shall individually be organized by the election of a President,
secretary, foreman and such other officers as each company may deem
necessary. The City may entrust to such companies the fire apparatus and
the property and appliances connected and used therewith under such rules
and regulations as the City may from time to time make and approve.
§ 59-2. Fire Department Advisory Board.
Each of the three City fire companies shall appoint two members of their
organization to serve on the Fire Department Advisory Board. One member
of each company shall be appointed for a term of two years, and the other
member to a term of four years. After initial election or appointment, all
terms of offices, except that position held by the Fire Chief, as hereinafter
provided, shall be for four years, beginning on July 1 of even-numbered
years. Advisory Board appointees shall have been members of their
companies for at least six years at the time of appointment. The seventh
member of the Fire Department Advisory Board shall be the Fire Chief and
shall automatically become a member by virtue of his appointment as Fire
Chief.
§ 59-3. Appointment of Chief, Deputy, and Assistant Chiefs.
[Amended 2-24-2014 by Ord. No. 931]
A. Qualifications. Any Fire Chief, deputy chief or assistant Fire Chief
appointed by the City shall have been a member of the Lock Haven Fire
Department for a period of at least six years at the time of said
appointment. He shall have satisfactorily completed an acceptable
training course in firefighting according to the standards established by
the City.
B. Selection and term of office. The term of office for Fire Chief, Deputy
Chief, and Assistant Fire Chief shall be two years, beginning on July 1 of
even-numbered years. Upon completion of said two-year term of office,
the Fire Department Advisory Board shall recommend to the City
Manager the appointment of the Deputy Chief as Fire Chief and the
appointment of the Assistant Fire Chief as Deputy Chief. The company
from which the outgoing Fire Chief is a member shall recommend to the
Fire Department Advisory Board one of its qualified members as
Assistant Fire Chief. If that person so recommended is qualified and
accepted by the Board, the Board shall recommend the nominee to the
City Manager for appointment as Assistant Fire Chief. Should the
person recommended to the Board not be qualified, the company from
which the nominee is a member shall be notified of the same and shall
recommend another member for consideration until the vacancy is
§ 59-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-3
1:63
§ 59-4. Employment of paid fire truck drivers. [Amended 4-7-1995
by Ord. No. 921A; 5-21-1984 by Ord. No. 198B; 2-24-2014 by Ord.
No. 931]
§ 59-5. Auxiliary and relief drivers. [Amended 2-24-2014 by Ord. No.
931]
Auxiliary and relief drivers shall be subject to the requirements of § 59-4A
of this chapter. They shall be under the control of and responsible to the
City Manager, Director of Public Safety or the Fire Chief as described in the
job description for the position.
§ 59-6. Vacancy in office of Fire Department Advisory Board.
Should a vacancy in office occur on the Fire Department Advisory Board,
except that office held by the Fire Chief, from whatever cause, the company
from which the office holder is a member shall immediately elect or appoint
one of its members to complete the unexpired term. Such elected or
appointed member shall be qualified according to provisions of § 59-2.
§ 59-7. Vacancy in office of Chief, Deputy Chief, or Assistant Chief.
[Amended 2-24-2014 by Ord. No. 931]
In case of a vacancy in the offices of Fire Chief, Deputy Chief, or Assistant
Fire Chief, from any cause, the Deputy Chief shall automatically be entitled
to appointment as Fire Chief, pending confirmation by the City Manager.
The company from which the outgoing Chief is a member shall immediately
recommend one of its members to the Fire Department Advisory Board for
filled. The Manager shall have the right to suspend or deprive of office
those persons appointed at any time for proper cause.
A. Qualifications. Paid fire truck drivers shall be members of one of the
three City fire companies and shall have a background of experience
and knowledge in firefighting and the operation of the emergency
equipment related thereto. They shall be at least 21 years of age and
shall submit to a physical examination once each year upon request by
the City. The cost of such physical examination will be paid by the City.
Paid drivers shall also be required to attend training programs related
to the driver's responsibilities when requested to do so by the City. Paid
drivers shall meet the qualifications included in the position
description, as prepared by the City of Lock Haven and amended from
time to time.
B. Term of and conditions of employment. Paid fire truck drivers shall be
employees of the City of Lock Haven. They shall be subject to policies
and regulations which are established by the City and may be
suspended or deprived of employment by the City at any time for proper
cause. They shall be under the control of and responsible to the City
Manager, Director of Public Safety or the Fire Chief as described in the
job description for the position.
§ 59-3 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 59-7
1:64
appointment to the office of Assistant Fire Chief, and the Assistant Fire
Chief shall automatically be recommended to the City Manager for the
office of Deputy Chief. Upon completion of such unexpired term, the office
holder shall then be appointed for a complete two-year term.
§ 59-8. Fire truck driver vacancy. [Amended 2-24-2014 by Ord. No.
931]
A. Should a vacancy occur in any position of part-time, auxiliary or relief
driver in any company, the company in which the vacancy exists shall
recommend one or more of its members to fill said vacancy. The Board
shall then recommend to the City Manager that person most qualified to
fill said vacancy. Should it not be possible for the company in which the
vacancy exists to fill the same from its membership, the Advisory Board
shall notify the other companies and solicit recommendations from
their membership for the position.
B. In case of a vacancy in the position of full time driver, the same
procedure shall be followed, with the exception that at least two names
shall be recommended by the Company with the vacancy, and the
Advisory Board shall recommend at least two names to the City
Manager, with those names ranked in order of qualifications from high
to low.
§ 59-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-8
1:65

ARTICLE II
Duties and Responsibilities
§ 59-9. Duties of Fire Department Advisory Board. [Amended
2-24-2014 by Ord. No. 931]
The Fire Department Advisory Board shall serve as liaison between the City
and the Fire Department in matters relating to the operation and control
of the Fire Department and shall have authority to make recommendations
to the City concerning the same. The Advisory Board shall also function as
a problem solving, dispute settling panel concerned with Fire Department
matters and shall have such other powers and duties as the City may deem
necessary.
§ 59-10. General duties of Chief.
A. The Fire Chief shall be governed in the performance of his duties by
such rules and regulations as may be adopted from time to time by the
City. [Amended 2-24-2014 by Ord. No. 931]
B. The Fire Chief shall have the power to recommend the suspension of
any member or members of any company of the Fire Department for
dereliction of duty, disobeying his orders or misconduct, and shall
submit a report of his actions and the causes for the same to the Fire
Department Advisory Board. The Fire Department Advisory Board shall
review the charges and action taken and shall report their findings and
recommendations to the City Manager for disposition.
C. The Fire Chief shall regularly visit the three companies of the Fire
Department and see that the apparatus, buildings and all property in
possession of the three companies are in proper condition. He shall
make a report of the same to the Fire Department Advisory Board and
the City when he deems necessary, with such recommendations as he
may think proper.
D. The Fire Chief shall attend all fires occurring in the City and shall have
the entire command of the Department. He shall supervise and direct
the operations of each fire company thereat in such manner as to
preserve property from destruction by fire and to prevent an
unnecessary use of water. He shall have entire control of the fire ground
during the time of the fire.
E. The Fire Chief shall have control of and be responsible for the
dispatching of the equipment of any company to any fire outside the
City limits according to any mutual aid agreement with such
communities, or to any parade or special event. No permission shall be
granted at any time to take all of the fire apparatus out of the City, but
sufficient apparatus shall be retained at all times to safeguard properly
all property within the City limits.
§ 59-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-10
1:67
§ 59-11. General duties of Deputy and Assistant Chiefs. [Amended
3-7-1977 by Ord. No. 16B; 2-24-2014 by Ord. No. 931]
§ 59-12. General duties of drivers. [Amended 2-24-2014 by Ord. No.
931]
§ 59-13. Duties of firemen at fires.
It shall be the duty of every fireman, immediately upon an alarm of fire,
to accompany his apparatus to or respond to the location of the fire and
perform such duties as may be required of him by the superior officer.
F. The Fire Chief shall make monthly and annual reports to the City,
setting forth the activities of the Fire Department.
G. The Fire Chief shall keep an accurate record of all fires occurring within
the City which shall set forth such information as shall be necessary to
accurately describe each fire. Such book to be furnished by the City and
to be known as the "record of fires."
A. The Deputy and Assistant Chiefs shall attend all fires occurring in the
City and aid the Fire Chief in the discharge of his duties and act under
his direction. In the absence of the Fire Chief, the Deputy Chief or
Assistant Chief shall act as Fire Chief, with all of his powers and all of
his orders shall be respected and obeyed by the Fire Department.
B. The Deputy Chief shall, under the direction of the Fire Chief and
according to the standards established by him and the City, conduct
periodic inspections for the prevention of fire and shall make a monthly
report of the locations of said inspections together with an account of
any corrective action taken.
A. Paid Fire Department drivers shall be responsible for the care and
maintenance of the designated areas of the fire station in which they
are employed, and all emergency and other equipment housed in the
same.
B. It shall be the duty of the driver to respond to any fire reported to him
and to assume the responsibilities of command at the fire scene until
such time as he is relieved of that responsibility by the Fire Chief,
Deputy, or Assistant Fire Chief or other superior officer. He shall be
responsible for the operation and care of the equipment he
accompanies to the fire and the general cleaning and maintenance of
the same upon return to the station.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the driver of each company to enforce
the rules and regulations of the company in the absence of the Fire
Chief or Deputy or Assistant Fire Chiefs at the fire scene, while en route
to and from the fire scene, and in the station house.
§ 59-10 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 59-13
1:68
ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§ 59-14. Use of intoxicating liquor.
No spirituous or malt liquor shall be allowed in any engine or other house
belonging to the Fire Department; or to be used by anyone in the Fire
Department when on duty. Any member intoxicated about any engine house,
or other house used by the Fire Department, at any fire, or alarm of fire
shall be subject to expulsion.
§ 59-15. Use of apparatus.
The apparatus of the Fire Department, unless by special order of the
Director of Public Safety or the Fire Chief, shall not be used for any other
purpose than the extinguishment of fires or the training therefor.
§ 59-16. Raising funds by entertainment.
The Fire Department, or any constituent part thereof, shall not offer any
entertainment or amusement to the public for the purpose of raising funds
which, in the judgment of the City Manager, is detrimental to and reflects
poorly upon the Department or the City.
§ 59-17. Inspection of companies.
Inspections of the entire Fire Department shall be made annually during
Fire Prevention Week by the Fire Chief and the City officials.
§ 59-18. Power of Council to suspend or expel company, officer or
member.
The City Council or City Manager shall have power to suspend or expel
any company, officer or member of the Fire Department for bad behavior,
insubordination, disturbance of the public peace or for any other cause
which they may deem sufficient. When any company shall have been
suspended or expelled, all fire apparatus and property of the City in their
possession shall be delivered to the City Council or Manager, or to such
officer as they may direct.
§ 59-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-18
1:69
Chapter 68
FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 59.
§ 68-1. Firemen's Relief Association recognized.
The Lock Haven Firemen's Relief Association of Lock Haven, Pennsylvania,
be and it is hereby officially recognized by the City Council of the City
of Lock Haven, Pennsylvania, as an organization formed for the purpose
of maintaining an association for beneficial and protective purposes to
its members and their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or
permanent disability or accident, from the funds collected therein.
§ 68-2. Association designated to receive funds from State
Treasurer. [Amended 12-30-1985 by Ord. No. 232B]
The aforesaid Lock Haven Firemen's Relief Association of Lock Haven,
Pennsylvania, be and it is hereby designated by the City Council of Lock
Haven, as the proper association to receive such funds as are due and
payable to the City by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania from the
foreign fire insurance tax on account of volunteer firefighters.
§ 68-3. Payment to association. [Amended 12-30-1985 by Ord. No.
232B]
The City shall, within 60 days of receipt, pay to the Association, all such sum
or sums of money that may hereafter be due and payable to the City by the
Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania, on account of volunteer firefighters
in accordance with the Foreign Fire Insurance Tax Distribution Law, Act No.
1984-205, § 701 et seq., 53 P.S. § 895.701 et seq.
Chapter 81
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 7.
Pensions — See Ch. 99.
Personnel — See Ch. 105.
§ 59-18 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 68-3
1:70
ARTICLE I
Health Officer
[Adopted 10-6-1975 by Ord. No. 936A; amended in its entirety
2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670 (Ch. 1, Part 3, §§ 1-301 and 1-302, of the
2003 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 81-1. Office established; qualifications and responsibilities.
The position of Health Officer is hereby established within the Department
of Public Safety, Code Enforcement Division. The qualifications and
responsibilities of the Health Officer shall be as set forth in a job description
prepared by the City Manager, and such description shall include
qualifications and responsibilities associated with the position of Health
Officer.
§ 81-2. Appointment of Health Officer.
Appointment to the position of Health Officer shall be in a manner
consistent with the civil service provisions of the Third Class City Code and
the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Health.
§ 81-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-2
1:71

ARTICLE II
Planner/Development Coordinator
[Adopted 6-7-1976 by Ord. No. 955A; amended in its entirety
2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670 (Ch. 1, Part 3, § 1-303, of the 2003 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 81-3. Position established.
The full-time position of Planner/Development Coordinator is hereby
established within the Department of Administration.
§ 81-4. Responsibilities.
The Planner/Development Coordinator shall be responsible to the City
Manager for the administration, direction and supervision of City planning
and community development services and activities as more fully described
in the applicable job description.
§ 81-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-4
1:73

ARTICLE III
Chief of Police
[Adopted 6-7-1976 by Ord. No. 955A; amended in its entirety
2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670 (Ch. 1, Part 3, § 1-304, of the 2003 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 81-5. Position established.
The full-time position of Chief of Police is hereby established within the
Department of Public Safety.
§ 81-6. Responsibilities.
The Chief of Police shall be responsible to the Director of Public Safety for
the administration, direction and supervision of City police services which
include traffic control and safety and City parking facilities.
§ 81-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-6
1:75
Chapter 99
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 128.
§ 81-6 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 81-6
1:76
ARTICLE I
Police Pension Fund
[Adopted 3-26-1963 by Ord. No. 506A (Ch. 1, Part 8A, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 99-1. Police Pension Fund established.
A police pension and retirement fund is hereby established by the City of
Lock Haven, which shall be known and designated as the "Police Pension
Fund" and shall hereafter be referred to in this article as the "fund."
§ 99-2. Maintenance, direction and distribution of fund.
The fund shall be maintained, directed, applied and distributed pursuant
to the provisions herein contained and the regulations adopted pursuant
hereto for the benefit of the members of the association herein created.
§ 99-3. Police Pension Fund Board created; membership. [Amended
5-1-1972 by Ord. No. 826A; 2-16-1976 by Ord. No. 950A; 4-21-1980
by Ord. No. 106B; 12-30-1985 by Ord. No. 233B; 8-3-1998 by Ord.
No. 561B; 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 67015]
A Board of seven members is hereby constituted and created, which shall be
known and designated as the "Police Pension Fund Board," and hereinafter
referred to in this article as the "Board," and which shall consist of the
following:
A. The City Treasurer of the City of Lock Haven, whose membership shall
be concurrent with his term of office as said Treasurer. The City
Treasurer shall be the Treasurer of the Police Pension Fund Board.
B. Three Councilmen of the City of Lock Haven, who shall be appointed by
the vote of City Council and who shall serve for terms of two years or
until a successor is appointed. A vacancy occurring during a term shall
be filled for the unexpired term by the election of a successor in the
same manner as his predecessor.
C. Two members of that group consisting of active members of the police
force, whose membership to said Board shall be by election by the
active members of the police force and whose term of office shall be
three years. Terms of office shall be staggered to provide continuity of
Board membership. A vacancy occurring during a term of office shall be
filled for the unexpired term by election of a successor in the same
manner as his predecessor.
D. One member of that group consisting of retired members of the police
force, whose membership to said Board shall be by election by retired
members of the police force. The term of office shall be for three years
and shall not be concurrent with the term of either of the members of
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 99-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-3
1:77
§ 99-4. Compensation of Board; reimbursement of expenses.
The members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but shall be
reimbursed from the fund for any necessary expenditures, and no member
shall suffer loss of salary or wages through serving on the Board.
§ 99-5. Powers of Board; corporate depository. [Amended 3-3-1970
by Ord. No. 762A]
§ 99-6. Duties of Board. [Amended 3-3-1970 by Ord. No. 762A;
4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 106B; 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
The Board shall, with approval of Council of the City and subject to the
limitations of this article and of law:
the Board elected pursuant to Subsection C above. A vacancy occurring
during a term of office shall be filled for the unexpired term by election
of a successor in the same manner as his predecessor. The terms
of Board members elected by ballots dated April 1996 are hereby
extended through February 28, 1999, at which time a new term of office
shall be filled by a new election. Said term shall not be concurrent with
the terms of either member of the Board elected pursuant to Subsection
C above.
A. The Board may, from time to time, with approval of Council of the City
and subject to the limitations of this article and of law:
(1) Establish rules and regulations for the administration of the fund
and the transaction of its business. All such rules and regulations
shall, however, be subject to the approval of Council; and Council
may, from time to time, by ordinance, alter, modify, change or
repeal such rules and regulations and establish new rules and
regulations for the administration of the fund by the Board and the
transaction of its business.
(2) Appoint a Secretary and such medical, clerical and other
employees as may be necessary.
(3) Determine and fix the compensation of all persons employed by the
Board.
B. A corporate depository chosen by the Board shall care for, manage,
invest and dispose of (as part of the fund) all money or property, real,
personal or mixed, taken by the City of Lock Haven by gift, grant, devise
or bequest, in trust, for the benefit of such pension fund, subject to the
provisions of this article and future regulations by Council, and subject
to such directions not inconsistent therewith as the donors of such
funds and property may prescribe.
A. Hold an annual meeting during the second calendar quarter of each
year and thereat present the annual report of the depository showing
the condition of the investments of the fund and evidencing receipts,
§ 99-3 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-6
1:78
§ 99-7. Police Pension Fund Association established; membership
requirements. [Amended 3-7-1977 by Ord. No. 6B; 4-20-1981 by
Ord. No. 130B]
An association is hereby constituted and created which shall be known and
designated as the "Police Pension Fund Association," herein referred to as
the "Association."
§ 99-8. Duties of Association.
The members of the Association shall, subject to the limitations of this
article and of law:
charges and disbursements during the previous year, which depository
report will be made part of the record of the proceedings and a copy
of which shall be filed with the Council of the City of Lock Haven, and
copies of which shall be furnished to each member of the association
requesting the same.
B. Hold such special meetings as the efficient discharge of their duties
require; and the Chairman may, and upon request in writing of three
members of the Board shall, call special meetings of the Board upon 24
hours' notice to each member, which notice shall state whether such
meeting is to be convened for special or general business; but such
notice may be waived by unanimous consent of the members.
C. Designate a depository or depositories for the fund, which designation
shall be valid until rescinded and another is designated by similar
action; and the Treasurer of the Board shall immediately deposit all
monies in the fund therewith in the name of the fund.
D. Keep all records and accounts as shall be necessary for the efficient
execution of this article.
E. Furnish to Council such financial and other reports as it may, from time
to time, request.
A. The membership of the Association shall consist of each active member
of the police force now or hereafter employed by the City of Lock
Haven. Admission to membership shall be automatic by virtue of such
employment and each person so employed shall and must become a
member of the Association.
B. Each active member of the police force shall contribute to the fund in
accordance with this article from the date of his employment as a
member of the police force.
A. Establish rules and regulations for the administration and transaction
of its business.
B. Elect officers in accordance with established rules and regulations to
represent the Association.
§ 99-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-8
1:79
§ 99-9. Control of fund.
The fund shall be under, and is hereby committed to, the direction and
control of the Board.
§ 99-10. Annual appropriation by City. [Amended 3-3-1986 by Ord.
No. 233B]
The City of Lock Haven shall annually appropriate and pay into the fund
not less than the minimum obligation as required by the Municipal Pension
Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act (Act 205 of 1984) as certified to
the Council of the City by the chief administrative officer in accordance with
Section 304 of the aforesaid Act.16
§ 99-11. Investment of funds. [Amended 3-3-1970 by Ord. No. 762A]
The depository shall invest the principal of the fund and any accumulated
interest thereon not necessary for the immediate payment of pensions
hereunder in:
C. Certify to the Board and Council annually a list of the members of the
Association in good standing and the amount of salaries and wages paid
to each member as a member of the police force of the City, together
with a list of members of the Association who were during said year
dismissed, or who resigned or terminated their service, and the date
thereof.
D. Furnish to the Board and Council, upon request, such information
relative to the subject of this article as the Board or Council shall
require.
A. The bonds or obligations of the United States or the United States
Treasury, or those for the payment of principal and interest on which
the faith and credit of the United States is pledged.
B. Bonds or other interest bearing obligations of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or those for the payment of principal and interest on
which the faith and credit of the Commonwealth is pledged.
C. Bonds or other interest-bearing obligations of any county, City,
borough, township or school district of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or those for the payment of which the faith and credit of
such political subdivision is pledged; provided, that at the date of the
investment in such bonds or other interest-bearing obligations, such
political subdivision is not in default in payment of principal or interest
owed by it on any part of its bonded indebtedness.
D. Any other investment which is legal for fiduciaries.
16.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.304.
§ 99-8 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-12
1:80
§ 99-12. Inalienability of pension payments.
The pension herein provided for shall not be subject to attachment or
execution and shall be payable only to the beneficiary designated and shall
not be subject to assignment or transfer.
§ 99-13. Eligibility for retirement; amount of pension payment;
widow's and survivor's benefits; service increments. [Amended
2-2-1965 by Ord. No. 533A; 11-30-1965 by Ord. No. 542A; 2-1-1966
by Ord. No. 561A; 7-2-1968 by Ord. No. 664A; 2-18-1969 by Ord. No.
709A; 3-3-1970 by Ord. No. 762A; 12-20-1971 by Ord. No. 809A;
3-7-1977 by Ord. No. 6B; 6-20-1977 by Ord. No. 40B; 6-20-1977 by
Ord. No. 41B; 12-30-1985 by Ord. No. 233B; 3-3-1986 by Ord. No.
236B; 12-19-1994 by Ord. No. 482B]
A. Any member of the Association who has attained 20 years of service as
an active member of the police force shall be entitled to a pension in
accordance with the terms of Subsections B and C hereof.
B. Payments in the amount provided in Subsection C hereof shall be
payable to members of the Association who are entitled to a pension
pursuant to Subsection A hereof upon attaining age 50 or retiring from
active service as a police officer, whichever event occurs later.
C. Upon becoming eligible for the commencement of payments pursuant
to Subsections A and B herein, the member shall apply to the Board
and, after the aforesaid date, the Board shall pay said member from the
fund during the remainder of his or her natural life, in monthly
installments, a pension in an amount annually equal to 50% of the
highest one year's W-2 earnings during the last three years of service
immediately preceding retirement from active service as a police
officer.
D. Surviving spouse benefits. [Amended 10-3-2011 by Ord. No. 88917]
(1) The surviving spouse of a member of the Association who retires on
pension or who has attained 20 or more years of active service with
the City of Lock Haven police force and has attained the age of 50
years shall be entitled to benefits. The surviving spouse shall be
eligible for benefits for the remainder of the surviving spouse's
lifetime or until the surviving spouse remarries. If no spouse
survives, or if the surviving spouse subsequently dies or remarries,
then the child or children, under 18 years of age, of the member of
the Association who retires on pension or who has attained 20 or
more years of active service with the City of Lock Haven police
force and has attained the age of 50 years who dies from causes
which would not entitle his survivors to a survivor annuity under
the terms of Pennsylvania Act 51 of 200918 shall be entitled to
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
18.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 891.
§ 99-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-13
1:81
benefits until reaching the age of 18 years. Such benefits shall be
paid in monthly installments to those entitled to receive benefits in
the amount of 50% of the benefit that the member was receiving
at the time of his death or was entitled to receive at the time
of his death had he retired at the time of his death. No survivor
benefit shall be payable in the event of the death of a member
who terminates employment with entitlement to a vested benefit
under § 99-14 but has not commenced that benefit at the time of
his death.
(2) Applications for such benefit shall be made to the Board after the
death of the member of the Association. Each member of the
Association shall contribute monthly to the fund an amount equal to
1/2 of 1% of the member's monthly salary for survivor benefits.
E. "Salary," as used in this section, shall be construed to mean the base
minimum compensation, plus the longevity increment received by the
member and shall not be construed to include any overtime pay
received by the member.
F. In addition to the retirement allowance which is authorized to be paid
from the Police Pension Fund and notwithstanding the limitations
therein placed upon such retirement allowances and upon
contributions, every contributor who shall become entitled to the
retirement allowance shall also be entitled to the payment of a "service
increment" in accordance with and subject to the conditions hereafter
set forth:
(1) "Service increment" shall be the sum obtained by computing the
number of whole years after having served the minimum required
by this article for the vesting of a pension during which a
contributor has been employed by such City and paid out of the City
treasury and multiplying the said number of years so computed by
an amount equal to 1/40 of the retirement allowance which has
become payable to such contributor in accordance with the
provisions of this article. No service increment shall be paid in
excess of $100 per month.
(2) Each contributor, beginning on January 1, 2012, will pay into the
retirement fund a monthly sum equal to 1% of total W-2 earnings.
This contribution is in addition to any contribution for any other
benefits paid under the pension fund, including widow and spouse
benefits and longevity.19
(3) Service increment contribution shall be paid at the same time and
in the same manner as retirement contributions and may be
withdrawn in full, without interest, by persons who leave the
employment of such City, subject to the same conditions by which
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 99-13 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-13
1:82
§ 99-14. Eligibility for vesting after 12 years of service. [Amended
2-2-1965 by Ord. No. 533A; 11-30-1965 by Ord. No. 542A; 2-1-1966
by Ord. No. 561A; 7-2-1968 by Ord. No. 664A; 2-18-1969 by Ord. No.
709A; 3-3-1970 by Ord. No. 762A; 12-20-1971 by Ord. No. 809A;
3-7-1977 by Ord. No. 6B; 6-20-1977 by Ord. No. 40B; 6-20-1977 by
Ord. No. 41B; 12-30-1985 by Ord. No. 233B; 3-3-1986 by Ord. No.
236B; 12-19-1994 by Ord. No. 482B; 10-1-2001 by Ord. No. 620B]
retirement contributions may be withdrawn, or by persons who
retired before becoming entitled to any service increment.
A. Effective for police officers who terminate employment on or after
January 1, 1999, a limited vested benefit shall be available pursuant to
the provisions below. As such, should a member of the Police Pension
Fund ("fund"), before completing the minimum age and minimum
period of continuous service requirements, but after having completed
12 years of full-time service with the City of Lock Haven Police
Department ("service") so elected, the member shall be entitled to vest
his pension benefit subject to the following conditions:
(1) The member must file with the Police Pension Board ("Board") of
the fund a written notice of his or her intention to vest.
(2) The member must include in the notice, the date the member
intends to terminate his or her service, and must acknowledge that
there is no entitlement to post-retirement medical benefits
pursuant to this limited vested benefit unless the member shall
have accrued at least 20 years of service, then any possible
entitlement to post-retirement medical benefits shall be as
described in the Act 111 Arbitration Award (14 L 360 01572 94J)
dated February 5, 1996.
(3) The member must be in good standing with the Police Department
on the date of notice to vest.
(4) The Board shall indicate on the notice to vest the highest one year's
W-2 earnings during the last three years of service preceding said
date.
(5) The member shall forgo any other benefits under the plan.
B. Upon reaching the date which would have been the member's
retirement date had the member continued his full-time employment
with the Police Department, the member shall notify the Board, in
writing, that the member desires to collect his or her pension. The
amount of retirement benefits the member is entitled to receive
pursuant to this provision shall be computed as follows:
(1) The initial determination of the member's base retirement benefits
shall be computed on the highest one year's W-2 earnings during
the last three years of service indicated on the notice to vest.
§ 99-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-14
1:83
§ 99-15. Definitions; disability benefits. [Amended 3-2-1971 by Ord.
No. 789A; 12-30-1985 by Ord. No. 233B; 3-3-1986 by Ord. No. 236B]
(2) The portion of the base retirement benefits due the member shall
be determined by applying to the base amount the ratio determined
by the number of years of service at termination divided by 20,
which represents the minimum number of years of service required
to receive base retirement benefits. These benefits will not be
payable until the member reaches the age of 50.
Examples
Years at
Vesting
Normal1
Retirement
Years
Actual Benefit2
Multiplier for
Vesting
% of Salary at
Retirement
12 20 12/20 30%
13 20 13/20 32.5%
14 20 14/20 35%
15 20 15/20 37.5%
16 20 16/20 40%
17 20 17/20 42.5%
18 20 18/20 45%
19 20 19/20 47.5%
20 20 20/20 50%
NOTES:
1 Normal retirement = 20 years of service.
2 To be multiplied by the base amount of retirement at normal
retirement.
A. Definitions.
(1) As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INJURY — Only violence to the physical structure of the body and
such disease or infection as naturally results therefrom.
INJURY SUSTAINED WHILE IN THE COURSE OF ACTIVE DUTY
AS A MEMBER OF THE POLICE FORCE — Shall not include an
injury caused by an act of a third person intended to injure the
member because of reasons personal to him, but shall include all
other injuries sustained while the employee is actually engaged in
the furtherance of his duties as a member of the police force.
§ 99-14 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-15
1:84
§ 99-16. Refund of member's contribution; status of military
service. [Amended 1-19-1998 by Ord. No. 539B-A; 2-24-2003 by Ord.
No. 670]
PERMANENT DISABILITY — A physical condition that
permanently prevents the member from discharging the duties of
an active member of the police force.
(2) The terms "salary," "wage," "monthly salary," "monthly wage or
salary," "salaries and wages" or any other similar term as used
throughout this article shall be construed to mean the base
minimum compensation, plus longevity increment received by the
member and shall not be construed to include any overtime pay
received by the member.
B. Disability benefits. The Board shall pay to each member of the
Association who, after one year of service on the police force, shall be
permanently disabled as a result of an injury sustained in the course of
active duty as a member of the police force, a monthly disability benefit
equal to 2 1/2% of the member's final monthly salary times the
member's complete years of service; provided, however, that the
maximum disability benefit shall be 50% of the member's final monthly
salary.
C. The pension provided for in this section shall be paid in monthly
installments and during such periods as there shall be sufficient
principal in the fund to make the payments.
D. A pension provided for in this section shall be paid in addition to any
workmen's compensation or benefits which the member shall receive by
reason of disability.
E. The surviving spouse of an Association member receiving disability
pension hereunder at the time of death shall be eligible for benefits the
remainder of the surviving spouse's lifetime or until the surviving
spouse remarries. If there is no surviving spouse, or if the surviving
spouse subsequently dies or remarries, then the child or children under
18 years of age of such deceased member of the Association shall be
entitled to benefits until reaching the age of 18. Such benefits shall be
paid in monthly installments to those entitled to receive benefits and
shall be calculated at the rate of 50% of the disability pension the
member was receiving at the time of death. Application for such benefit
shall be made to the Board after the death of the member of the
Association.
A. If a member of the Association contributing to the fund shall be
dismissed by the City, or for any cause cease to be a member of the
Association before he becomes entitled to a pension hereunder, the
total amount of the contribution paid into the fund by the member,
except life insurance premiums, shall upon request be refunded in full,
without interest.
§ 99-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-16
1:85
§ 99-17. Elected officials ineligible for pension payments.
A person receiving a pension hereunder, who serves in any City office to
which he was elected by popular vote, during the term of said office, said
person shall not be entitled to said pension.
§ 99-18. Disbursements from fund. [Amended 3-3-1970 by Ord. No.
762A]
All disbursements from the fund shall be by check or order drawn by the
authorized depository.
B. If a member of the Association enters into the active military or naval
service of the United States government and shall, at the time of his
entry into such service or immediately thereafter, file with the City
Treasurer a statement under oath setting forth that he intends to retain
his position with the City of Lock Haven and resume his duties at the
expiration of his military or naval service, and such member shall pay to
the fund monthly during the time he is in such military or naval service
a sum equal to that which he would have paid had he been a member
during the period for which he desires credit, then in such case the
period of his military or naval service shall be included in computing his
years of service in the employ of the City.
C. In the event of the death of a member of the Association before he
becomes entitled to the pension herein provided for, the total of the
contributions paid into the fund by said member shall be paid to the
estate of said deceased employee, without interest.
D. In the event of the death of a member of the Association while receiving
pension hereunder, but before the amount of the pension received shall
equal the total amount of contributions paid into the fund, the
difference between the amount received as pension and the amount
contributed to the fund by the deceased member shall be paid to the
estate of said deceased employee, without interest.
E. A member of the police pension fund who is a contributor or who served
in the armed forces of the United States subsequent to September 1,
1940, and who was not a member of the police pension plan fund prior
to such military service, shall be entitled to have full credit for each
year or fraction thereof, not to exceed three years of such service, upon
his payment to the police pension fund an amount equal to that which
he would have paid had he been a member during the period for which
he desires credit, and his payment to such fund of an additional amount
as the equivalent of contributions of the City on account of such military
service. The amount to be paid by the member for purchase of military
service shall be determined by the fund's actuary. This provision shall
apply irrespective of date of employment. [Amended 11-4-2013 by
Ord. No. 925]
§ 99-16 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-19
1:86
§ 99-19. Payment of benefits.
Payments of pensions or allowances under this article shall be made solely
out of the moneys and property in the Police Pension Fund and shall not be
a charge on any other fund in the treasury of the City or under its control.
§ 99-20. Treasurer's bond.
The Treasurer shall give surety bond approved by the Board in such sum
as the Board may determine for the faithful performance of his duties. The
premium for such bond shall be paid by the Board out of the funds entrusted
to them.
§ 99-21. Duties of Treasurer.
It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to keep account of all moneys coming
into his hands belonging to the Board and of all disbursements of the same.
All moneys received by the Treasurer shall forthwith be deposited in the
depository chosen by the said Board in the name of the Police Pension Fund.
§ 99-22. Financial report by depository. [Amended 3-3-1970 by Ord.
No. 762A]
The depository or someone employed by it shall at least once a year submit
to the Board and to the Council of the City of Lock Haven a statement of
the financial condition of the fund and of the accounts received and paid
out during the year, and of all investments made by the depository and the
condition of such investments.
§ 99-23. Retirement Committee. [Added 4-21-1980 by Ord. No.
106B]
There is hereby created a Retirement Committee composed of the
Treasurer of the Board and the Secretary of the Board. The Committee shall
receive applications for benefits, shall approve or disapprove applications
and shall transmit approved applications to the depository for benefit
payments in accordance therewith. The Board may designate the
Committee to execute any document(s) on behalf of the Board, in which
event the Board shall notify the depository in writing of such action.
§ 99-24. Applicable provisions of Internal Revenue Code. [Added
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 625B; amended 2-2-2009 by Ord. No. 833]
A. Definitions. The following words and phrases are hereby introduced
and defined for purposes of this section only:
LEASED EMPLOYEE — Effective as of January 1, 1997, any person
(other than an employee of the recipient) who, pursuant to an
agreement between the recipient and any other person ("leasing
organization"), has performed services for the recipient [or for the
recipient and related persons determined in accordance with Code
§ 99-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-24
1:87
Section 414(n)(6)20] on a substantially full-time basis for a period of
at least one year, and such services are under primary direction and
control of the recipient.
LIMITATION YEAR — The plan year, for purposes of applying the
limitations under the current article.
B. Maximum annual benefit.
(1) General rule. Except as otherwise provided, this plan shall at all
times comply with the provisions of Code Section 41521 and the
regulations thereunder, the terms of which are specifically
incorporated herein by reference. If a benefit payable to a
participant under this plan would otherwise exceed the limit under
Code Section 415, the benefit will be reduced to the maximum
permissible benefit.
(2) Effective date. If there is more than one permissible effective date
for any required change in the Code Section 415(b)22 provisions,
then the change shall be effective as of the latest permissible
effective date; however, any adjustment in the dollar limit under
Code Section 415(b)(1)(A),23 whether required or permissible, shall
take effect automatically as of the earliest permissible effective
date. The "applicable mortality table" in Revenue Ruling 2001-62
became effective as of December 31, 2002, and shall remain
effective through December 31, 2007. The "applicable mortality
table" and "applicable interest rate" after December 31, 2007, is
found in Revenue Ruling 2007-67.
(3) No reduction in accrued benefits. Notwithstanding the above, no
change in the limits under this section shall reduce the benefit of
any participant.
(4) Multiple plans. If a participant also participates in one or more
other plans that are required to be aggregated with this plan for
purposes of determining the limits under Code Section 415(b),24
and if the aggregated benefits would otherwise exceed the limit
under Code Section 415(b), then benefits shall be reduced first
under this plan.
(5) Mandatory contributions. Participant contributions are annual
additions, and any benefit attributable to participant contributions
is not included in the benefit subject to the limits of Code Section
415(b).25 This subsection does not apply to contributions "picked
up" in accordance with Code Section 414(h).26
20.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 414(n)(6).
21.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415.
22.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415(b).
23.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415(b)(1)(A).
24.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415(b).
25.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415(b).
§ 99-24 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-24
1:88
(6) Permissive service credit. Effective as of January 1, 1998, if a
participant makes a purchase of permissive service credit [within
the meaning of Code Section 415(n)27] under the plan, the benefit
derived from the contributions made to purchase the service credit
shall be treated as part of the benefit subject to the limitations
under this section.
(7) Benefit less than $10,000. Benefits paid to a participant which total
less than $10,000 from all defined benefit plans maintained by the
employer expressed as an annual benefit shall be deemed not to
exceed the limitations of this section, provided that the employer
has not at any time maintained a defined contribution plan in which
the participant has participated; however, in the case of a
participant who is not receiving a disability retirement benefit or a
death benefit, with fewer than 10 years of service, the limitation
expressed in this Subsection B(7) shall be reduced by 1/10 for each
year of service less than 10, but in no event shall this limitation be
less than $1,000. In the event that a participant has less than 10
years of service with the employer, the limitation of this section
shall be reduced by multiplying the otherwise applicable limitation
by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of years of
service with the employer. [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 910]
C. Limit on annual additions.
(1) Annual additions. Except as otherwise provided, annual additions
(which include participant contributions) under this plan shall at all
times comply with the provisions of Code Section 415(c)28 and the
regulations thereunder, the terms of which are specifically
incorporated herein by reference. If an annual addition would
otherwise exceed the limit under Code Section 415(c), the excess
annual addition will be eliminated in accordance with methods
permitted under Revenue Procedure 2008-50 (Revenue Procedure
2006-27 prior to 2009) or its successor.
(2) Multiple plans. If a participant also participates in one or more
other plans that are required to be aggregated with this plan for
purposes of determining the limits under Code Section 415(c),29
and if the annual additions would otherwise exceed the limit under
Code Section 415(c), annual additions will first be reduced under
the other plan. If there is more than one other plan, annual
additions will first be reduced under the plan with the greatest
amount of annual additions.
26.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 414(h).
27.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415(n).
28.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415(c).
29.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415(c).
§ 99-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-24
1:89
(3) Effective date. The limits under which Code Section 415(c)30 are
adjusted periodically in accordance with changes in the law or costof-
living adjustments without the need for a plan amendment. If
there is more than one permissible effective date for any required
change relating to Code Section 415(c), then the change shall be
effective as of the earliest permissible effective date.
(4) Code Section 415 compensation. For the purposes of the annual
additions limitations of Code Section 415(c)31 and this section,
"compensation" includes wages within the meaning of Section
3401(a)32 (for the purpose of income tax withholding at the source),
plus amounts that would be included in wages but for an election
under Code Sections 125(a), 132(f)(4), 402(e)(3), 402(h)(1)(B),
401(k) or 457(b).33 However, any rules that limit the remuneration
included in wages based on the nature or location of the
employment or the services performed [such as the exception for
agricultural labor in Section 3401(a)(2)34] are disregarded for this
purpose. For limitation years beginning prior to January 1, 1998,
elective deferrals under Code Section 402(g)35 and amounts
elected under Sections 125(a), 132(f)(4), 401(k) or 457(b)36 are
excluded from "compensation." Effective as of January 1, 2009, to
the extent required by the Heroes Earnings Assistance Tax Relief
Tax Act of 2008 (HEART Act), differential wage payments shall be
included in compensation. [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 910]
D. Leased employees and independent contractors. Leased employees and
independent contractors are not eligible to participate in this plan. Any
person whom the Board of Supervisors does not regard as being an
employee shall not be eligible to participate.
E. Limit on compensation. Compensation (for purposes of calculating
monthly earnings) is subject to the limitation under Code Section
401(a)(17),37 which is $230,000 for the plan year beginning in 2008.
The limit is automatically adjusted periodically, without formal
amendment, for changes in the law and cost-of-living adjustments
under Code Section 401(a)(17). As of January 1, 1994, this amount was
$150,000, and at all times the plan requires compliance with Section
401(a)(17).
30.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415(c).
31.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415(c).
32.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 3401(a).
33.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. §§ 125(a), 132(f)(4), 402(e)(3), 402(h)(1)(B), 401(k) and
457(b).
34.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 3401(a)(2).
35.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 402(g).
36.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. §§ 125(a), 132(f)(4), 401(k) and 457(b).
37.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 401(a)(17).
§ 99-24 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-24
1:90
F. Multiple plan reduction. Code Section 415(e)38 applied for limitation
years beginning prior to 2000.
G. Vesting upon plan termination. Upon the termination of this plan, or
complete discontinuance of contributions [within the meaning of pre-
ERISA Code Section 401(a)(7)] to this plan, each employee, as of the
date of such termination or discontinuance, shall become vested to the
extent that the plan is funded.
H. Required distributions.
(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein contained, all
distributions under the plan shall be made in accordance with
Section 401(a)(9) of the Code.39 Any distribution option under the
plan which is inconsistent with Section 401(a)(9) of the Code shall
be inoperative to the extent of such inconsistency. Effective as of
January 1, 2003, all distributions under the plan shall be made in
accordance with Regulation § 1.401(a)(9)-1 through
§ 1.401(a)(9)-9. For calendar years prior to 2003, distributions
were made in accordance with the 1987 proposed regulations
[under Section 401(a)(9) of the Code], except to the extent that
those proposed regulations were overridden by amendments to the
Code. Nothing in this section gives any participant, retired
participant, beneficiary, or alternate payee the right to elect any
time or method of a distribution not provided for in another section
of the plan.
(2) Required beginning date.
(a) Participant's required beginning date. Effective as of January
1, 1997, distribution to a participant must be made or
commenced no later than the first day of April following the
calendar year in which such participant attains age 70 1/2 or
retires, whichever is later.
(b) Death of participant before distribution begins. If the
participant dies before distributions begin, the participant's
entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, no
later than as follows:
[1] If the participant's surviving spouse is the participant's
sole designated beneficiary, then distributions to the
surviving spouse will begin by December 31 of the
calendar year immediately following the calendar year in
which the participant died, or by December 31 of the
calendar year in which the participant would have attained
age 70 1/2, if later.
38.Editor's Note: 26 U.S.C. § 415(e) was repealed 8-20-1996 by P.L. 104-188, § 1452(a).
39.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 401(a)(9).
§ 99-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-24
1:91
[2] If the participant's surviving spouse is not the participant's
sole designated beneficiary, then distributions to the
designated beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the
calendar year immediately following the calendar year in
which the participant died.
[3] If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of
the year following the year of the participant's death, the
participant's entire interest will be distributed by
December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth
anniversary of the participant's death.
[4] If the participant's surviving spouse is the participant's
sole designated beneficiary and the surviving spouse dies
after the participant but before distributions to the
surviving spouse begin, this Subsection H(2)(b), other than
Subsection H(2)(b)[1], will apply as if the surviving spouse
were the participant.
(3) Distributions, if not made in a lump sum, shall be made over a
period not exceeding the lifetime of the participant or the joint
lifetimes of the participant and his designated beneficiary, or over a
period certain not extending beyond the life expectancy of the
participant or the joint life expectancies of the participant and his
beneficiary.
(4) If the participant's interest is to be paid in the form of annuity
distributions under the plan, payments under the annuity shall
satisfy the following:
(a) The annuity distributions must be paid in periodic payments
made at intervals not longer than one year;
(b) The distribution period must be over a life (or lives) or over a
period certain not longer than a life expectancy (or joint life
and last survivor expectancy) described in Section
401(a)(9)(A)(ii) or Section 401(a)(9)(B)(iii) of the Code,40
whichever is applicable;
(c) For plan years beginning prior to 2003, the life expectancy (or
joint life and last survivor expectancy) for purposes of
determining the period certain shall be determined without
recalculation of life expectancy;
(d) Once payments have begun over a period certain, the period
certain may not be lengthened even if the period certain is
shorter than the maximum permitted;
(e) Payments must either be nonincreasing or increase only as in
accordance with Treasury regulations.
40.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 401(a)(9)(A)(ii) and (a)(9)(B)(iii).
§ 99-24 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-24
1:92
I. Domestic relations order. All rights and benefits, including elections,
provided to a participant in this plan may be subject to the rights
afforded to any alternate payee pursuant to a domestic relations order
as provided by applicable state law.
J. Direct rollover.
(1) This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1,
1993. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary
that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this
section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner
prescribed by the plan administrator, to have any portion of an
eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement
plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover.
(2) For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
(a) Eligible rollover distribution.
[1] An "eligible rollover distribution" is any distribution of all
or any portion of the balance to the credit of the
distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution
does not include:
[a] Any distribution that is one of a series of substantially
equal periodic payments (not less frequently than
annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the
distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies)
of the distributee and the distributee's designated
beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or
more;
[b] Any distribution to the extent such distribution is
required under Code Section 401(a)(9)41;
[c] The portion of any distribution that is not includible in
gross income (determined without regard to the
exclusion for net unrealized appreciation with respect
to employer securities); and
[d] Effective as of January 1, 2002, any hardship
distribution.
[2] Effective as of January 1, 2002, Subsection J(2)(a)[1][c]
does not apply to any after-tax participant contributions
that are paid to an individual retirement account or
annuity described in Code Section 408(a) or (b),42 or to a
qualified defined contribution plan described in Code
Section 401(a) or 403(a) or, effective as of January 1, 2007,
41.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 401(a)(9).
42.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 408(a) and (b).
§ 99-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-24
1:93
any 403(b)43 annuity contract that agrees to separately
account for amounts so transferred, including separately
accounting for the portion of such distribution which is
includible in gross income and the portion of such
distribution which is not so includible.
(b) An "eligible retirement plan" is an individual retirement
account described in Code Section 408(a), an individual
retirement annuity described in Code Section 408(b), an
annuity plan described in Code Section 403(a) or a qualified
trust described in Code Section 401(a) that accepts the
distributee's eligible rollover distribution.44 However, in the
case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse,
prior to January 1, 2002, an "eligible retirement plan" was an
individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity.
Effective as of January 1, 2002, an eligible retirement plan
includes an annuity contract described in Code Section
403(b)45 and an eligible plan under Code Section 457(b)46
which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state,
or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political
subdivision of a state and which agrees to separately account
for amounts transferred into such plan from this plan. Effective
January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA is an eligible retirement plan.
(c) A "distributee" includes an employee or former employee. In
addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving
spouse and the employee's or former employee's spouse or
former spouse who is the alternate payee under a qualified
domestic relations order, as defined in Code Section 414(p),47
are distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse or
former spouse.
(d) A "direct rollover" is a payment by the plan to the eligible
retirement plan specified by the distributee.
K. Credit for qualified military service. Notwithstanding any provision of
this plan to the contrary, contributions, benefits and service credit with
respect to qualified military service will be provided in accordance with
Section 414(a) of the Code.48
L. Mandatory lump-sum distributions. Effective as of January 1, 2006, if,
prior to attaining age 62, a participant is entitled to a lump-sum
distribution in excess of $1,000, his or her vested interest shall be
43.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. §§ 401(a), 403(a) and 403(b), respectively.
44.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. §§ 408(a), 408(b), 403(a) and 401(a), respectively.
45.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 403(b).
46.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 457(b).
47.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 414(p).
48.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 414(a).
§ 99-24 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-24
1:94
transferred to an individual retirement account (IRA), unless the
participant elects to receive a cash distribution.
M. Heroes Earnings Assistance Relief Tax Act (HEART Act). Effective for
deaths occurring on or after January 1, 2007, if a participant dies while
performing qualified military service [as defined in IRC § 414(u)49], the
survivors of the participant are entitled to any additional benefits (other
than benefit accruals relating to the period of qualified military service)
provided under the plan had the participant resumed and then
terminated employment on account of death. [Amended 10-1-2012 by
Ord. No. 910]
N. Nonspouse beneficiaries. Effective as of January 1, 2007, if a
beneficiary who is not a surviving spouse is entitled to receive what
would otherwise be an eligible rollover distribution, the beneficiary
may, in accordance with Code Section 402(c)(11),50 make a trustee-totrustee
transfer of that amount to an IRA or individual retirement
annuity (other than an endowment contract), provided that:
(1) The transfer is made not later than the end of the fourth year after
the year of the participant's death; and
(2) The account or annuity to which the amount is transferred is
treated as an inherited IRA or individual retirement annuity in
accordance with Code Section 408(d)(3)(C).51
O. Plan for sole benefit of participants. The income and principal of the
plan are for the sole use and benefit of the participants and their
beneficiaries and, to the extent permitted by law, shall be free, clear
and discharged of and from and are not to be in any way liable for
debts, contracts or agreements, now contracted or which may hereafter
be contracted, and from all claims and liabilities now or hereafter
incurred by any participant or beneficiary. [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord.
No. 910]
P. No reversion to the employer. At no time shall it be possible for the plan
assets to be used for, or diverted to, any purpose other than for the
exclusive benefit of the participants and their beneficiaries, except that
contributions made by the employer may be returned to the employer if
the contribution was made due to a mistake of fact and the contribution
is returned within one year of the mistaken payment of the
contribution, the plan is terminated, or as otherwise permitted by the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. [Added 10-1-2012 by
Ord. No. 910]
Q. Vesting upon attainment of normal retirement age. The participant shall
be one-hundred-percent vested in his normal retirement benefit upon
49.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 414(u).
50.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 402(c)(11).
51.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 408(d)(3)(C).
§ 99-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-24
1:95
the attainment of normal retirement age. [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord.
No. 910]
R. Vesting upon plan termination. Upon the termination of this plan, or
complete discontinuance of contributions [within the meaning of pre-
ERISA Code Section 401(a)(7)] to this plan, each employee (who is not
already one-hundred-percent vested), as of the date of such termination
or discontinuance, shall become vested to the extent that the plan is
funded. [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 910]
S. Retroactive effective date for certain Internal Revenue Code provisions.
Notwithstanding the effective date of this section, any provision
required by EGTRRA is effective as of January 1, 2002, and any
provision that is required by GUST is effective as of the effective dates
set forth herein. [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 910]
§ 99-24 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-24
1:96
ARTICLE II
City Employees Retirement Fund
[Adopted 2-29-1977 by Ord. No. 52B (Ch. 1, Part 8B, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 99-25. City Employees Retirement Fund established.
The City Employees Retirement Fund be and the same is hereby established
by the City of Lock Haven, which shall be known and designated as the "City
Employees Retirement Fund" and shall be as follows.
§ 99-26. Name of plan.
The plan shall be known as the "City Employees Retirement Fund,"
hereinafter referred to as the "plan," and is established to provide income
for the employees at the close of their employment.
§ 99-27. Definitions. [Amended 12-30-1985 by Ord. No. 234B]
The following words and phrases, as used herein, shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning is plainly required for intelligent
interpretation of the context:
AGE — A person's age at his or her birthday.
AMENDMENT DATE — January 1, 1978.
ANNIVERSARY DATE — Each January 1 subsequent to the effective date.
BENEFICIARY — That person, persons or trusts who has been designated
by the participant to receive any benefits hereunder upon the death of
the participant or pensioner and, in the event of no designation by the
participant, the participant's spouse, if living, otherwise to his children,
if living, otherwise to his parents, if living, otherwise to his brothers and
sisters, if living, otherwise to his estate. Any amounts payable to two or
more persons as beneficiary should be paid to them in equal shares unless
the beneficiary designation provides otherwise. The word "children" as used
herein or in a beneficiary designation will not be construed to have the
broad meaning of descendants.
CITY EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT FUND BOARD or RETIREMENT BOARD
— As defined in § 99-34A of this article.
EARNINGS — The gross wages, compensation or salary of an employee,
excluding amounts paid for overtime and including any longevity pay.
Earnings shall include workers' compensation paid to a participant plus
a gross up 1/2 of the workers' compensation so that earnings during any
period on workers' compensation is substantially equivalent to salary while
not under workers' compensation.[Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No.
974]
EFFECTIVE DATE — February 1, 1966.
§ 99-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-27
1:97
EMPLOYEE — Any person who is employed on a full-time and permanent
basis by the City, excluding all policemen, whose most recent date of
employment is subsequent to December 31, 1977, and including elected or
appointed officials of the City of Lock Haven other than those who first serve
as Mayor, members of Council or Controller on or after January 7, 1986.
EMPLOYER — The City of Lock Haven.
FUND — All monies, contracts or other property received in any manner by
the trustees.
MONTH — Fifteen or more days during any calendar month.
PARTICIPANT — Any employee who has met the eligibility requirements
under the provisions of § 99-28 herein.
PENSIONER — A participant who has become certified to the trustee by
the Retirement Committee as one entitled to receive retirement benefits
hereunder.
RETIREMENT COMMITTEE — The City Treasurer, City Manager and
Secretary of the Retirement Fund Board.
SERVICE — The total number of months of employment from February 1,
1956, and the total number of months shall be reduced to years. Service
shall not be deemed to be interrupted by vacations, temporary illness,
disability preventing the participant from engaging in any gainful
employment with the City or by leave of absence, provided that no such
interruption shall exceed one year. Leaves of absence shall not be granted
on a discriminatory basis. If an employee shall be excluded from the payroll,
as a result of the reasons stated in this definition, he shall pay back all
contributions due.
TRUSTEE — The depository selected by the City to hold and invest the fund
pursuant to § 99-32.
§ 99-28. Eligibility and participation. [Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord.
No. 105B]
A. Present participants. Any present participant of the plan on January 1,
1978, shall remain eligible and shall participate in this plan as of the
amendment date.
B. Present nonparticipating employees. Any employee of the City whose
date of hire precedes January 1, 1978, and who, at that date, is not a
part of the plan shall be eligible to be a participant of the plan as of that
date, but for the purposes of this article shall be considered as a future
employee.
C. Future employees. Any employee of the City whose date of employment
is subsequent to January 1, 1978, shall become eligible and shall
participate on the date of his hire.
§ 99-27 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-29
1:98
§ 99-29. Eligibility for benefits. [Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No.
105B]
§ 99-30. Benefits. [Amended 11-29-1979 by Ord. No. 93B; 4-21-1980
by Ord. No. 105B; 6-6-1983 by Ord. No. 179B; 12-30-1985 by Ord.
No. 234B; 12-7-1987 by Ord. No. 288BA; 6-17-1991 by Ord. No.
380B; 8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 388B; 11-24-1994 by Ord. No. 477B;
12-1-1997 by Ord. No. 536B; 6-1-1998 by Ord. No. 549B; 10-5-1998
by Ord. No. 562B; 8-23-1999 by Ord. No. 576B]
A. Normal retirement. The normal retirement date of a participant shall be
the first of the month coincident with or next following the participant's
65th birthday and the completion of 10 years' service. The normal
retirement date shall not be construed by the employer as a mandatory
retirement date.
B. Early retirement. Any participant may retire within 15 years prior to his
normal retirement date, providing he has completed at least 10 years of
service.
C. Death benefit. A death benefit as defined in § 99-30D shall be paid.
A. Benefits upon normal retirement. Upon retirement on his normal
retirement date, a participant shall be entitled to receive a monthly
retirement benefit, payable for his lifetime, equal to:
(1) For participants who were employed prior to January 1, 1978, by
the police force: $3 multiplied by the participant's years of service.
(2) For individuals who participated in the City Employees Retirement
Fund under Ordinance No. 562A, as amended, and who were
employed and left City employment prior to January 1, 1978, and
who did not withdraw their contributions at the time their
employment was terminated: $3 multiplied by the participant's
years of service.
(3) For individuals who participated in the City Employees Retirement
Fund only while first serving prior to January 1, 1978, as either
Mayor, a member of Council or Controller of the City of Lock
Haven: $7 multiplied by the participant's years of service in said
capacity.
(4) For individuals who participated in the City Employees Retirement
Fund while serving as either Mayor, a member of Council or
Controller of the City of Lock Haven and also participate in said
fund while serving the City of Lock Haven in some other capacity
subsequent to December 30, 1985: $7 multiplied by the
participant's years of service as Mayor, member of Council or
Controller, plus the participant's years of service in such other
capacity multiplied by 1.8% of the average monthly earnings
during the best five consecutive years of the 10 years immediately
prior to retirement or, if the years of service in such other capacity
§ 99-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-30
1:99
is less than 10 years, 1.8% of the average monthly earnings during
the best five consecutive years of service in such capacity or the
entire period if such period of service is less than five years.
(5) For individuals who participated in the City Employees Retirement
Fund under Ordinance No. 562A, as amended, and who were
employed and left City employment prior to January 1, 1978, and
who withdrew their contributions at the time their employment was
terminated and who are later reemployed and who repay the
amount withdrawn, or those who left City employment prior to
January 1, 1978, and who did not withdraw their contributions and
who are later reemployed: $3 multiplied by the participant's years
of service during the original employment period, plus the
participant's years of service during the reemployment period
multiplied by 1.8% of the average monthly earnings during the best
five consecutive years out of the 10 years immediately prior to
retirement or, if such reemployment period is less than 10 years,
1.8% of the average monthly earnings during the best five
consecutive years of the reemployment period or the entire
reemployment period if less than five years.
(6) For all other participants: 1.8% of the average monthly earnings
during the best five consecutive years out of the 10 years
immediately prior to retirement multiplied by the participant's
years of service. Beginning April 1, 1999, the contribution rate for
the City Employee Retirement Fund members, other than police
employees and elected officials, shall be decreased from 8% of
annual salary to 6% of annual salary. This rate of contribution shall
be in effect through April 1, 2001, at which time the rate will be
reexamined. The City, at its discretion, may annually look at and
may, at its discretion, maintain the employee contribution rate at
6% rather than 8% if, in its discretion, it believes that savings
related to worker's compensation premiums related to the fund
members warrants reduction from 8% to 6%.
B. Optional forms of payment.
(1) In lieu of the normal form of benefit distribution set forth in
Subsection A above, a participant shall have the option to elect to
have his retirement benefits paid in one of the following forms:
(a) Sixty months certain and life annuity. A participant may elect
to receive an actuarial equivalent pension payable for life, with
a stipulation that should he die prior to receiving 60 monthly
payments, the balance of such payments shall continue to be
paid to his designated beneficiaries or, if none, to his estate.
(b) One hundred twenty months certain and life annuity. A
participant may elect to receive an actuarial equivalent
pension payable for life, with a stipulation that should he die
prior to receiving 120 monthly payments, the balance of such
§ 99-30 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-30
1:100
payments shall continue to be paid his designated beneficiaries
or, if none, to his estate.
(c) Joint and 50% survivor annuity. A participant who is married on
his retirement date may elect to receive an actuarial equivalent
pension for life with payments continuing after his death to his
spouse for the continued lifetime of such spouse, equal to 50%
of the reduced pension payable to him.
(2) Such optional forms of payment shall be the actuarial equivalents
of the amount of benefit the participant and his beneficiary were
entitled to under the plan.
C. Benefits upon early retirement. A participant who retires on early
retirement shall be entitled to elect to receive, upon making application
to the City Employees Retirement Fund therefor, either:
(1) A deferred pension, commencing at normal retirement date
computed under the provisions of Subsection A above.
(2) An immediate pension commencing at the time of early retirement
equal to the deferred pension to which he would have been eligible
under Subsection B(1)(a) above, had he so elected, reduced to the
following percentages:
Age of Retirement Percentage
50 55.0%
51 58.0%
52 61.0%
53 64.0%
54 67.0%
55 70.0%
56 73.0%
57 76.0%
58 79.0%
59 82.0%
60 85.0%
61 88.0%
62 91.0%
63 94.0%
64 97.0%
65 100.0%
NOTE: Interpolated to the completed month.
§ 99-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-30
1:101
§ 99-31. Financing. [Amended 12-30-1985 by Ord. No. 234B;
6-17-1991 by Ord. No. 380B; 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 477B;
12-1-1997 by Ord. No. 536B; 8-23-1999 by Ord. No. 576]
D. Death benefits.
(1) In the event of the death of a participant before he becomes
entitled to the pension herein provided for, the total of the
contributions paid into the fund by said participant shall be paid to
the beneficiary, without interest, or his estate, without interest.
Payment shall be made upon request to the City Employees
Retirement Fund Board by the beneficiary or the estate with proof
of death submitted at the time of request.
(2) In the event of the death of a participant while receiving pension
hereunder, but before the amount of the pension received shall
equal the total amount of contributions paid into the plan, the
difference between the amount received as pension and the amount
contributed to the plan by the deceased participant shall be paid to
the beneficiary without interest, or to the estate without interest.
Payment shall be made upon request to the City Employees
Retirement Fund Board by the beneficiary or the estate with proof
of death submitted at the time of the request.
E. Termination of employment. If a participant should terminate his
employment with the City for any reason other than as provided in
§ 99-29, he shall be entitled to receive the amount of his employee
contributions without interest. If a participant has completed at least 10
years of service prior to terminating his employment with the City for
any reason other than as provided in § 99-29, he shall be entitled to
receive either the amount of his employee contributions without
interest or a deferred pension, commencing at his normal retirement
date, as calculated under the provisions of Subsection A above, or early
retirement as calculated under the provisions of Subsection C above,
and based on service to the date such participant terminated his
employment with the City.
A. Amount of contributions.
(1) By participants. Each participant shall contribute to the fund by
payroll withholding:
(a) For participant's who are employed by the police force: $3 each
month.
(b) For participant's who are serving as Mayor, a member of
Council or Controller of the City of Lock Haven: $8 each
month.
(c) For all other participants: 8% of earnings due to the participant
each pay period.
§ 99-30 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-31
1:102
§ 99-32. Trustee; expenses. [Amended 3-3-1986 by Ord. No. 237B]
§ 99-33. Amendment and termination.
NOTE: Beginning April 1, 1999, the contribution rate for the
City Employee Retirement Fund members, other than police
employees and elected officials, shall be decreased from 8% of
annual salary to 6% of annual salary. The City, at its discretion,
may annually look at and may, at its discretion, maintain the
employee contribution rate at 6% rather than 8% if, in its
discretion, it believes that savings related to worker's
compensation premiums related to the fund members warrants
reduction from 8% to 6%.
(2) By the City. The City shall annually appropriate and pay into the
fund not less than the minimum obligation as required by the
Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act (Act
205 of 1984),52 as certified to Council of the City by the Chief
Administrative Officer in accordance with Section 304 of the
aforesaid Act.53
A. Designation. The City shall appoint a trustee to hold and invest the fund
in accordance with the terms of a trust agreement between the City and
the trustee. The City may, from time to time, change the trustee then
serving under the trust agreement for another trustee.
B. Expenses. The fund shall be used to pay benefits as provided in the plan
and to pay such expenses of administering the plan as are permitted
under the provisions of Act 205 of 1984, December 18, 1984, P.L.
1005.54 No benefits or expenses shall be paid out of the fund without
prior authorization by the Retirement Board.
A. Amendment. The City shall have the right at any time, and from time to
time, to amend, in whole or in part, any or all of the provisions of this
plan. However, no such amendment shall authorize or permit any part
of the fund (other than such part as is required to pay taxes and
administrative expense) to be used for or diverted to purposes other
than for the exclusive benefit of the participants or their beneficiaries
or estates; no such amendment shall cause any reduction in the amount
theretofore credited to any participant or cause or permit any portion of
the fund to revert to or become the property of the City.
B. Termination; discontinuance of contributions. The City shall have the
right at any time to discontinue the contributions hereunder and to
terminate this plan hereby created. In the event of termination or
complete discontinuance of contributions, the trustee shall dispose of
the fund until it is depleted in the following order:
52.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
53.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.304.
54.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 99-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-33
1:103
§ 99-34. Employees Retirement Fund Board. [Amended 2-3-1986 by
Ord. No. 237B; 8-3-1998 by Ord. No. 560B]
(1) First, provide for each pensioner who is retired under the terms of
this plan and for whom no annuity contracts have been obtained
which will provide the amount of retirement benefits to which he is
entitled.
(2) Second, provide for each participant who is eligible for retirement
under the terms of § 99-29A of this plan and for whom no annuity
contracts have been obtained which will provide the amount of
retirement benefits to which he is entitled.
(3) Third, to provide for each participant who is eligible for retirement
under the terms of § 99-29B of this plan or for whom no annuity
contracts have been obtained which will provide the amount of
retirement benefits to which he is entitled.
(4) Fourth, distribute any remaining assets of the fund equitably
among the remaining participants.
C. Irrevocability of contributions. All contributions made to the fund by the
City shall be irrevocable during the existence of the plan and shall be
maintained exclusively for the benefit of the participants hereunder and
at no time will they be returned to or in any manner used for the benefit
of the City, exclusive of such actions that would be considered
investment in nature and conducted within an arm's length transaction;
provided, however, that any contributions in excess of the amount
required under this plan which are paid to the trustee by reason of
clerical or actuarial error may be returned to the City if all liabilities,
contingent as well as fixed, with respect to participants and their
beneficiaries under this plan have been satisfied.
A. Composition. A Board of 11 members, which shall be known and
designated as the "City Employees Retirement Fund Board," and
hereinafter referred to in this article as the "Board," and which shall
consist of the following:
(1) Four members of the Council of the City of Lock Haven, selected at
their discretion, whose terms of office shall be concurrent with
their terms of office on Council.
(2) Six employees of the City of Lock Haven, one of whom shall be
elected from each of the following employee subgroups:
administration and finance; police; fire, code and civilian police;
streets/parks; sewer; and water. Each of said members shall be
elected by a vote of the majority of the employees within their
respective subgroup and shall serve for a term of two years or until
their successor is elected. A vacancy occurring during a term shall
be filled for the unexpired term by the election of a successor in the
same manner as his predecessor.
§ 99-33 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-34
1:104
§ 99-35. Miscellaneous provisions.
(3) One retired employee of the City of Lock Haven who is a participant
of the plan, who shall be elected by a vote of the majority of the
retired employees who are participants in the plan. Said member
shall serve for a term of two years. A vacancy occurring during a
term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the election of a
successor in the same manner as his predecessor.
B. Actions. The Retirement Board shall act by a majority of its members at
the time in office, and such action may be taken either by vote at a
meeting or in writing without a meeting, and shall meet at least
annually. The Retirement Board may authorize any one or more of its
members to execute any document or documents on behalf of the
Retirement Board, in which event the Retirement Board shall notify the
trustee in writing of such action and the name or names of its member
or members so designated. The trustee shall thereafter accept and rely
upon any document executed by such member or members as
representing the action of the Retirement Board until the Retirement
Board shall file with the trustee a written revocation of such
designation. The Retirement Board may authorize the Retirement
Committee to receive the application for benefits from the plan, to
approve or disapprove the application, and to notify the trustee of the
approval of the application in order that the trustee might make the
payments in accordance therewith.
C. Records. The Retirement Board shall keep a record of all its
proceedings and acts and shall keep all such books of account, records
and other data as may be necessary for proper administration of the
plan. The Retirement Board shall notify the trustee and the City of any
action taken by the Retirement Board and, when required, shall notify
any other interested person or persons.
D. Actuarial service. City Council shall engage an accredited actuarial
service which shall present to the City actuarial statements as required
by law as to the sufficiency of the fund in accordance with generally
accepted actuarial standards.
E. Expenses. Unless otherwise determined by the City, the members of the
Retirement Board shall serve without compensation for services as
such. Expenses of the Retirement Board not payable pursuant to
§ 99-32B shall be paid by the City.
F. Immunity from liability. No member of the Retirement Board shall incur
any liability for any action or failure to act, excepting only liability for
his own gross negligence or wilful misconduct. The City shall indemnify
each member of the Retirement Board against any and all claims, loss,
damages, expense and liability arising from any action or failure to act
pursuant to his actions as a member of the Retirement Board, except
when the same is judicially determined to be due to the gross
negligence or willful misconduct of such member.
§ 99-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-35
1:105
A. City not liable for payment of benefits. The City shall have no liability
for the payment of the benefits under this plan, nor shall the City have
any liability for the administration of the plan or of the funds or assets
paid over to the trustee, and each participant and pensioner shall look
solely to the assets of the trust for any payments or benefits under the
plan.
B. City's rights to discharge any employee. The establishment of the plan
shall not be construed as conferring any legal rights upon any employee
or any person for continuation of employment, nor shall it interfere with
the rights of the City to discharge any employee without regard to the
effect which such action might have upon him as a participant in the
plan.
C. Spendthrift clause. The right of any participant or beneficiary to any
benefit, to any payment hereunder or to any separate account shall not
be subject to alienation or assignment. If such participant shall attempt
to assign, transfer or dispose of such right, or should such right be
subjected to attachment, execution, garnishment, sequestration or
other legal, equitable or other process, it shall, ipso facto, pass to such
one or more beneficiaries as may be appointed by the Retirement Board
from among the beneficiaries, if any, theretofore designated by such
participant and the spouse and blood relative of the participant.
However, the Retirement Board in its sole discretion may reappoint the
participant to receive any payment thereafter becoming due either in
whole or in part. Any appointment made by the Retirement Board
hereunder may be revoked by the Retirement Board at any time and a
further appointment made by it.
D. Delegation of authority by City. Whenever the City, under the terms of
this plan, is permitted or required to do or perform any act or matter or
thing, it shall be done and performed by any officer thereunto duly
authorized by the City.
E. Construction of agreement. This plan shall be construed according to
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and all provisions
hereof shall be administered according to the laws of such
commonwealth.
F. Limitation on liability; legal actions; payment of expenses. It is
expressly understood and agreed by each employee who becomes a
participant hereunder that, except for his, its or their wilful neglect or
fraud, neither the City, its officers or agents, nor the trustee, its officers
or agents nor members of the Retirement Board shall be in any way
subject to any suit or litigation or to any legal liability for any cause or
reason or thing whatsoever in connection with this plan or its operation.
In any action or proceeding involving the fund, or any property
constituting part or all thereof or the administration thereof, the City,
the Retirement Board and the trustee shall be the only necessary
parties, and no employees or former employees of the City or their
beneficiaries or any other person having or claiming to have an interest
§ 99-35 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-35
1:106
§ 99-36. Applicable provisions of Internal Revenue Code. [Added
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 626B; amended 2-2-2009 by Ord. No. 832]
in the fund or under the plan shall be entitled to any notice of process.
Any final judgment that may be entered in any such action or
proceeding shall be binding and conclusive on the parties thereto and
all persons having or claiming to have any interest in the fund or under
the plan or in the administration of the plan.
A. Definitions. The following words and phrases are hereby introduced
and defined for purposes of this section only:
LEASED EMPLOYEE — Effective as of January 1, 1997, any person
(other than an employee of the recipient) who, pursuant to an
agreement between the recipient and any other person ("leasing
organization"), has performed services for the recipient [or for the
recipient and related persons determined in accordance with Code
Section 414(n)(6)55] on a substantially full-time basis for a period of
at least one year, and such services are under primary direction and
control of the recipient.
LIMITATION YEAR — The plan year, for purposes of applying the
limitations under the current article.
B. Maximum annual benefit.
(1) General rule. Except as otherwise provided, this plan shall at all
times comply with the provisions of Code Section 41556 and the
regulations thereunder, the terms of which are specifically
incorporated herein by reference. If a benefit payable to a
participant under this plan would otherwise exceed the limit under
Code Section 415, the benefit will be reduced to the maximum
permissible benefit.
(2) Effective date. If there is more than one permissible effective date
for any required change in the Code Section 415(b)57 provisions,
then the change shall be effective as of the latest permissible
effective date; however, any adjustment in the dollar limit under
Code Section 415(b)(1)(A),58 whether required or permissible, shall
take effect automatically as of the earliest permissible effective
date. The "applicable mortality table" in Revenue Ruling 2001-62
became effective as of December 31, 2002, and shall remain
effective through December 31, 2007. The "applicable mortality
table" and "applicable interest rate" after December 31, 2007, is
found in Revenue Ruling 2007-67.
55.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 414(n)(6).
56.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415.
57.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415(b).
58.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415(b)(1)(A).
§ 99-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-36
1:107
(3) No reduction in accrued benefits. Notwithstanding the above, no
change in the limits under this section shall reduce the benefit of
any participant.
(4) Multiple plans. If a participant also participates in one or more
other plans that are required to be aggregated with this plan for
purposes of determining the limits under Code Section 415(b),59
and if the aggregated benefits would otherwise exceed the limit
under Code Section 415(b), then benefits shall be reduced first
under this plan.
(5) Mandatory contributions. Participant contributions are annual
additions, and any benefit attributable to participant contributions
is not included in the benefit subject to the limits of Code Section
415(b).60 This subsection does not apply to contributions "picked
up" in accordance with Code Section 414(h).61
(6) Permissive service credit. Effective as of January 1, 1998, if a
participant makes a purchase of permissive service credit [within
the meaning of Code Section 415(n)62] under the plan, the benefit
derived from the contributions made to purchase the service credit
shall be treated as part of the benefit subject to the limitations
under this section.
(7) Benefit less than $10,000. Effective for plan years beginning before
January 1, 2008, benefits paid to a participant which total less than
$10,000 from all defined benefit plans maintained by the employer
expressed as an annual benefit shall be deemed not to exceed the
limitations of this section, provided that the employer has not at
any time maintained a defined contribution plan in which the
participant has participated; however, in the case of a participant
who is not receiving a disability retirement benefit or a death
benefit, with fewer than 10 years of service, the limitation
expressed in this subsection shall be reduced by 1/10 for each year
of service less than 10, but in no event shall this limitation be less
than $1,000. In the event that a participant has less than 10 years
of service with the employer, the limitation of this subsection shall
be reduced by multiplying the otherwise applicable limitation by a
fraction, the numerator of which is the number of years of service
with the employer. [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 911]
C. Limit on annual additions.
(1) Annual additions. Except as otherwise provided, annual additions
(which include participant contributions) under this plan shall at all
times comply with the provisions of Code Section 415(c)63 and the
59.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415(b).
60.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415(b).
61.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 414(h).
62.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415(n).
§ 99-36 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-36
1:108
regulations thereunder, the terms of which are specifically
incorporated herein by reference. If an annual addition would
otherwise exceed the limit under Code Section 415(c), the excess
annual addition will be eliminated in accordance with methods
permitted under Revenue Procedure 2008-50 (Revenue Procedure
2006-27 prior to 2009) or its successor.
(2) Multiple plans. If a participant also participates in one or more
other plans that are required to be aggregated with this plan for
purposes of determining the limits under Code Section 415(c),64
and if the annual additions would otherwise exceed the limit under
Code Section 415(c), annual additions will first be reduced under
the other plan. If there is more than one other plan, annual
additions will first be reduced under the plan with the greatest
amount of annual additions.
(3) Effective date. The limits under which Code Section 415(c)65 are
adjusted periodically in accordance with changes in the law or costof-
living adjustments without the need for a plan amendment. If
there is more than one permissible effective date for any required
change relating to Code Section 415(c), then the change shall be
effective as of the earliest permissible effective date.
(4) Code Section 415 compensation. For the purposes of the annual
additions limitations of Code Section 415(c)66 and this section,
"compensation" includes wages within the meaning of Section
3401(a)67 (for the purpose of income tax withholding at the source),
plus amounts that would be included in wages but for an election
under Code Sections 125(a), 132(f)(4), 402(e)(3), 402(h)(1)(B),
401(k) or 457(b).68 However, any rules that limit the remuneration
included in wages based on the nature or location of the
employment or the services performed [such as the exception for
agricultural labor in Section 3401(a)(2)69] are disregarded for this
purpose. For limitation years beginning prior to January 1, 1998,
elective deferrals under Code Section 402(g)70 and amounts
elected under Sections 125(a), 132(f)(4), 401(k) or 457(b)71 are
excluded from "compensation." [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No.
911]
63.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415(c).
64.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415(c).
65.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415(c).
66.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415(c).
67.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 3401(a).
68.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. §§ 125(a), 132(f)(4), 402(e)(3), 402(h)(1)(B), 401(k) and
457(b).
69.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 3401(a)(2).
70.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 402(g).
71.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 125(a), 132(f)(4), 401(k) and 457(b).
§ 99-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-36
1:109
D. Leased employees and independent contractors. Leased employees and
independent contractors are not eligible to participate in this plan. Any
person whom the Board of Supervisors does not regard as being an
employee shall not be eligible to participate.
E. Limit on compensation. Compensation (for purposes of calculating
monthly earnings) is subject to the limitation under Code Section
401(a)(17),72 which is $230,000 for the plan year beginning in 2008.
The limit is automatically adjusted periodically, without formal
amendment, for changes in the law and cost-of-living adjustments
under Code Section 401(a)(17). As of January 1, 1994, this amount was
$150,000, and at all times the plan requires compliance with Section
401(a)(17).
F. Multiple plan reduction. Code Section 415(e)73 applied for limitation
years beginning prior to 2000.
G. Vesting upon plan termination. Upon the termination of this plan, or
complete discontinuance of contributions [within the meaning of pre-
ERISA Code Section 401(a)(7)] to this plan, each employee, as of the
date of such termination or discontinuance, shall become vested to the
extent that the plan is funded.
H. Required distributions.
(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein contained, all
distributions under the plan shall be made in accordance with
Section 401(a)(9) of the Code.74 Any distribution option under the
plan which is inconsistent with Section 401(a)(9) of the Code shall
be inoperative to the extent of such inconsistency. Effective as of
January 1, 2003, all distributions under the plan shall be made in
accordance with Regulation § 1.401(a)(9)-1 through
§ 1.401(a)(9)-9. For calendar years prior to 2003, distributions
were made in accordance with the 1987 proposed regulations
[under Section 401(a)(9) of the Code], except to the extent that
those proposed regulations were overridden by amendments to the
Code. Nothing in this section gives any participant, retired
participant, beneficiary, or alternate payee the right to elect any
time or method of a distribution not provided for in another section
of the plan.
(2) Required beginning date.
(a) Participant's required beginning date. Effective as of January
1, 1997, distribution to a participant must be made or
commenced no later than the first day of April following the
calendar year in which such participant attains age 70 1/2 or
retires, whichever is later.
72.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 401(a)(17).
73.Editor's Note: 26 U.S.C. § 415(e) was repealed 8-20-1996 by P.L. 104-188, § 1452(a).
74.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 401(a)(9).
§ 99-36 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-36
1:110
(b) Death of participant before distribution begins. If the
participant dies before distributions begin, the participant's
entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, no
later than as follows:
[1] If the participant's surviving spouse is the participant's
sole designated beneficiary, then distributions to the
surviving spouse will begin by December 31 of the
calendar year immediately following the calendar year in
which the participant died, or by December 31 of the
calendar year in which the participant would have attained
age 70 1/2, if later.
[2] If the participant's surviving spouse is not the participant's
sole designated beneficiary, then distributions to the
designated beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the
calendar year immediately following the calendar year in
which the participant died.
[3] If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of
the year following the year of the participant's death, the
participant's entire interest will be distributed by
December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth
anniversary of the participant's death.
[4] If the participant's surviving spouse is the participant's
sole designated beneficiary and the surviving spouse dies
after the participant but before distributions to the
surviving spouse begin, this Subsection H(2)(b), other than
Subsection H(2)(b)[1], will apply as if the surviving spouse
were the participant.
(3) Distributions, if not made in a lump sum, shall be made over a
period not exceeding the lifetime of the participant or the joint
lifetimes of the participant and his designated beneficiary, or over a
period certain not extending beyond the life expectancy of the
participant or the joint life expectancies of the participant and his
beneficiary.
(4) If the participant's interest is to be paid in the form of annuity
distributions under the plan, payments under the annuity shall
satisfy the following requirements:
(a) The annuity distributions must be paid in periodic payments
made at intervals not longer than one year;
(b) The distribution period must be over a life (or lives) or over a
period certain not longer than a life expectancy (or joint life
and last survivor expectancy) described in Section
§ 99-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-36
1:111
401(a)(9)(A)(ii) or Section 401(a)(9)(B)(iii) of the Code,75
whichever is applicable;
(c) For plan years beginning prior to 2003, the life expectancy (or
joint life and last survivor expectancy) for purposes of
determining the period certain shall be determined without
recalculation of life expectancy;
(d) Once payments have begun over a period certain, the period
certain may not be lengthened even if the period certain is
shorter than the maximum permitted;
(e) Payments must either be nonincreasing or increase only as in
accordance with Treasury regulations.
I. Domestic relations order. All rights and benefits, including elections,
provided to a participant in this plan may be subject to the rights
afforded to any alternate payee pursuant to a domestic relations order
as provided by applicable state law.
J. Direct rollover.
(1) This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1,
1993. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary
that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this
section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner
prescribed by the plan administrator, to have any portion of an
eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement
plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover.
(2) For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
(a) Eligible rollover distribution.
[1] An "eligible rollover distribution" is any distribution of all
or any portion of the balance to the credit of the
distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution
does not include:
[a] Any distribution that is one of a series of substantially
equal periodic payments (not less frequently than
annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the
distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies)
of the distributee and the distributee's designated
beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or
more;
[b] Any distribution to the extent such distribution is
required under Code Section 401(a)(9)76;
75.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 401(a)(9)(A)(ii) and (a)(9)(B)(iii).
76.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 401(a)(9).
§ 99-36 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-36
1:112
[c] The portion of any distribution that is not includible in
gross income (determined without regard to the
exclusion for net unrealized appreciation with respect
to employer securities); and
[d] Effective as of January 1, 2002, any hardship
distribution.
[2] Effective as of January 1, 2002, Subsection J(2)(a)[1][c]
does not apply to any after-tax participant contributions
that are paid to an individual retirement account or
annuity described in Code Section 408(a) or (b),77 or to a
qualified defined contribution plan described in Code
Section 401(a) or 403(a) or, effective as of January 1, 2007,
any 403(b)78 annuity contract that agrees to separately
account for amounts so transferred, including separately
accounting for the portion of such distribution which is
includible in gross income and the portion of such
distribution which is not so includible.
(b) An "eligible retirement plan" is an individual retirement
account described in Code Section 408(a), an individual
retirement annuity described in Code Section 408(b), an
annuity plan described in Code Section 403(a) or a qualified
trust described in Code Section 401(a) that accepts the
distributee's eligible rollover distribution.79 However, in the
case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse,
prior to January 1, 2002, an "eligible retirement plan" was an
individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity.
Effective as of January 1, 2002, an eligible retirement plan
includes an annuity contract described in Code Section
403(b)80 and an eligible plan under Code Section 457(b)81
which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state,
or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political
subdivision of a state and which agrees to separately account
for amounts transferred into such plan from this plan. Effective
January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA is an eligible retirement plan.
(c) A "distributee" includes an employee or former employee. In
addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving
spouse and the employee's or former employee's spouse or
former spouse who is the alternate payee under a qualified
domestic relations order, as defined in Code Section 414(p),82
77.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 408(a) and (b).
78.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. §§ 401(a), 403(a) and 403(b), respectively.
79.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. §§ 408(a), 408(b), 403(a) and 401(a), respectively.
80.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 403(b).
81.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 457(b).
82.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 414(p).
§ 99-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-36
1:113
are distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse or
former spouse.
(d) A "direct rollover" is a payment by the plan to the eligible
retirement plan specified by the distributee.
K. Credit for qualified military service. Notwithstanding any provision of
this plan to the contrary, contributions, benefits and service credit with
respect to qualified military service will be provided in accordance with
Section 414(a) of the Code.83
L. Mandatory lump-sum distributions. Effective as of January 1, 2006, if,
prior to attaining age 62, a participant is entitled to a lump-sum
distribution in excess of $1,000, his or her vested interest shall be
transferred to an individual retirement account (IRA), unless the
participant elects to receive a cash distribution.
M. Heroes Earnings Assistance Relief Tax Act (HEART Act). Effective for
deaths occurring on or after January 1, 2007, if a participant dies while
performing qualified military service [as defined in IRC § 414(u)84], the
survivors of the participant are entitled to any additional benefits (other
than benefit accruals relating to the period of qualified military service)
provided under the plan had the participant resumed and then
terminated employment on account of death. [Amended 10-1-2012 by
Ord. No. 911]
N. Nonspouse beneficiaries. Effective as of January 1, 2007, if a
beneficiary who is not a surviving spouse is entitled to receive what
would otherwise be an eligible rollover distribution, the beneficiary
may, in accordance with Code Section 402(c)(11),85 make a trustee-totrustee
transfer of that amount to an IRA or individual retirement
annuity (other than an endowment contract), provided that:
(1) The transfer is made not later than the end of the fourth year after
the year of the participant's death; and
(2) The account or annuity to which the amount is transferred is
treated as an inherited IRA or individual retirement annuity in
accordance with Code Section 408(d)(3)(C).86
O. Actuarial assumptions for optional forms of benefit. To determine the
actuarial equivalence of optional forms of benefit, the UP-84 Mortality
Table and PBGC immediate lump-sum rate as of the first day of the plan
year in which the distribution occurs (i.e., January) shall be used.
[Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 911]
83.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 414(a).
84.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 414(u).
85.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 402(c)(11).
86.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 408(d)(3)(C).
§ 99-36 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-36
1:114
P. Vesting upon attainment of normal retirement age. The participant shall
be one-hundred-percent vested in his normal retirement benefit upon
the attainment of normal retirement age. [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord.
No. 911]
Q. Vesting upon plan termination. Effective for plan years beginning prior
to January 1, 2008, upon the termination of this plan, or complete
discontinuance of contributions [within the meaning of pre-ERISA Code
Section 401(a)(7)] to this plan, each employee (who is not already onehundred-
percent vested), as of the date of such termination or
discontinuance, shall become vested to the extent that the plan is
funded. [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 911]
R. Retroactive effective date for certain Internal Revenue Code provisions.
Notwithstanding the effective date of this section, any provision
required by EGTRRA is effective as of January 1, 2002, and any
provision that is required by GUST is effective as of the effective dates
set forth herein. [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 911]
S. Differential wage payments. Effective as of January 1, 2009, to the
extent required by the Heroes Earnings Assistance Tax Relief Tax Act of
2008 (HEART Act), differential wage payments shall be included in
Code Section 41587 compensation. [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No.
911]
T. Intent to comply with Internal Revenue Code. The employer intends
that this plan shall meet all the pertinent requirements established for a
governmental plan [as defined in Internal Revenue Code § 414(d) under
Internal Revenue Code § 401(a), as amended], and the plan shall be
interpreted, wherever possible, to comply with the terms of said code
and all formal regulations and rulings pertinent to the plan and trust
agreement. [Added 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 974]
U. Full vesting at normal retirement age. A participant's normal
retirement benefit shall be 100% vested upon attainment of his normal
retirement age. [Added 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 974]
V. Forfeitures. Forfeitures shall not be used to increase the benefits of any
participants in this plan, but may be used to reduce employer
contributions to the plan. [Added 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 974]
W. Exclusive benefit. The plan in maintained for the exclusive benefit of its
participants and beneficiaries. [Added 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 974]
X. Windsor Case. Effective June 23, 2013, the terms "spouse," "husband,"
"wife," "widow" and "widower" shall include individuals married to
persons of the same sex it the individuals are legally married under
state law. Also, where the term "widow" appears, it shall be read to
include "widower." [Added 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 974]
87.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 415.
§ 99-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-36
1:115

ARTICLE III
Death Benefits for Retired Police
[Adopted 6-20-1977 by Ord. No. 40B (Ch. 1, Part 8C, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 99-37. Police Death Benefits Fund established.
A Police Death Benefits Fund be and the same is hereby established by the
City of Lock Haven, which shall be known and designated as the "Police
Death Benefits Fund" and shall hereafter be referred to in this article as the
"fund."
§ 99-38. Maintenance, direction and distribution of fund.
The fund shall be maintained, directed, applied and distributed pursuant
to the provisions herein contained and the regulations adopted pursuant
thereto for the benefit of the members of the Association herein created.
§ 99-39. Police Death Benefits Fund Board created; membership.
A Board of seven members is hereby constituted and created, which shall
consist of the same members as the Police Pension Fund Board, and being
known as the "Police Death Benefits Fund Board," and hereinafter referred
to in this article as the "Board." Said Board shall have the terms of office of
the Police Pension Fund Board.
§ 99-40. Compensation of Board; reimbursement of expenses.
The members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but shall be
reimbursed from the fund for any necessary expenditures, and no member
shall suffer loss of salary or wages through serving on the Board.
§ 99-41. Powers of Board; corporate depository.
A. The Board may, from time to time, with approval of Council of the City
and subject to the limitations of this article and of law:
(1) Establish rules and regulations for the administration of the fund
and the transaction of its business. All such rules and regulations
shall, however, be subject to the approval of Council, and Council
may, from time to time, by ordinance, alter, modify, change or
repeal such rules and regulations and establish new rules and
regulations for the administration of the fund by the Board and the
transaction of its business.
(2) Appoint a Secretary and such medical, clerical and other
employees as may be necessary.
(3) Determine and fix the compensation of all persons employed by the
Board.
§ 99-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-41
1:117
§ 99-42. Duties of Board.
The Board shall, with the approval of Council of the City and subject to the
limitations of this article and of law:
§ 99-43. Police Pension Fund Association established.
An Association is hereby constituted to be the basis for receiving benefits
hereunder and which Association shall be known and designated as the
"Police Pension Fund Association," hereinbefore established and herein
referred to as the "Association."
B. A corporate depository chosen by the Board shall care for, manage,
invest and dispose of (as part of the fund) all money or property, real,
personal or mixed, taken by the City of Lock Haven by gift, grant, devise
or bequest, in trust, for the benefit of such pension fund, subject to the
provisions of this article and future regulations by Council, and subject
to such directions not inconsistent therewith as the donors of such
funds and property may prescribe.
A. Hold an annual meeting during the second calendar quarter of each
year and thereat present the annual report of the depository showing
the condition of the investments of the fund and evidencing receipts,
charges and disbursements during the previous year, which depository
report will be made a part of the record of the proceedings and a copy
of which shall be filed with the Council of the City of Lock Haven and
copies of which shall be furnished to each member of the Association
requesting the same.
B. Hold such special meetings as the efficient discharge of its duties
requires, and the Chairman may, and upon request in writing of three
members of the Board shall, call special meetings of the Board upon 24
hours' notice to each member, which notice shall state whether such
meeting is to be convened for special or general business, but such
notice may be waived by unanimous consent of the members.
C. At the annual meeting, or as soon thereafter as is practical, designate a
depository or depositories for the fund, which designation shall be valid
for the period of one year, or until such time as another is designated by
similar action, and the Treasurer of the Board shall, upon the
designation of the depository, immediately deposit all monies in the
fund therein in the name of the fund.
D. Keep all records and accounts as shall be necessary for the efficient
execution of this article.
E. Furnish to Council such financial and other reports as it may, from time
to time, request.
§ 99-41 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-44
1:118
§ 99-44. Control of fund.
The fund shall be under, and is hereby committed to, the direction and
control of the Board.
§ 99-45. Appropriation by City.
The City of Lock Haven shall appropriate and pay into the fund at the time
of enactment of this article the sum of $16,000 and any and all costs or
expenses incidental thereto hereafter.
§ 99-46. Investment of funds.
The depository shall invest the principal of the fund, and any accumulated
interest thereon not necessary for the immediate payment of pensions
hereunder, in:
§ 99-47. Inalienability of death benefit payments.
The death benefits herein provided for shall not be subject to attachment or
execution and shall be payable only to the beneficiary designated and shall
not be subject to assignment or transfer.
§ 99-48. Eligibility for death benefits.
Upon the later of attaining age 55 or from retiring from active service as
a police officer after a minimum of 20 years' service, a member of the
Association shall be entitled to a death benefit in the amount of $4,000
for which the fund itself shall be liable and which shall be paid to the
designated beneficiary of the member.
A. The bonds or obligations of the United States or the United States
Treasury, or those for the payment of principal and interest on which
the faith and credit of the United States is pledged.
B. Bonds or other interest-bearing obligations of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or those for the payment of principal and interest on
which the faith and credit of the commonwealth is pledged.
C. Bonds or other interest-bearing obligations of any county, City,
borough, township or school district of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or those for the payment of which the faith and credit of
such political subdivision is pledged, provided that, at the date of the
investment in such bonds or other interest-bearing obligations, such
political subdivision is not in default in payment of principal or interest
owed by it or any part of its bonded indebtedness.
D. Any other investment which is legal for fiduciaries.
§ 99-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-49
1:119
§ 99-49. Disbursements from fund.
All disbursements from the fund shall be by check or order drawn by the
authorized depository.
§ 99-50. Payment of benefits.
Payments of death benefits under this article shall be made solely out of the
moneys and property in the Police Death Benefits Fund and shall not be a
charge on any other fund in the treasury of the City or under its control.
§ 99-51. Treasurer's bond.
The Treasurer shall give surety bond approved by the Board in such sum
as the Board may determine for the faithful performance of his duties. The
premium for such bond shall be paid by the Board out of the funds entrusted
to it.
§ 99-52. Duties of Treasurer.
It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to keep account of all moneys coming
into his hands belonging to the Board and of all disbursements of the
same. All moneys received by the Treasurer shall forthwith be deposited in
the depository chosen by the said Board in the name of the Police Death
Benefits Fund.
§ 99-53. Financial report by depository.
The depository, or someone employed by it, shall, at least once a year,
submit to the Board and to the Council of the City of Lock Haven a
statement of the financial condition of the fund and of the documents
received and paid out during the year and of all investments made by the
depository and the condition of such investments.
§ 99-49 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 99-53
1:120
Chapter 105
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 81. Pensions — See Ch. 99.
§ 99-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-53
1:121

ARTICLE I
Employee Benefits
[Adopted 4-3-1972 by Ord. No. 823A (Ch. 1, Part 10, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 105-1. Overtime pay.
All full-time hourly employees, both regular and temporary, in the
Department of Public Works shall be compensated for hours worked over
eight per day or 40 per week at the rate of 1 1/2 times their normal hourly
rate.
§ 105-2. Call-in pay.
All regular full-time hourly employees in the Department of Public Works
shall be guaranteed a minimum of four hours' pay at 1 1/2 times their
normal hourly rate in the event they are required to perform work during
off-duty hours and providing they have left their work site.
§ 105-3. Longevity pay. [Amended 4-19-1982 by Ord. No. 156B;
9-10-1984 by Ord. No. 202B]
All regular full-time hourly and salary employees, except the City Manager
and City Treasurer, hired prior to January 1,1984, shall be entitled to
longevity pay in accordance with Schedule A hereof. Employees hired on or
after this date shall not receive longevity pay.
A. The longevity date shall be the January 1 nearest in time to the
employee's date of hire. An eligible employee shall be entitled to
longevity pay in the year beginning on the fifth anniversary of his
longevity date, shall receive the maximum longevity pay on the 20th
anniversary of his longevity date, and shall then continue to receive the
same amount for the duration of his employment. Longevity pay shall
not be included in the computation of overtime pay.
B. The payment of longevity pay shall be made in a lump sum amount on
the first scheduled payday in November; those leaving City employment
prior thereto shall be paid a prorated sum based on actual service.
Schedule A
Anniversary of Longevity Date
Longevity Pay
(annual)
5th $200
10th $400
15th $600
20th $800
§ 105-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-4
1:123
§ 105-4. Applicability of certain provisions. [Added 6-16-1975 by
Ord. No. 926A; amended 4-18-1977 by Ord. No. 33B]
The provisions of this article are applicable to all full-time employees of the
City of Lock Haven, Pennsylvania not covered by labor agreements.
§ 105-5. Sick leave. [Amended 6-16-1975 by Ord. No. 926A;
4-18-1977 by Ord. No. 33B; 4-19-1982 by Ord. No. 156B; 5-6-1985
by Ord. No. 217B; 6-17-1991 by Ord. 382B; 3-15-1999 by Res. No.
575]
A. Each permanent full-time employee who has completed his
probationary period is entitled to sick leave with pay on the basis of one
day for each full calendar month of service, wherein the employee
works 75% of the scheduled workdays in said month, and said sick leave
shall be accumulative up to 200 days.
B. Each regular part-time employee who has completed his probationary
period is entitled to sick leave with pay on the basis of 1/2 day for each
full calendar month of service, wherein the employee works 75% of the
scheduled workdays in said month, and said sick leave shall be
accumulative up to 100 days.
C. A doctor's certificate is required for an absence from work due to
sickness for three or more consecutive days. For absences of less than
three days, a doctor's certificate may be required where, in the opinion
of the City, the employee has been abusing his sick leave privileges.
D. An employee who is eligible for workmen's compensation benefits shall
not be eligible for sick leave pay. The City may, however, grant sick
leave benefits for the period not initially covered by workmen's
compensation but, upon the applicability of coverage due to extended
loss of time from work for which an employee is paid retroactive
workmen's compensation benefits, the employee shall reimburse the
City for the advanced sick leave and, upon so doing, his sick leave
eligibility schedule shall be accordingly increased.
E. If an employee claims sick leave pay to which he is not entitled under
this section, he will be subject to disciplinary action.
F. Sick leave may be used to prevent loss of pay when absent for personal
illness or injury of the employee only.
G. Sick leave buyback policy. The City of Lock Haven hereby adopts a
policy applicable to all full-time permanent employees in positions not
covered by a labor agreement, a "sick leave buyback policy," specifically
conditioned as described below:
(1) Employees who retire shall be paid for their accumulated, unused
sick leave benefits in accordance with the schedule below, if they
retire under the conditions set forth in Subsection G(2):
§ 105-4 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 105-5
1:124
§ 105-6. Holidays. [Amended 6-16-1975 by Ord. No. 926A;
4-18-1977 by Ord. No. 33B; 12-3-1979 by Ord. No. 94B; 9-10-1984
by Ord. No. 202B; 5-6-1985 by Ord. No. 217B; 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
Days Available at
Retirement Percent
Maximum Buy-
Out
(days)
0 to 100 30% 30
101 to 200 40% 80
(2) Eligibility for payment of benefits under Subsection G(1) is as
follows:
(a) Superannuation retirement with at least five years credited
service in the employ of the City.
(b) Disability retirement which requires at least five years of City
service.
(c) After seven years of service, death prior to retirement or
separation of service.
(d) Such payments shall not be made for partial days of
accumulated sick leave.
(e) Such payments shall not be construed to add to the credited
service of retiring members or to the retirement covered
compensation of the member. This buyback will not be used in
the calculation of retirement benefits.
A. The following days shall be recognized as paid holidays:
(1) New Year's Day (January 1).
(2) Good Friday.
(3) Memorial Day (last Monday in May).
(4) Independence Day (July 4).
(5) Labor Day (first Monday in September).
(6) Veterans Day (on designated federal holiday).
(7) Thanksgiving Day.
(8) Day after Thanksgiving.
(9) Christmas Day.
(10) Personal day.
§ 105-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-6
1:125
(11) Personal day.
(12) President's Day.
(13) Personal day.
(14) Personal day.
B. Eligible full-time employees who are off work due to the observance of
one of the above-named holidays will receive their normally scheduled
day's pay for such holiday not worked.
C. An "eligible" employee shall have:
(1) Completed his probationary period prior to the date of such holiday.
(2) Worked the full workday immediately preceding such holiday and
the full workday immediately following such holiday unless his
absence on either of such days has been with the permission of the
City.
(3) Performed work for the City during the week in which the abovenamed
holidays fall, unless he was absent on vacation.
(4) Reported as scheduled and actually performed assigned work when
the employee is scheduled to work on such holiday.
D. Holidays occurring on Sunday shall be treated for all purposes under
this article as falling on the following Monday and shall for such
purposes be observed on that Monday only. In like manner, any of the
holidays occurring on Saturday shall be treated for all purposes under
this article as falling on the preceding Friday and shall for such
purposes be observed on the Friday only.
E. An employee whose vacation period includes a holiday shall receive
holiday pay in addition to vacation pay.
F. An employee to be eligible to take the holiday (personal day), in
addition to the requirements of Subsection C, shall have:
(1) Filed a written request with the City at least one calendar week
prior to the day of his choice.
(2) Obtained permission from the City, which will be governed by
operational requirements.
G. Personal days shall not be cumulative.
H. Fire truck drivers shall be entitled to the holiday time off provided for in
this section, but the same shall be used as vacation time in accordance
with § 105-7 and shall be in addition to the schedule set forth therein.
I. Each regular part-time employee who is determined to be an eligible
employee under Subsections C and F and who is off work due to the
observance of one of the holidays named in Subsection A, is entitled to
§ 105-6 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 105-6
1:126
§ 105-7. Vacations. [Amended 6-16-1975 by Ord. No. 926A;
4-18-1977 by Ord. No. 33B; 5-6-1985 by Ord. No. 217B; 9-8-1986 by
Ord. No. 246B; 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
one workday at straight time rate of pay for each holiday not worked.
"Workday" shall be defined as the number of hours that employee
normally works in one regularly scheduled workday.
A. Employees will earn vacation credits as of their date of hire. Vacations
shall be earned according to the following annual schedule, and such
schedule shall be proportionally reduced to reflect monthly vacation
credits. Full-time and regular part time employees will earn vacation
credits as of their date of hire.
(1) Vacation to the nearest half day shall be prorated on the date the
employee starts to work the first year, and then computed on each
succeeding January 1 for the calendar year.88
(2) Proration shall be based on number of months from the starting or
anniversary date to December 31. The starting or anniversary
month will count provided the employee was hired on or before the
15th day of the month.89
(3) When an employee is not actively employed, reimbursement from
the employee's last pay shall be made for all paid but unearned
vacation.
B. To qualify for vacation, an eligible employee must:
(1) Complete his probationary period.
(2) Be in a payroll status all of the scheduled workdays during each
month to qualify for vacation credit. An employee is not in payroll
status if he is not entitled to be paid for any scheduled workday.
C. Vacation pay shall be employee's regular straight rate of pay on the pay
day immediately preceding the employee's vacation period.
D. Length of continuous employment shall be computed from the
employee's first day of continuous employment for the City.
E. It is the responsibility of the City to administer the vacation program.
Vacation schedules shall be governed by the operational requirements
of the City. The wishes of each employee shall be taken into
consideration, and where there is a conflict in the choice of vacation
time among employees in any classification, seniority shall prevail.
88.Editor's Note: Original Subsection 1.B., regarding vacation being pro rata during first
calendar year of employment, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
89.Editor's Note: Original Subsection D, regarding earned vacation time on anniversary date
schedule, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 105-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-7
1:127
§ 105-8. Workmen's compensation.
F. If a holiday or holidays fall during an employee's vacation, that
employee shall receive holiday pay for the holiday or holidays in
addition to his vacation pay, provided he has worked the full day prior
and following the vacation, unless his absence on either of such days
has been with the permission of the City.
G. Vacations are not cumulative.
H. If an employee with more than six months' past service quits with two
weeks' notice to the City, he shall be paid for any vacation pay to which
he is eligible.
I. Senior employees shall be given preference of dates they prefer to take
their vacation over junior employees, provided their choice is made
prior to April 1. If no choice is made prior to April 1, or if a choice has
been made prior to April 1, and subsequently the employee desires to
change the date, the employee, if senior, will not be allowed to select a
date which interferes with a date which has previously been selected by
a junior employee.90
J. Each regular part-time employee who is determined to be an eligible
employee under Subsection B, and who has been continuously
employed for the periods contained in Subsection A, is entitled to
straight time pay for one workday for each vacation day contained in
Subsection A. "Workday" shall be defined as the number of hours that
employee normally works in one regularly scheduled workday.
A. All regular full-time hourly and salaried employees unable to work due
to injury caused by accident occurring during and in the course of
employment shall be entitled to payment of their wages or salaries for
the remainder of the scheduled workday on which the accident occurs.
The employee may further use sick or vacation leave benefits, if unable
to work on the second through seventh consecutive workdays following
the day of the accident. If the employee is still unable to work after the
seventh consecutive workday, the employee shall then be entitled to
benefits under the workers' compensation insurance coverage carried
by the City. If the employee is unable to work after the 14th consecutive
workday after the day of the accident, the workers' compensation
insurance benefit will become retroactive to the day of the accident.
The employee must then reimburse the City for any sick or vacation
benefits received for the period between the day of the accident and the
14th consecutive workday. In no event shall an employee receive a
combined payment of wages from the City and from workers'
compensation insurance in an amount greater than he would have
received if working.
90.Editor's Note: Original Subsection 10, regarding vacation of fire truck drivers, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 2-24-2014 by Ord. No. 931.
§ 105-7 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 105-8
1:128
§ 105-9. Mileage. [Added 6-16-1975 by Ord. No. 926A; amended
4-18-1977 by Ord. No. 33B; 12-3-1979 by Ord. No. 94B; 4-19-1993
by Ord. No. 439B]
An employee who is required by the City to use his personal vehicle for
City business shall receive a mileage allowance equivalent to the federally
approved Internal Revenue Service rate for each mile driven in his personal
vehicle when on City business. Prior approval of the trip and method
of travel must be obtained from the City Manager. Expense sheets must
be filled out immediately upon return and approved by the employee's
supervisor.
§ 105-10. Life insurance. [Added 6-16-1975 by Ord. No. 926A;
amended 4-18-1977 by Ord. No. 33B; 12-3-1979 by Ord. No. 94B;
4-19-1982 by Ord. No. 156B; 9-10-1984 by Ord. No. 202B; 5-6-1985
by Ord. No. 217B; 9-8-1986 by Ord. No. 246B; 10-2-1989 by Ord. No.
330B; 6-17-1991 by Ord. No. 382B; 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
§ 105-11. Hospital and medical insurance. [Added 6-16-1975 by
Ord. No. 926A; amended 10-2-1989 by Ord. No. 330B; 2-24-2003 by
Ord. No. 670]
B. Employees are required to report accidents immediately to their
supervisor and each request for payment of wages and salaries for time
off due to injury on the job shall be accompanied by a written statement
from a medical provider on the list of designated workers'
compensation health care providers, stating the nature of the injury and
the employee's availability for work. The days paid under workers'
compensation benefits are not chargeable to an employee's normal sick
leave benefit.
A. The insurance shall terminate at the end of the month in which the
employee's active employment with the City ends.91
B. The group term life insurance is a contract between the employer and
the insurance carrier. No dispute over a claim for life insurance will be
subject to the grievance procedure in any collective bargaining
agreement.
C. It is agreed and understood that the employer does not accept, nor is
the employer to be charged with hereby, any responsibility in any
manner connected with the determination of liability for payment of life
insurance. It is agreed that the employer's liability shall be limited to
the payment of premiums.
A. The City agrees to pay the premium, except as specified in Subsection B
below, for each eligible employee and employee's eligible dependents
91.Editor's Note: Original Subsections 1 and 2, regarding the City to pay group term life
insurance, which immediately preceded this subsection, were repealed at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 105-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-11
1:129
§ 105-12. National guard training leave. [Added 4-18-1977 by Ord.
No. 33B]
All full-time employees who are National Guardsmen shall, subject to
operational requirements and written request with one-month notice, be
granted a leave of absence to attend the two-week annual training program.
Such employees shall be entitled to receive the difference between the
amount received for National Guard training and the amount they could
have received at work. The differential shall be paid only for scheduled
workdays lost at straight time rates.
on the active payroll of a group hospital and medical service plan
(insurance carrier to be selected by employer) having benefits equal to
the Blue Cross/Blue Shield Plan 100 with major medical in the amount
of $250,000. The insurance program shall be based on the principle of
coordination of benefits. An employee may opt for Blue Cross Access
Care II in lieu of Plan 100, the employee shall be responsible for any
additional premium cost above Plan 100.
B. Any increase in the premium for hospital and medical insurance that
becomes effective after July 1, 1989, shall be shared equally by the
employer and the employee; providing, however, that the contribution
of each employee shall not exceed $10 per month.
C. New employees shall be eligible for insurance coverage upon
completion of their probationary period. The insurance coverage shall
terminate at the end of the policy month in which the employee's active
employment with the employer ends. However, premiums will be paid
up to six months when the employee is not working due to illness and
his sick leave and vacation time have been exhausted.
D. The hospitalization and medical service plan is in a form of a contract
between the employer and the insurance carrier. No dispute over a
claim for any benefits extended by the hospitalization and medical
service plan shall be subject to the grievance procedure established in
any collective bargaining agreement.
E. It is agreed and understood that the employer does not accept, nor is
the employer to be charged with hereby, any responsibility in any
manner connected with the determination of liability to any employee
claiming under any of the benefits extended by the hospitalization and
medical service plan. It is agreed that the employer's liability shall be
limited to the payment of premiums as stated above.
§ 105-11 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 105-12
1:130
ARTICLE II
Organizational Structure for City Personnel
[Adopted 1-26-1981 by Ord. No. 125B (Ch. 1, Part 12, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 105-13. Organizational structure.
The personnel for the City be organized in an organizational structure as
set forth in "Exhibit A," which is attached hereto and made a part hereof.92
§ 105-14. Guidelines and policies.
The personnel for the City shall operate under the guidelines and in
accordance with the policies set forth in the Administrative Code of the City.
§ 105-15. Abolishment of positions.
All positions heretofore created by the City and not contained in "Exhibit A"
hereof are hereby abolished.
92.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 105-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-15
1:131
Chapter 116
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 59.
§ 105-15 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 105-15
1:132
ARTICLE I
Appointments to Police Force
[Adopted 1-16-1968 by Ord. No. 641A (Ch. 1, Part 6A, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 116-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — All those persons who have applied for the position of police
officer in the City of Lock Haven, by written application and according to
the regulations set forth by the Civil Service Commission of the City of Lock
Haven.
§ 116-2. Passage of civil service examination required.
All applicants shall have first passed a civil service examination and shall
have been recommended by the examining board for appointment to the
police force.
§ 116-3. Passage of physical examination required.
No applicant shall be appointed to the police force without first passing a
physical examination by a medical doctor and being approved by him to be
in good physical condition.
§ 116-4. Veterans' preference applicable.
Those applicants who have served in the armed forces of the United States
shall be given veterans' preference in accordance with the regulations set
forth by the Civil Service Commission.
§ 116-5. Probationary period prior to permanent appointment.
All applicants who are appointed to the police force shall be on a
probationary status for a period of one year and permanent appointment
shall be automatic unless disapproved by City Council prior to completion
of one year of service.
§ 116-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-5
1:133

ARTICLE II
Auxiliary Police
[Adopted 4-3-1972 by Ord. No. 821A (Ch. 1, Part 6B, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 116-6. Auxiliary Police Department established.
There is hereby created an Auxiliary Police Department in the City of Lock
Haven, which shall be under the control of and responsible to the Director
of Public Safety of the City of Lock Haven.
§ 116-7. Membership; appointment.
Said Auxiliary Police Department shall consist of 10 members, who shall be
nominated by and serve at the pleasure of the City Manager.
§ 116-8. Oath.
Each person who is appointed to serve as an auxiliary policeman shall,
before entering upon his duties, take an oath in writing before the Mayor of
the City of Lock Haven, which oath shall be provided by law.
§ 116-9. Authority for Manager or Director of Public Safety to call
auxiliary police to active duty.
The City Manager or the Director of Public Safety may call the auxiliary
police to active duty during any period of distress, disaster or emergency
except in cases of labor disturbance.
§ 116-10. Auxiliary Police may be special school police.
Auxiliary policemen, appointed as prescribed herein, may also be
designated to serve as special school police.
§ 116-11. Powers and duties.
Auxiliary policemen on active duty shall have the same powers as regular
police officers and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to
them by the Director of Public Safety; auxiliary policemen, when on active
duty in a municipality other than the City of Lock Haven, shall have the
same powers in such municipality as regular police officers thereof; the
powers herein conferred may be exercised by auxiliary policemen only after
they report for active duty and until they are relieved from duty.
§ 116-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-11
1:135
Chapter 120
PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 116-11 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 116-11
1:136
ARTICLE I
Reward Policy for Crime or Vandalism
[Adopted 10-2-1995 by Ord. No. 497B (Ch. 1, Part 13, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 120-1. Award.
The Manager of the City of Lock Haven and/or Police Chief of the City
of Lock Haven is hereby authorized to offer an award of up to $500 for
information leading to the arrest and conviction of any individual
committing a crime, including vandalism, on or against the property of the
City of Lock Haven or any property managed or maintained by the City.
§ 120-2. Reimbursement.
Any individual who pleads guilty or is convicted of any crime or vandalism
occurring against any City owned/managed/maintained property shall be
obligated to reimburse the City of Lock Haven for the costs of those
damages in accordance with § 1106(d) of the Crimes Code, 18 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 1106(d).
§ 120-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-2
1:137
Chapter 128
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 99. Personnel — See Ch. 105.
§ 120-2 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 120-2
1:138
ARTICLE I
Mayor and Council
[Adopted 4-6-1971 by Ord. No. 790A; amended in its entirety
2-4-2013 by Ord. No. 918 (Ch. 1, Part 2A, of the 2003 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 128-1. Mayor's compensation.
The compensation of the Mayor of the City of Lock Haven shall be $4,800
annually, for terms beginning January 1, 2014, and thereafter.
§ 128-2. Compensation of Council members.
The compensation of the Councilmen of the City of Lock Haven shall be
$3,600 annually, for terms beginning January 1, 2014, and thereafter.
§ 128-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-2
1:139

ARTICLE II
City Treasurer
[Adopted 8-22-1977 by Ord. No. 46B; amended in its entirety
2-4-2013 by Ord. No. 918 (Ch. 1, Part 2B, of the 2003 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 128-3. Compensation of City Treasurer as Tax Collector.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Local Tax Collection Law, Act of May
25, 1945, as amended,93 the compensation of the City Treasurer as Tax
Collector shall be established by ordinance adopted during the year in
which general elections are held to elect the City Treasurer.
§ 128-4. Annual salary as Tax Collector.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Local Tax Collection Law, the annual salary
of the City Treasurer for the performance of City Tax Collector functions
and duties is hereby established at the rate of $600 per year for each of the
years 2014 through 2017.
§ 128-5. Annual salary.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Optional Third Class City Charter Law,94
the annual salary of the City Treasurer is hereby established at the rate
of $600 per year for each of the years 2014 through 2017. Said salary
is compensation for all the powers, duties and functions relating to the
collection, receiving, safeguarding, accounting for and payment over of
public monies of the City of Lock Haven.
93.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
94.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 41101 et seq.
§ 128-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-5
1:141
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 164
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 212.
§ 164-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ALARM SYSTEM — An assembly of equipment and devices, or a single
device such as a solid state unit, which uses electrical energy to signal the
presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention such as a burglar, robbery,
fire, smoke or need for medical assistance within a building, structure or
facility, or for alerting others to the commission of an unlawful act or hazard
within the building, structure or facility and to which firemen, policemen
or public safety officers are expected to respond, and which emits a sound
or transmits a signal or message when actuated. "Alarm system" includes,
but is not limited to, the terms "audible alarm system," "automatic holdup
alarm system," "burglar alarm system," "fire alarm system" and "manual
holdup alarm system," as those terms are hereinafter defined. Excluded
from the definition of "alarm systems" are systems used solely to alert or
signal persons within the premises in which the alarm system is located.
ALARM USER — Any person, corporation, partnership or association
owning, leasing, occupying or found in charge of any premises wherein an
alarm system is located.
ANSWERING SERVICE — A telephone answering service providing the
service of receiving emergency signals from an alarm system and thereafter
relaying the emergency alarm by voice to the Clinton County
Communication Center and/or the Police Department for the City of Lock
Haven.
AUDIBLE ALARM SYSTEM — An alarm system which generates an audible
sound on the premises when it is actuated, which sound can be heard by
persons not on the premises, although it may be also heard on the premises.
AUTOMATIC HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM — An alarm in which the signal
transmission is initiated by the action of the robber or intruder.
BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM — An alarm signaling an entry or an attempted
entry in the area protected by the alarm system.
FALSE ALARMS — The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or
lessee of an alarm system or his employees or agents.
§ 128-5 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 164-1
1:142
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — An alarm system signaling fire and/or smoke in
the area protected by the alarm system and shall include, but not be limited
to, all fire alarms, smoke alarms or sprinkler alarms.
MANUAL HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM — Refers to an alarm in which the
signal transmission is initiated by the direct action of the person attacked
or by an observer of the attack.
PUBLIC SAFETY ALARM — Any one or more of the alarm systems described
in this section.
SUBSCRIBER — The person who buys or leases or otherwise obtains for
use upon the premises within the City an alarm system or contracts with or
hires an alarm business to monitor or service the alarm system.
§ 164-2. Entry on premises.
The alarm subscriber shall provide the Clinton County Communication
Center with the names and residence telephone numbers of at least two
persons who can be reached by telephone and who can provide entry
into the premises wherein an alarm system is located for the purpose of
terminating an alarm signal.
§ 164-3. Testing of alarm.
No alarm system shall be tested with a resulting transmission of an alarm
without first notifying the Clinton County Communication Center.
§ 164-4. Liability of City of Lock Haven.
The City of Lock Haven shall not be liable for the maintenance of any alarm
system equipment, for answering any alarms or for any loss or damage
relating to the alarm system or procedure; and, further, each subscriber
shall hold harmless the City of Lock Haven, as well as its employees for
the same and shall reimburse for any reasonable attorney's fees and cost
incurred in the event the City of Lock Haven is made party to any such legal
proceedings.
§ 164-5. False alarms, penalties, disconnection. [Amended 3-5-2018
by Ord. No. 983]
Each subscriber shall pay to the City of Lock Haven a penalty in the event a
false alarm is transmitted to the Clinton County Communication Center, as
follows:
A. For the first two false alarms in any calendar year: no penalty.
B. For the third false alarm in any calendar year: $50.
C. For the fourth false alarm in any calendar year: $100.
D. For the fifth and each succeeding false alarm in any calendar year:
$200.
§ 164-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-6
1:143
§ 164-6. Notification.
§ 164-7. Circumstances not constituting false alarms. [Amended
6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 611B]
Alarm conditions caused by the following circumstances shall not constitute
a false alarm for which a user fee is imposed. Alarm system malfunctions if:
§ 164-8. Termination of response.
In the event the subscriber of an alarm device has been assessed with
eight or more penalties per calendar year or has any unpaid penalties, the
Chief of Police or the Lock Haven Fire Department Chief shall recommend
to the City Manager that the City terminate responses until such time as
the penalties are paid in full and/or the subscriber has his alarm system
certified as repaired and functioning properly by a company which installs
and maintains alarm systems.
Chapter 170
A. When a false alarm occurs, the Lock Haven City Police Department or
the Lock Haven Fire Department, within 10 days from the date of the
false alarm, shall notify the subscriber of the alarm device from which
the false alarm emanated that a false alarm charge is due and the
amount thereof. Such notice shall be in writing and mailed (certified
mail) to the subscriber at the location of the alarm. Failure of the Lock
Haven Police Department or the Lock Haven Fire Department to mail
notice of assessment of a false alarm charge within 10 days from the
occurrence of a false alarm shall preclude the City from assessing a
false alarm charge for said false alarm.
B. A false alarm charge shall be due and payable at the office of the Lock
Haven City Police Department 15 days from the date of the mailing of
the notice of assessment of the charge.
C. Failure of the subscriber causing a false alarm to pay a false alarm
charge on or before the date due shall constitute a violation of this
chapter and shall be subject to termination of police or fire response.
A. A person who has accidentally caused a false alarm immediately calls
the Clinton County Communication Center in time to prevent a
response of the Police or Fire Department to the premises.
B. Alarm activated by storm conditions, motor vehicle-utility pole
collisions or disruption of telephone company service or other natural
disaster.
C. Corrective measures are instituted and written proof of repairs
provided within 72 hours after the alarm has been transmitted. Written
proof of repairs shall be provided to the Fire Chief for all false alarm
notifications issued by the Fire Department and to the Chief of Police
for all false alarm notifications issued by the Police Department.
§ 164-6 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 164-8
1:144
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 170-1. Definitions.
The following words or phrases, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:
LIQUOR AND MALT OR BREWED BEVERAGES AND CONTAINER AND
OFFICIAL SEAL — The same as those words and phrases are defined in the
Liquor Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.95
OPEN — When used in connection with a container, shall mean any
container which has been perforated, in the case of a can or similar
container, or a container on which the cap has been removed.
§ 170-2. Unlawful to drink liquor, malt or brewed beverages.
[Amended 4-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
Except as may be permitted by the City upon the filing of a request for a
permit, it shall be unlawful, within the City of Lock Haven, for any person
to drink alcoholic beverages upon any public street, public sidewalk, public
municipal parking lot, private parking lot open to public use or public park,
or to possess an open container in the same. The City's authority to grant
exceptions to the requirements of this chapter limited by all applicable
statutory or regulatory provisions of the commonwealth.
§ 170-3. Unlawful to possess open container of liquor, malt or
brewed beverages. [Amended 4-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
It shall be unlawful, within the City of Lock Haven, for any person to
have in a vehicle operated or parked under such person's control any open
container containing alcoholic beverages upon any public street, public
sidewalk, public municipal parking lot, private parking lot open to public
use or public park, or to drink liquor alcoholic beverages therein.
§ 170-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $600 plus costs
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment
for not more than 30 days.
§ 170-5. Permits; fees. [Added 4-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
A permit application for exceptions for the public consumption of alcohol
on any street, sidewalk, municipal parking lot, private parking lot open to
public use or public park must be filed with the City Manager or designee
and accompanied by the fee set from time to time by resolution of Council.
95.Editor's Note: See 47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.
§ 164-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-5
1:145
All permits must be approved by City Council and will only become valid
when accompanied by a special occasion permit or off-premises catering
permit issued to the applicant by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
Chapter 177
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 177-1. License requirement. [Amended 6-27-1983 by Ord. No.
180B]
On or after July 1, 1958, no person or persons, firm, association or
corporation shall at any time have in his, its or their possession or under
control within the City of Lock Haven any music box, jukebox, phonograph,
billiard table, pool table, gaming table or devices, machines or apparatus
whatsoever, for the playing of games and amusement operated and played
through the insertion therein of a coin or token, without first having secured
a license therefor as hereinafter provided.
§ 177-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any amusement machine or
device, whether for the playing of music or the playing of a game or games,
operated by means of the insertion of a coin, token or similar object for the
purpose of amusement or skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged.
The term does not include vending machines in which are not incorporated
gaming or amusement features.
OPERATOR — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who
sets up for operation by another or leases or distributes for the purpose of
operation by another any device as herein defined, whether such setting up
for operation, leasing or distributing be for a fixed charge or rental, or on
the basis of a division of the income derived from such device or otherwise.
PROPRIETOR — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or
club who, as the owner, lessee or proprietor has under his, its or their
control any establishment, place or premises in or at which such device is
placed or kept for use or play, or on exhibition for the purpose of use or play.
§ 177-3. License required. [Amended 6-27-1983 by Ord. No. 180B]
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in business as an operator or
proprietor of coin-operated amusement devices, billiard tables, pool tables
or gaming tables and devices, without first having obtained a proper license
therefor.
§ 170-5 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 177-4
1:146
§ 177-4. Operator's license fee. [Amended 3-7-1977 by Ord. No. 5B;
2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
The annual operator's license fee for each coin-operated table, machine or
device shall be in an amount as established from time to time by resolution
of City Council.
§ 177-5. Proprietor's license fee. [Amended 1-17-1972 by Ord. No.
814A; 6-27-1983 by Ord. No. 180B; 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
The license fee for each proprietor as herein defined shall be in an amount
as established from time to time by resolution of City Council.
§ 177-6. Application for license. [Amended 1-17-1972 by Ord. No.
814A]
A. Application for license hereunder shall be filed, in writing, with the
Chief of Police of the City of Lock Haven, on a form to be provided by
the City of Lock Haven and shall specify:
(1) The name and address of the applicant and, if a firm, corporation,
partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and their
addresses.
(2) The address of the premises where the licensed device or devices
are to be operated, together with the character of the business as
carried on at such place.
(3) The trade name and general description of the device or devices to
be licensed, the name of the manufacturer and the serial number
and, if the applicant is a proprietor, the number of devices to be
licensed.
(4) The name and address of the operator of the device or devices, if
other than the proprietor.
B. The proper license fee shall accompany such application. Upon receipt
of an application for license hereunder, the Chief of Police shall cause to
be made such investigation as he shall deem necessary. If the
application is approved by the Chief of Police, a license shall be issued
by him and he shall remit the fee to the City Treasurer. If the license is
denied the fee shall be returned to the applicant. All licenses under this
chapter shall expire on June 30 following their issuance. The license
shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment of the
licensee. Such license shall be nonassignable and nontransferable, and
in the case of a proprietor shall apply only to the premises for which
such license is issued.
§ 177-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-7
1:147
§ 177-7. Increasing number of devices. [Amended 1-17-1972 by Ord.
No. 814A]
In case a proprietor licensed under this chapter desires, after the expiration
of any portion of any license year, to increase the number of devices to be
used or played, or exhibited for use or play in his establishment, he shall
surrender his license to the Chief of Police, who shall issue a new license
showing the number of devices licensed thereunder, upon payment of the
proper license fee therefor.
§ 177-8. Evidence of ownership to be filed with Chief of Police.
[Amended 1-17-1972 by Ord. No. 814A]
Any proprietor who owns such device or devices at the time this chapter
becomes effective shall file with the Chief of Police evidence of such
ownership prior to the issuance of a license; and any proprietor purchasing
a device or devices after the effective date of this chapter shall file with the
Chief of Police evidence of ownership thereof before exhibiting or placing
said device or devices for use or play.
§ 177-9. Revocation of license. [Amended 1-17-1972 by Ord. No.
814A]
The Chief of Police shall have the right to revoke any license issued
hereunder for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 177-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-7-1977 by Ord. No.
5B; 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs,
to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 177-11. Penalty for late payment. [Added 6-27-1983 by Ord. No.
180B]
In the event the annual operator or proprietor license fee is not paid on
or before July 1 of each year as aforesaid, there shall be added to said
operator's license fee or proprietor's license fee a penalty of 10% of said fee
for late payment in addition to any penalty set forth in § 177-10.
Chapter 182
ANIMALS
§ 177-7 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 177-11
1:148
ARTICLE I
Dog Control
[Adopted 6-21-1976 by Ord. No. 958A (Ch. 2, Part 1, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 182-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
CUSTODIAN — Any person who has control of a dog.
FOULING — Urinating or defecating by a dog.
KEEPER — Anyone who is responsible for a dog, whether or not the dog is
in that person's presence.
OWNER — Any person having a right of property in any dog or having
custody of any dog, or any person who harbors or permits a dog to remain
on that person's property and who feeds said dog on a regular basis.
§ 182-2. Dogs prohibited in City parks and other planted areas.
[Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian or keeper, or the parent or
guardian of any minor owner, custodian or keeper of any dog, except seeing
eye dogs, to keep the dog from entering and being upon any City park,
playground, recreation area, mini-mall or any other planted area of the
City. For purposes of enforcement of this section, the flood protection levee
system is excluded and dogs are not prohibited from that area if on leashes.
§ 182-3. Dogs to be leashed on City property.
It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian, keeper, or parent or guardian of
any minor owner, custodian or keeper of any dog, to keep the dog secured
on a leash any time the dog is on any City property other than property
listed in § 182-2 hereof.
§ 182-4. Fouling of private property prohibited without owner's
consent.
It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian or keeper, or the parent or
guardian of any minor owner, custodian or keeper of any dog, except seeing
eye dogs, to keep the dog from fouling any property not owned by the City,
unless the property owner otherwise consents thereto.
§ 182-5. Fouling of City property prohibited, except in gutters.
[Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian, keeper, or parent or guardian of
any minor owner, custodian or keeper of any dog, to keep that person's dog
from fouling any property owned by the City.
§ 182-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-6
1:149
§ 182-6. Complaints; prosecution of violators.
Upon receiving a complaint or information that an owner, custodian, keeper,
or parent or guardian of any minor owner, custodian or keeper of any dog
has permitted said dog to violate this article, then the City police, if the facts
so warrant, shall prosecute the said owner, custodian, keeper, or the parent
or guardian of any minor owner, custodian or keeper of said dog under the
terms of this article.
§ 182-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $10 and each succeeding offense shall cause to be issued a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 182-6 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 182-7
1:150
ARTICLE II
Animal Nuisances
[Adopted 9-4-1987 by Ord. No. 279B (Ch. 2, Part 2, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 182-8. Nuisance.
§ 182-9. Warning.
§ 182-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
A. Any dog or cat, which by frequent or habitual barking, howling,
screeching, yelping or baying, or in any way or manner injures or
disturbs the quiet of any person or the community or which disturbs or
endangers the comfort, repose or health of persons, is hereby declared
a nuisance.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner or person having custody of such a
dog or cat to harbor or permit it to commit such nuisances.
A. Prior to any violations or prosecutions under this article, the owner or
person violating this article shall be given a warning of the conduct
constituting such violation.
B. Should such conduct continue after said warning, charges shall be
brought against the owner or person having custody of such dog or cat.
§ 182-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-10
1:151
Chapter 194
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 3078.
§ 194-1. Definitions. [Added 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 811]
The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this chapter.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer, the Zoning
Officer, any City police officer, or any other City employee assigned to
enforcing City ordinances.[Amended 7-2-2018 by Ord. No. 992]
GROWING SEASON — The period of time beginning April 1 and ending
October 31 in any given year.[Added 7-2-2018 by Ord. No. 992]
OCCUPANT — Any person living in a dwelling or having possession of a
space within a building.[Amended 7-2-2018 by Ord. No. 992]
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of
the municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control
of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and
the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take
possession of real property by a court.[Amended 7-2-2018 by Ord. No.
992]
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.[Amended
7-2-2018 by Ord. No. 992]
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, whether improved or unimproved,
including portions occupied by a street or alley and portions of land
between sidewalks and streets.[Amended 7-2-2018 by Ord. No. 992]
§ 194-2. Vegetative growth restricted. [Amended 12-17-2007 by
Ord. No. 811; 7-2-2018 by Ord. No. 992]
No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying a property within the
City of Lock Haven shall permit any grass or weeds or any other vegetation
whatsoever to grow or remain upon such premises to exceed a height of
eight inches, subject to the following exceptions:
A. Vegetation which is edible and cultivated for that purpose shall be
permitted to exceed a height of greater than eight inches, provided it is
planted, cultivated, and maintained in an orderly manner.
§ 182-10 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 194-2
1:152
§ 194-3. Responsibility for controlling vegetative growth.
The owner or occupant of any premises, whether vacant or occupied, shall
remove, trim or cut all grass, weeds or other vegetation growing or
remaining upon such premises in violation of the provisions of § 194-2 of
this chapter.
§ 194-4. Annual notice to control vegetative growth.
On or before April 20 of each year, the Chief of Police shall give notice in
a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Lock Haven, ordering
removal or trimming of said grass and weeds or other vegetation. This shall
be the only notice given and if the same is not adhered to by the owner or
occupant of any property during that period, the City of Lock Haven may
take necessary steps to bring said premises in conformity with § 194-2 and
collect the costs thereof, as provided herein.
§ 194-5. Curblines to be kept clear of vegetative growth.96
It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant, occupant or agent of any lot of
land, house or tenement in the City of Lock Haven to allow or permit any
weeds or brushes to grow and remain upon that portion of the street or
alley immediately in front or adjoining said premises between the property
line of such street or alley and the outer edge of the roadway of such street
or alley commonly known as the curbline. It is the intent and meaning of
this chapter that a portion of streets or alleys between the property line
and the outer edge of the roadway, commonly known as the curbline, which
space is ordinarily occupied by lawns, sidewalks and shade trees, shall be
clipped clean and clear of all kinds of weeds, bushes and refuse by the
owner, tenant, occupant or agent of the property immediately abutting such
space under a penalty for the violation as provided herein.
§ 194-6. Notice of ordinance violation. [Added 12-17-2007 by Ord.
No. 811; amended 7-2-2018 by Ord. No. 992]
B. Vegetative growth commonly recognized as having an ornamental
purpose shall be permitted, provided it is planted, cultivated, and
maintained in an orderly manner.
C. The use of native plant species for aesthetic reasons or introduced plant
species to attract and aid wildlife may be planted and cultivated,
provided it is planted, cultivated, and maintained in an orderly manner.
D. Plant growth to offset and control any soil loss problems both occurring
or predicted shall be permitted, provided it is planted, cultivated, and
maintained in an orderly manner.
A. Upon the discovery of an initial violation on a premises during a
growing season, the Enforcement Officer shall give written notice of
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 194-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-6
1:153
warning to the owner and/or occupant of such violation by posting the
property and providing notice either by United States mail, certified,
return receipt requested, to the owner and/or occupant's last known
address or by personal service. Following receipt of notice, the owner
and/or occupant shall have 48 hours to abate such violation. This
section shall not apply to subsequent violations after the initial violation
by the same owner and/or occupant of a property during the same
growing season.
B. After a period of no less than 48 hours following the receipt of the
notice of warning, the Enforcement Officer may inspect the premises
for compliance with this chapter.
C. If the owner and/or occupant does not abate the violation within 48
hours of receipt of the notice of warning, or in the event of a subsequent
violation within the same growing season where no notice of warning is
required, then an ordinance violation shall be issued to the owner and/
or occupant by posting the property and providing notice either by
United States mail, certified, return receipt requested, to the owner
and/or occupant's last known address or by personal service. Each
twenty-four-hour period shall constitute a separate violation and an
ordinance violation may be issued every 24 hours following the
expiration of the initial forty-eight-hour period specified in Subsection A
without further notice as required by that section.
D. The notice of violation set forth in Subsection C shall direct and require
such occupant or owner, or both of them, to remove, trim, or cut such
grass, weeds or vegetation so as to conform to the requirements of this
chapter, within 48 hours after posting of such notice. If any owner or
occupant shall neglect to comply with such notice within the period of
time stated therein, the City authorities may remove, trim or cut such
grass, weeds or vegetation so as to comply with the provisions of this
chapter, and the reasonable cost thereof, including court costs and
attorney's fees, together with any additional penalty authorized by law,
may be collected by the City from such owner or occupant as a penalty
under the provisions of this chapter, or in any other manner provided by
law. This right, as herein vested in the City, shall be in addition to the
penalties prescribed by § 194-7 for the failure of the owner or occupant
to comply with the terms of this chapter.
E. In addition to, and notwithstanding the City's exercise or non-exercise
of the above procedures, following the issuance of a notice of warning
(in the event of an initial violation) or without such issuance (in the
event of a subsequent violation during the same growing season), the
Enforcement Officer may issue a citation to the owner/occupant and
commence proceedings regarding same in the office of the applicable
Magisterial District Judge.
§ 194-6 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 194-7
1:154
§ 194-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670; 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 811; 7-2-2018 by Ord. No. 992]
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate the terms of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$300, nor more than $1,000, plus costs. Each day's violation shall constitute
a separate offense and notice to the offender shall not be necessary in
order to constitute a separate offense, nor shall notice to the offender be
necessary to constitute an offense. In default of payment of the penalty
stated herein, such offender may be committed to the county jail for a
period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 194-8. Notice to owners and occupants of premises. [Added
12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 811]
The Enforcement Officer is hereby empowered to give notice, by personal
service or by United States mail, to the owner and/or the occupant of a
violation of the terms of this chapter, directing and requiring such occupant
or owner or both of them to remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds or
vegetation so as to conform to the requirements of this chapter, within 48
hours after issuance of such notice. If any owner or occupant shall neglect
to comply with such notice within the period of time stated therein, the City
authorities may remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation so as to
comply with the provisions of this chapter, and the reasonable cost thereof,
together with any additional penalty unauthorized by law, may be collected
by the City from such owner or occupant as a penalty under the provisions
of this chapter, or in any other manner provided by law. This right, as
herein vested in the City, shall be in addition to penalties prescribed by
the provisions of this chapter for the failure of the owner or occupant, as
aforesaid, to comply with the terms of this chapter.
§ 194-9. City may do work upon certain conditions.
The City may abate any violation of this chapter and shall charge all costs
therefor, plus 10% of said costs, to the person, firm or corporation convicted
of said violation; provided, however, said person, firm or corporation shall
first have, upon conviction, seven days to abate said violation, before City
may perform the same.
Chapter 203
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 203-1. Preliminary provisions.
A. Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of
Lock Haven Cable Television Ordinance Amendments of 1993."
B. Repealer. All other ordinances of the City of Lock Haven are repealed to
the extent inconsistent herewith. All franchise agreements between the
§ 194-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-1
1:155
§ 203-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT — All equipment in a cable subscriber's home
that is used to receive the basic service, regardless of whether such
equipment is additionally used to receive other tiers of regulated
programming service and/or unregulated service. Equipment shall include,
but not be limited to:
City of Lock Haven and cable operators are abrogated to the extent,
and only to the extent, inconsistent herewith, except to the extent
abrogation is not required by the Federal Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 199297 or the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
C. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate cable television in
the exercise of the power of City Council to:
(1) Regulate telephone, telegraph and electric power poles, and other
obstructions erected upon or in the streets and roads of the City;
and
(2) Provide for the maintenance of peace, good government, safety and
welfare of the City and its trade, commerce and manufactures.
D. Federal law. This chapter is enacted under the Federal Cable Television
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, which permits local
franchising authorities to regulate cable television, subject to certain
substantive and procedural limitations.
E. Interpretation. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this
chapter, these provisions shall be construed broadly as required for the
maintenance of peace, good government, safety and welfare of the City
and its trade, commerce and manufactures.
F. Conflict with federal law. It is the intent of City Council that this chapter
conform to the federal law. If a court of competent jurisdiction declares
any provision of this chapter to be in conflict with the federal law, the
federal law will control and this chapter, to the extent that any provision
is declared to be in conflict with the federal law, shall not apply.
A. Converter boxes.
B. Remote control units.
C. Connections for additional television receivers.
D. Other cable home wiring.
97.Editor's Note: See See 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq.
§ 203-1 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 203-2
1:156
BASIC SERVICE — At a minimum, all signals of domestic television
broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal secondarily
transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station,
regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable system),
any public, educational and governmental programming required by the
franchise to be carried on the basic tier and any additional video
programming signals a service added to the basic tier by the cable operator.
BASIC SERVICE RATE — The rate charged by a cable operator for basic
service and associated equipment costs.
CABLE OPERATOR — Any person or group of persons:
CABLE SERVICE —
CABLE SYSTEM — A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and
which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but does not
include:
CITY COUNCIL — The Lock Haven City Council.
FEDERAL LAW — The Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984,98
as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
That provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system.
A.
Who otherwise owns, controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.
B.
The one-way transmission to subscribers of:
(1) Video programming; or
(2) Other programming service.
A.
Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such
video programming or other programming service.
B.
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more television broadcast stations.
A.
A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit
dwellings under common ownership, control or management, unless
such facility uses any public right-of-way.
B.
A facility of a common carrier, except to the extent that such facility is
used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers.
C.
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility systems.
D.
98.Editor's Note: See 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq.
§ 203-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-2
1:157
Act of 1992, and all regulations promulgated by the FCC thereunder, as any
of the foregoing may be amended from time to time.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Lock Haven, a City of the third class; a
political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 203-3. Administration. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
A. Appointment and powers of compliance officer.
(1) For the administration of this chapter, a compliance officer, who
shall not hold any elective office in the City, shall be appointed by
the City Council.
(2) The compliance officer shall meet the qualifications established by
City Council and shall be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
City Council a working knowledge of cable regulation under the
federal law and this chapter.
(3) The compliance officer shall administer this chapter in accordance
with its literal terms.
B. Duties of compliance officer. This compliance officer shall be
responsible for:
(1) Taking such action on behalf of the City as may from time to time be
required to obtain or maintain the City's certification to regulate
basic service rates.
(2) Notifying all cable operators serving the City when the City has
been certified by the FCC to regulate basic service rates.
(3) Notifying all cable operators serving the City that the City intends
to enforce the minimum customer service standards established by
the federal law.
(4) Making all filings required or permitted to be made to the FCC by
the City pursuant to the federal law, subject to oversight and
control of City Council.
(5) Receiving, filing in the public records of the City, reviewing for
completeness and placing on the City Council's agenda for
consideration, all submissions, petitions and other filings required
or permitted to be made to the City pursuant to the federal law. All
submissions, petitions and other filings made to the City pursuant
to the federal law shall be made via first class mail, postage
prepaid, to the following address:
§ 203-2 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 203-3
1:158
§ 203-4. Regulation of basic service rates. [Amended 2-24-2003 by
Ord. No. 670]
The City Council shall regulate basic service rates in accordance with the
substantive and procedural provisions of the federal law and any applicable
state law or regulations or local ordinances.
City of Lock Haven
Attn: Cable Television Compliance Officer
City Hall, 20 East Church Street, Lock Haven, PA 17745
(6) Receiving and transmitting to the proper officer of the City any
filing fees paid pursuant to this chapter. The filing of fees, as
applicable to this chapter, shall be in amounts established from
time to time by resolution of City Council.
(7) Enforcing the provisions of this chapter and all decisions of City
Council made hereunder to the fullest extent permitted by the
federal law, subject to the oversight and control of City Council.
(8) Taking such other action as may be necessary from time to time,
subject to the oversight and control of City Council, to protect the
right of the City to regulate cable television to the fullest extent
permitted by the federal law.
A. Duties of cable operators.
(1) Within 30 days of receiving written notification from the City that
the City has been certified by the FCC to regulate rates for the
basic service, a cable operator shall file its schedule of rates for the
basic service and associated equipment with the City.
(2) At least 30 days prior to increasing its rates for the basic service, a
cable operator shall notify each subscriber of the proposed rate
increase in billing envelopes and shall file a notice of its proposed
rate increase with the City, together with the fee in an amount as
established from time to time by resolution of City Council.
(3) At the time of filing a schedule of rates or a proposed rate increase
with the City, a cable operator shall:
(a) Publish a summary of the rates or rate increase in a local
newspaper of daily general circulation for at least three
consecutive days in a block advertisement no smaller than
three inches by four inches; and
(b) Cablecast a summary of the rates or rate increase on its public
information channel, at least twice daily at such times as are
reasonably expected to reach the largest audience, over a
seven-day period, in each case notifying interested parties that
they must submit written comments by a certain date (within
§ 203-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-4
1:159
15 days of the cable operator's filing with the City), at the
municipal address.
(4) A cable operator shall comply with all orders of the City, except that
a cable operator shall not be required to comply with an order if the
cable operator demonstrates that complying with the order would
require the cable operator to disclose proprietary information.
B. Duties of the City.
(1) Upon receipt of a cable operator's schedule of rates or a proposed
rate increase, the City shall cablecast a summary of the rates or
rate increase on the channel(s) allocated to the City at least twice
daily at such times as are reasonably expected to reach the largest
audience, over a three-day period, along with a notice that
interested parties shall submit written comments to the City by a
date certain (within 15 days of the cable operator's filing with the
City), at the City address.
(2) The City shall make any decision on the reasonableness of current
basic service rates and proposed rate increases pursuant to the
procedural and substantive provisions of the federal law.
(3) In making a decision on the reasonableness of current basic service
rates or proposed rate increases, the City shall have the authority
to compel the production of proprietary information from cable
operators and, in such circumstances, the City shall be subject to
the confidentiality provisions set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
C. Enforcement. In rendering its decisions, the City Council shall have the
full authority granted to it pursuant to the federal law to order a cable
operator to take any and all actions as the federal law permits
including, without limitation:
(1) Ordering a cable operator to implement a reduction in basic service
tier or associated equipment rates where necessary to bring rates
into compliance with the standards set forth in the federal law.
(2) Prescribing a reasonable rate for the basic service tier or
associated equipment after it determines that a proposed rate is
unreasonable.
(3) Ordering a cable operator to refund to subscribers that portion of
previously paid rates determined to be in excess of the permitted
tier charge or above the actual cost of equipment, unless the
operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing which justified
the rate charged as reasonable. Before ordering such a refund,
however, the City shall give the operator notice and shall give the
operator 15 days from the date such notice is given to submit
written comments to the City. Any such refund order shall be
further subject to the limitations contained in the federal law.
§ 203-4 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 203-4
1:160
§ 203-5. Customer service regulation.
D. Penalties. In the event that a cable operator does not comply with a
decision made pursuant to this chapter and directed specifically toward
the cable operator, the City may assess a fine against the cable operator
as set by resolution of the City of Lock Haven.
A. Federal minimum customer service standards adopted. It is the intent
of the City to enforce the following minimum customer service
standards as established by the federal law:
(1) Cable system office hours and telephone availability.
(a) The cable operator will maintain a local, toll-free or collect call
telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers
24 hours a day, seven days a week.
[1] Trained company representatives will be available to
respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal
business hours.
[2] After normal business hours, the access line may be
answered by a service or an automated response system,
including an answering machine. Inquiries received after
normal business hours must be responded to by a trained
company representative on the next business day.
(b) Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by
a customer representative, including wait time, shall not
exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than
90% of the time under normal operating conditions, measured
on a quarterly basis.
(c) The operator will not be required to acquire equipment or
perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone
answering standards above unless an historical record of
complaints indicates a clear failure to comply.
(d) Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a
busy signal less than 3% of the time.
(e) Customer service center and bill payment locations will be
open at least during normal business hours and will be
conveniently located.
(2) Installation, outages and service calls. Under normal operating
conditions, each of the following four standards will be met no less
than 95% of the time measured on a quarterly basis:
(a) Standard installations will be performed within seven business
days after an order has been placed. "Standard" installations
are those that are located up to 125 feet from the existing
distribution system.
§ 203-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-5
1:161
(b) Excluding conditions beyond the control of the operator, the
cable operator will begin working on "service interruptions"
promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the
interruption becomes known. The cable operator must begin
actions to correct other service problems the next business day
after notification of the service problem.
(c) The "appointment window" alternatives for installations,
service calls and other installation activities will be either a
specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during
normal business hours. (The operator may schedule service
calls and other installation activities outside of normal
business hours for the express convenience of the customer.)
(d) An operator may not cancel an appointment with a customer
after the close of business on the business day prior to the
scheduled appointment.
(e) If a cable operator representative is running late for an
appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the
appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The
appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which
is convenient for the customer.
(3) Communications between cable operators and cable subscribers.
(a) Notification to subscribers.
[1] The cable operator shall provide written information on
each of the following areas at the time of installation of
service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any
time upon request.
[a] Products and services offered.
[b] Prices and options for programming services and
conditions of subscription to programming and other
services.
[c] Installation and service maintenance policies.
[d] Instructions on how to use the cable service.
[e] Channel positions of programming carried on the
system.
[f] Billing and complaint procedures, including the
address and telephone number of the local franchise
authority's cable office.
[2] Billing.
[a] Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills
must be fully itemized with itemizations including, but
§ 203-5 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 203-5
1:162
not limited to, basic and premium service charges and
equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all
activity during the billing period, including optional
charges, rebates and credits.
[b] In case of a billing dispute, the cable operator must
respond to a written complaint from a subscriber
within 30 days.
[3] Refunds. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no
later than either:
[a] The customer's next billing cycle following resolution
of the request or 30 days, whichever is earlier.
[b] The return of the equipment supplied by the cable
operator if service is terminated.
[4] Credits. Credits for service will be issued no later than the
customer's next billing cycle following the determination
that a credit is warranted.
(4) Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS — Those hours during which most
similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers.
In all cases, "normal business hours" must include some evening
hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS — Those service conditions
which are within the control of the cable operator. Those conditions
which are not within the control of the cable operator include,
but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power
outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual weather
conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control
of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special
promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or
seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade of the cable
system.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION — The loss of picture or sound on one or
more cable channels.
B. Enforcement. In furtherance thereof, the compliance officer, 90 days
after giving notice to the cable operators of the City's intent to enforce
these standards, shall have the authority and responsibility to enforce
these standards to the fullest extent permitted by the federal law and in
accordance with all substantive and procedural requirements of the
federal law. In furtherance thereof, the compliance officer may make
any and all such orders and assess any and all such penalties for
violations of these standards as are permitted by the federal law,
§ 203-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-5
1:163
Chapter 212
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 164.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 307.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
352.
Zoning — See Ch. 410.
§ 212-1. Election to administer and enforce.
The City of Lock Haven hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999,
35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 to 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 212-2. Adoption by reference.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401
to 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of the City of Lock
Haven.
§ 212-3. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within the City of Lock Haven
shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the City
Council of the City of Lock Haven from time to time by resolution:
subject to the oversight and control of the City Council, including,
without limitation:
(1) Ordering the cable operator to pay credits or refunds to the
subscribers to the cable operator's system.
(2) Filing suit against a cable operator to compel specific performance.
(3) Conducting performance evaluations at the time of renewal of the
cable operator's franchise agreement.
C. Other customer service standards not affected. All other customer
service standards, whether established by franchise agreement, state
law or regulation or local ordinance, and whether now or hereafter
enacted, shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that such
other customer service standards are not preempted by the federal law.
A. By the designation of any employee of the City of Lock Haven to serve
as the municipal code official to act on behalf of the municipality;
§ 203-5 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 212-3
1:164
§ 212-4. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Council of the
City of Lock Haven in conformity with the requirements of the relevant
provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes
set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is
undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of
Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
§ 212-5. Effect on existing provisions.
§ 212-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by the City of Lock Haven for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the code shall be
established by the City Council by resolution from time to time.
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the City of Lock Haven;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of the City of Lock
Haven;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by the City of Lock Haven on or before July 1, 1999, and which
equal or exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in full force
and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the City of Lock
Haven not governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 212-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-6
1:165
Chapter 220
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 279.
§ 220-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Curfew Ordinance."
§ 220-2. Purpose; findings.
This chapter prescribes the conduct of minors on streets at night for the
public good, safety and welfare.
§ 220-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular and words in the
singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 17, in equivalent phrasing often
herein employed, any person 16 or less years of age.
PARENT — Any person having legal custody of a minor:
REMAIN — To stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the
streets, including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors)
totaling four or more persons in which any minor involved would not be
using the streets for ordinary or serious purposes such as mere passage
or going home. To implement that thought with additional precision and
precaution, exceptions are expressly defined in § 220-5 so that this is not a
mere prohibitory or presence type curfew ordinance.
STREET — A way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of the
public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel, or in the case of
the sidewalk thereof, for pedestrian travel. The term "street" includes the
legal right-of-way including, but not limited to, the cartway of traffic lanes,
the curb, the sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots
A. As a natural or adoptive parent;
B. As a legal guardian;
C. As a person who stands in the place of a parent; or
D. As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of court.
§ 212-6 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 220-3
1:166
or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street. The term
"street" applies irrespective of what it be called or normally named, whether
alley, avenue, court, road or otherwise.
TIME OF NIGHT — Referred to herein is based upon the prevailing
standard of time, whether Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight
Saving Time, generally observed at that hour by the public in the City, prima
facie the time then observed in the City administrative offices and police
station.
YEARS OF AGE — Continues from one birthday, such as the sixteenth to, but
not including, the day of the next, such as the 17th birthday, making it clear
that 16 or less years of age is herein treated as equivalent to the phrase
"under 17 years of age," the latter phrase in practice, unfortunately, having
confused a number of persons into the mistaken thought that seventeenyear-
olds might be involved.
§ 220-4. Curfew for minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person 16 or less years of age (under 17) to be or
remain in or upon the streets within the City of Lock Haven at night during
the period ending at 6:00 a.m. and beginning:
§ 220-5. Exceptions. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
In the following exceptional cases, a minor on a City street during the
nocturnal hours for which § 220-4 is intended to provide the maximum limits
of regulation (and a clear general guide for minors, their parents and their
fellow citizens) shall not, however, be considered in violation of this chapter:
A. 10:30 p.m., Mondays to Fridays and Sundays.
B. 11:15 p.m. on Saturdays.
A. When accompanied by a parent of such minor.
B. When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to
take said parent's place in accompanying said minor for a designated
period of time and purpose within a specified area.
C. If a legally recognized employment makes it necessary for such child to
be in or upon said public streets, highways, alleys, parks or other public
places.
D. If said minor is driving a motor vehicle on some errand at the time
(parental errand).
E. During any evening when a sporting event is being conducted at the
local high school or Lock Haven University, or during the period of any
such supervised gathering, late compliance with this chapter may be
allowed, but only if prior notice of such intention is given to the Chief of
Police.
§ 220-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-6
1:167
§ 220-6. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor knowingly
to permit or, by inefficient control, to allow, such minor to be or remain
upon any City street under circumstances not constituting an exception
to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, this chapter. The term "knowingly"
includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have
concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal custody.
It is intended to continue to keep neglectful or careless parents up to
a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an
objective test. It shall, therefore, be no defense that a parent was
completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such
minor.
§ 220-7. Police procedures.
A police officer of the City, upon finding or having attention called to
any minor on the streets in prima facie violation of this chapter, normally
shall take the minor to the City Police Department where a parent shall
immediately be notified to come for such minor, whereupon they shall be
interviewed. This is intended to permit ascertainment, under constitutional
safeguards or relevant facts, and to centralize responsibility in the officer
in charge there and then on duty for accurate, effective, fair, impartial
and uniform enforcement and recording, thus making available experienced
supervisory personnel, the best of facilities and access to information and
records. In the absence of convincing evidence such as birth certificate, a
police officer on the street shall in the first instance use his best judgment
in determining age.
A. Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of experience
and may provide, among other things, that the police officer may
deliver to a parent thereof a minor under appropriate circumstances;
for example, a minor of tender age near home whose identity and
address may readily be ascertained or are known.
B. In any event, the investigating police officer shall write a report within
24 hours.99
C. When a parent, immediately called, has come to take charge of the
minor and the appropriate information has been recorded, the minor
shall be released to the custody of such parent. If the parent cannot be
located, or fails to take charge of the minor, then the minor shall be
released to the juvenile authorities, except to the extent that in
accordance with police regulations, approved in advance by juvenile
authorities, the minor may temporarily be entrusted to a relative,
neighbor or other person who will, on behalf of a parent, assume the
responsibility of caring for the minor pending the availability or arrival
of a parent.
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-6 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 220-7
1:168
§ 220-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each violation of this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 229
DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
D. In the case of a first violation by a minor, the Chief of Police shall, by
certified mail, send to a parent written notice of said violation with a
warning, or said notice may be delivered by a police officer, that any
subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of this chapter,
including enforcement of parental responsibility and of applicable
penalties.
§ 220-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-8
1:169

ARTICLE I
Bath Salts and Synthetic Cannabinoids
[Adopted 6-6-2011 by Ord. No. 883]
§ 229-1. Definitions and interpretation.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall
have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the
plural number include the singular number; words in the singular shall
include the plural, and words in the masculine shall include feminine and
neuter.
DELIVER or DELIVERY — Actual, constructive or attempted transfer of
possession of MDVP, synthetic drugs or synthetic cannabinoids with or
without consideration, whether or not there is an agency relationship.
DISTRIBUTE — To deliver MDVP, synthetic cannabinoids, or other synthetic
drugs and/or their derivatives.
KNOWLEDGE — A person acts knowingly with respect to a material
element of this article when:
MANUFACTURE — The production, preparation, propagation,
compounding, conversion or processing of MDPV and/or their derivatives or
synthetic cannabinoids and/or its derivatives, either directly or indirectly, by
extraction from substances of natural origin, or independently by means of
chemical synthesis, and includes any packaging or repackaging of synthetic
cannabinoids or synthetic drugs or labeling of its container, except that
this term does not include the preparation, compounding, packaging or
labeling of synthetic cannabinoids or synthetic drugs as an incident to
lawful research, teaching or chemical analysis and not for sale.
METHADONE METHYLENEDIOXPYROVALERONE (MDPV) — Commonly
referred to as "bath salts"; Compounds or psychoactive drugs with stimulant
properties which act as a norepinephrine-dopamine reuptake inhibitor
(NOR) or that work on the same receptors as the chemical compounds in
Methamphetamines and/or any derivatives and synthetic cannabis and/or
its derivatives for human consumption or ingestion thereof, including but
not limited to the following street or brand names: Ivory Wave, Bounce,
The element involves the nature of his/her conduct or the attendant
circumstances so that the person knows or should have known that the
conduct is of that nature or that such circumstances exist; and
A.
If the element involves a result of the person's conduct, the person
knows or should have known that it is practically certain that the
conduct will cause such a result;
B.
The results of his/her conduct, described by the section defining the
offense, when he/she knows or should have known that such a result is
likely to be caused by his/her conduct.
C.
§ 229-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-1
1:171
Plant Food, Meph, Mad Cow, Shake N'Vac, Drone, Bubbles, Meow Meow,
MCAT, and 4MMC (hereinafter at times collectively referred to as "MDPV").
PERSON — Any individual including adults or minors, partnership,
corporation, limited liability company, trust, association, owner, contractor,
salesperson, or any other form of entity or the combination or joint venture
thereof.
PRODUCE or PRODUCTION — Planting, cultivating, tending or harvesting
or the mixing of or combining any chemicals, herbs or any materials,
whether solid or liquid that result in the creation of MDPV and/or their
derivatives or synthetic cannabinoids and/or its derivatives.
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS — An herbal and chemical product which
mimics the effects of cannabinoids, including but not limited to synthetic
cannabinoids, cannablcvclohexano, synthetic cannabis, JWH-015, JWH-018,
JWH-073, JWH-200, Win-55, HU-210, HU-211, CP-47, 497, CP 55, 940 and
212-2 and is distributed or sold under the brand names including, but not
limited to SPICE-Diamond, Gold, Tropical Synergy, Arctic Synergy, Gold
Spirit, PEP Spice, Yucatan Fire, Smoke, K2, Skunk, Space, K2 Citron and
K2 Blonde (hereinafter at times collectively referred to as "synthetic
cannabinoids").
§ 229-2. Prohibited conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly, recklessly, or under the
circumstances where one should know, to:
§ 229-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article, shall
upon conviction (hereof, be guilty of a summary offense, and shall be fined
not to exceed $300 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, together
with judgment or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days per offense.
A. Sell at retail or wholesale MDPV commonly referred to as "bath salts"
and/or its derivatives or synthetic cannabinoids and/or its derivatives;
B. Give, exchange, deliver, aid, assist or abet another person in obtaining
methadone commonly referred to as "bath salts" and/or its derivatives
or synthetic cannabinoids and/or its derivatives.
C. Manufacture any MDPV commonly referred to as "bath salts" and/or its
derivatives or synthetic cannabinoids and/or its derivatives.
D. Produce any MDPV commonly referred to as "bath salts" and/or its
derivatives or synthetic cannabinoids and/or its derivatives.
§ 229-1 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 229-3
1:172
Chapter 241
FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS
§ 241-1. Discharge of firearms prohibited.
Except in necessary defense of person and property and except as provided
in § 241-3, it shall be unlawful, within the City of Lock Haven, for any person
to use, fire or discharge any gun or other firearm.
§ 241-2. Use of air rifles, bows and arrows or similar devices
regulated.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle, air pistol,
spring gun, spring pistol, BB gun, bow and arrow or similar device, or any
implement that is not a firearm which impels a pellet of any kind, at any
place within the City of Lock Haven, except on a properly constructed target
range or no closer than 500 feet to any dwelling or public building, and
except as provided in § 241-3.
§ 241-3. Exception. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the proper use of
firearms, bows and arrows or similar devices where their lawful use is
permitted in hunting as provided for by the Game and Wildlife Code, 34
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., and the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania
Game Commission.
§ 241-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus
costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each violation of any provision of this chapter
and each day the same is continued shall be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 246
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 212.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
352.
Zoning — See Ch. 410.
§ 229-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-1
1:173
§ 246-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,100 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Council of the City of Lock Haven does hereby
order as follows.
§ 246-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 246-3. Applicability.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or development
anywhere within any identified floodplain area unless a permit has been
obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 246-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 246-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
100. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 246-1 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 246-6
1:174
§ 246-6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
§ 246-7. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
§ 246-8. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any identified floodplain area of the City of Lock Haven.
§ 246-9. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Lock
Haven or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
A. The City Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce
this chapter and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator
The Floodplain Administrator may: (a) fulfill the duties and
responsibilities set forth in these regulations; (b) delegate duties and
responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical
personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees; or (c)
enter into a written agreement or written contract with another agency
or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these
regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another
entity shall not relieve the City of Lock Haven of its responsibilities
pursuant to the participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44
CFR 59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the City Engineer.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
§ 246-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-9
1:175
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);101 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);102 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);103 and the United
States Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall
be issued until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
proposed cost of improvements or repairs and the pre-improvement
market value of the structure, so that a substantial improvement/
substantial damage determination can be made, in accordance with
FEMA's Substantial Improvement/Substantial Damage Desk Reference.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Council for whatever
action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity, or for the
lifetime of the structure, all records associated with the requirements of
this chapter including, but not limited to, finished construction
elevation data, permitting, inspection and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning City of Lock Haven participation in
the National Flood Insurance Program as requested.
I. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in the floodplain ordinance as the Floodplain Administrator/
Manager.
101. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
102. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
103. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 246-9 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 246-9
1:176
§ 246-10. Application procedures and requirements.
J. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the latest revision
thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the City of Lock Haven.
Such application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
§ 246-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-10
1:177
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC, or the latest revision
thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the effect of any proposed
development within a floodway area (see § 246-18A) will not
increase the base flood elevation at any point.
§ 246-10 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 246-10
1:178
§ 246-11. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, municipal engineer,
etc.) for review and comment.
(d) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an AE Area/District without floodway (see
§ 246-18B) when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point within the City of
Lock Haven.
(e) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(f) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 246-24F, Storage, and § 246-25, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 246-24F and 246-25 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 246-25
during a base flood.
(g) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(h) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the
City of Lock Haven based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 246-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-12
1:179
§ 246-12. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 246-13. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard,
or similar document, which shall be displayed on the premises during
the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number
of the permit, the date of its issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain
Administrator.
§ 246-14. Start of construction.
§ 246-15. Enforcement.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The "actual start of construction" means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
§ 246-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 246-15
1:180
§ 246-16. Appeals.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines that there
are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, the Floodplain Administrator shall give notice of such alleged
violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator shall be guilty of a summary offense and upon conviction
shall pay a fine to the City of Lock Haven of not less than $25 nor more
than $500, plus costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties,
all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for
the proper enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or
penalty for any violation of or noncompliance with this chapter shall not
excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated, in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by
the Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipal Planning Code and any
other local ordinance.
§ 246-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-16
1:181
§ 246-17. Identification of floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall be:
§ 246-18. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.104
A. Any areas of City of Lock Haven classified as Special Flood Hazard
Areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated June 16, 2016
and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or
the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as
part of the Flood Insurance Study.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments are hereby adopted by City of Lock Haven and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The floodway area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the City of
Lock Haven during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
104. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 246-16 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 246-18
1:182
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
(2) AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE
Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which
base flood elevations have been provided but no floodway has been
determined.
(a) No permit shall be granted within any AE Zone without
floodway, no encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development shall be
permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic
and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard
engineering practice that the proposed development together
with all other existing and anticipated development, would not
result in an increase in flood levels of more than one foot within
the entire City of Lock Haven during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(b) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
C. A Area/District.
(1) The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no
base flood elevations have been provided. For these areas,
elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or
other acceptable sources shall be used when available. Where
other acceptable information is not available, the base flood
elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on
the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site.
(2) In lieu of the above, the City of Lock Haven may require the
applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be
undertaken only by professional engineers or others of
demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical
methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical
concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted
in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the City
of Lock Haven. In the absence of any of the above data or
documentation, the City of Lock Haven may require elevation of the
lowest floor to be at least three feet above the highest adjacent
grade.
§ 246-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-18
1:183
§ 246-19. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Council
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person
documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change
to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after
the date such information becomes available, the City of Lock Haven shall
notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting
technical or scientific data. See § 246-25B for situations where FEMA
notification is required.
§ 246-20. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the City of Lock Haven and any party
aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Council. The
burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 246-21. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the City of
Lock Haven shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject
to boundary changes. The City of Lock Haven shall adopt and enforce
floodplain regulations in areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary
changes which meet or exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 246-22. General technical provisions.
D. The AO and AH Area/District shall be those areas identified as Zones
AO and AH on the FIRM and in the FIS. These areas are subject to
inundation by one-percent-annual-chance shallow flooding where
average depths are between one foot and three feet. In Zones AO and
AH, drainage paths shall be established to guide floodwaters around
and away from structures on slopes.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the City of
Lock Haven, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
§ 246-18 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 246-22
1:184
§ 246-23. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When City of Lock Haven proposes to permit the following
encroachments: any development that causes a rise in the base flood
elevations within the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones
A1-30 and Zone AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a
rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or
relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing culverts
and bridges), the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the FEMA Administrator's conditional approval of
map change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments,
the City of Lock Haven shall provide evidence to FEMA of the
adoption of floodplain management ordinances incorporating the
increased base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting
the post-project condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, the City of Lock
Haven or applicant shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will
initiate a final map revision upon receipt of such certifications in
accordance with 44 CFR 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 246-18C of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
§ 246-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-23
1:185
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and ASCE
24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall
be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 246-18Cof this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have their lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the FIRM.
(4) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above referenced standards. There should be a statement
submitted with the permit application and a statement submitted
with the as-built floodproofing certificate prior to the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy.
(5) Any nonresidential structure that will be floodproofed must submit
the following to the Floodplain Administrator along with the
nonresidential floodproofing certificate and prior to the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy:
§ 246-23 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 246-23
1:186
(a) An inspection and maintenance plan detailing the annual
maintenance of floodproofed components ensuring that all
components will operate properly under flood conditions.
Components that must be inspected include, at a minimum:
[1] Mechanical equipment such as sump pumps and
generators;
[2] Flood shields and closures;
[3] Walls and wall penetrations; and
[4] Levees and berms (as applicable).
(b) Flood emergency operation plan detailing the procedures to be
followed during a flooding event, and must include information
pertaining to how all components will operate properly under
all conditions, including power failures. The design
professional must produce the plan. An adequate plan must
include the following:
[1] An established chain of command and responsibility with
leadership responsibilities clearly defined for all aspects of
the plan.
[2] A procedure for notification of necessary parties when
flooding threatens and flood warnings are issued.
Personnel required to be at the building should have a
planned and safe means of ingress and should have no
other emergency response duties during a flood event.
Alternates should be assigned in the event that the
primary persons responsible are unable to complete their
assigned duties under the plan.
[3] A list of specific duties assigned to ensure that all
responsibilities are addressed expeditiously. The locations
of materials necessary to properly install all floodproofing
components must be included in the list.
[4] An evacuation plan for all personnel or occupants; those
without duties for the flood emergency as well as those
with duties for implementing the plan. All possible ingress
and egress routes must be identified.
[5] A periodic training and exercise program to keep
personnel and occupants aware of their duties and
responsibilities. Training drills should be held at least once
a year and should be coordinated with City of Lock Haven
officials.
(6) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the latest revision
§ 246-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-23
1:187
thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and
ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended)
shall be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement,
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry
and exit of flood waters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space
installed on two separate walls.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as
defined in this chapter, must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will
cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic places must be obtained from
the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer.
Any exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
§ 246-23 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 246-23
1:188
§ 246-24. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc. are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
(9) For accessory structures that are 200 square feet or larger in area
(footprint) and that are below the base flood elevation, a variance is
required as set forth in §§ 246-35 and 246-36. If a variance is
granted, a signed Declaration of Land Restriction (Nonconversion
Agreement) shall be recorded on the property deed prior to
issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling;
§ 246-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-24
1:189
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
#348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages" and
"The International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 246-25, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
§ 246-24 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 246-24
1:190
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment.
(1) Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units, and
other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall
not be located below the Regulatory Flood Elevation and shall be
anchored to resist fflotation collapse, and lateral movement.
§ 246-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-24
1:191
§ 246-25. Development which may endanger human life.
(2) Ductwork shall be elevated to or above the regulatory flood
elevation or floodproofed to remain water resistant.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as
amended) and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter:
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest revision
thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania: Secs.
801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
revision thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
Secs. R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,105
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or, will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or, will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances; shall be
subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other
applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
105. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 246-24 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 246-25
1:192
§ 246-26. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited. Where permitted within any
identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved residential
structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be elevated
to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood
elevation and built in accordance with §§ 246-22, 246-23 and 246-24.
C. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind described in
Subsection A above, shall be built in accordance with §§ 246-22, 246-23
and 246-24, including:
(1) Elevated, or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood.
(3) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations (United
States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March
1992), or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
§ 246-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-26
1:193
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) and Letter of Map Revision
(LOMR). Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
§ 246-27. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
§ 246-28. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
A. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation;
(3) And anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
B. Equipment requirement:
(1) Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units, and
other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall
not be located below the regulatory flood elevation and shall be
anchored to resist fflotation collapse, and lateral improvement.
(2) Ductwork shall be elevated to or above the regulatory flood
elevation or floodproofed to remain water-resistant.
C. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 "International
Residential Building Code" or the "United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for
Manufactured Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto
and 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 through 405, shall apply.
D. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the latest revision thereto as adopted by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and 34 Pa. Code, as amended,
where appropriate, and/or applicable to units where the manufacturers'
standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were not established for
the proposed unit's(s') installation.
A. Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
§ 246-26 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 246-28
1:194
§ 246-29. Activities requiring special permits.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,106 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area unless a special permit
has been issued by the City of Lock Haven:
§ 246-30. Application requirements for special permits.
Applicants for special permits shall provide five copies of the following
items:
(3) Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 246-27.
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
A. A written request including a completed permit application form.
B. A small-scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
C. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch
being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale and date;
(2) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet;
(3) All property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of the
site expressed in acres or square feet;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, other access ways, and
parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types
and construction, and elevations;
106. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 246-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-30
1:195
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and
man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity
or development;
(6) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the base flood elevation, and information
concerning the flow of water including direction and velocities;
(7) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and any
other improvements; and
(8) Any other information which the City of Lock Haven considers
necessary for adequate review of the application.
D. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(1) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate;
(2) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other
floor;
(3) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated
with the base flood;
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures, including the flood emergency operation plan and the
inspection and maintenance plan;
(5) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(6) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways including existing and proposed grades; and
(7) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
E. The following data and documentation:
(1) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he represents;
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect, or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
§ 246-30 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 246-30
1:196
§ 246-31. Application review procedures.
Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by the City of Lock
Haven, the following procedures shall apply in addition to those of §§ 246-7
through 246-16:
adequately designed to protect against damage from the base
flood;
(3) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development
during the course of a base flood, including a statement concerning
the effects such pollution may have on human life;
(4) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the effects the proposed development will
have on base flood elevation and flows;
(5) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the base flood elevation and the effects such materials and
debris may have on base flood elevation and flows;
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's "Planning Module for Land Development";
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
(8) Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a permit
for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental
Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166;107 and
(9) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a base
flood.
A. Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation
shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or
certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the
application shall also be forwarded to the City of Lock Haven Planning
Commission and City of Lock Haven engineer for review and comment.
107. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.302.
§ 246-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-31
1:197
§ 246-32. Special technical requirements.
B. If an application is received that is incomplete, the City of Lock Haven
shall notify the applicant in writing, stating in what respect the
application is deficient.
C. If the City of Lock Haven decides to disapprove an application, it shall
notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
D. If the City of Lock Haven approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent information,
with the Department of Community and Economic Development, by
registered or certified mail, within five working days after the date of
approval.
E. Before issuing the special permit, the City of Lock Haven shall allow the
Department of Community and Economic Development 30 days, after
receipt of the notification by the Department, to review the application
and decision made by the City of Lock Haven.
F. If the City of Lock Haven does not receive any communication from the
Department of Community and Economic Development during the
thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to the applicant.
G. If the Department of Community and Economic Development should
decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify the City of Lock
Haven and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval,
and the City of Lock Haven shall not issue the special permit.
A. In addition to the requirements of §§ 246-22 through 246-28 of this
chapter, the following minimum requirements shall also apply to any
proposed development requiring a special permit. If there is any
conflict between any of the following requirements and those in
§§ 246-22 through 246-28 of this chapter or in any other code,
ordinance, or regulation, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
B. No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed
and maintained in a manner which will:
(1) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall
be designed, located, and constructed so that:
(a) The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood without any lateral movement or damage to either the
structure itself, or to any of its equipment or contents below
the BFE.
(b) The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
§ 246-31 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 246-32
1:198
§ 246-33. Existing structures in identified floodplain areas.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 246-34 shall apply.
§ 246-34. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
(c) The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time
during the base flood.
(2) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
C. All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc. shall
be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by
the City of Lock Haven and the Department of Community and
Economic Development.
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any increase in
BFE.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within AE Area/District without floodway that would, together with all
other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or most recent
revision thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. Within any Floodway Area/District (see § 246-18A), no new construction
or development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
F. Within any AE Area/District without Floodway (see § 246-18B), no new
construction or development shall be located within the area measured
§ 246-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-34
1:199
§ 246-35. Variances.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in an
exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner, the
City of Lock Haven Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request, grant relief
from the strict application of the requirements, via application from builder,
developer, or landowner, upon a form prepared by the City of Lock Haven
and submitted to the City of Lock Haven Zoning Hearing Board in the form
of a variance request.
§ 246-36. Variance procedures and conditions.
Requests for variances shall be considered by the City of Lock Haven
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code108 and the following:
50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless the
appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
A. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any
increase in the BFE.
B. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any AE Area/District without floodway that would,
together with all other existing and anticipated development, increase
the BFE more than one foot at any point.
C. No variances shall be granted for a proposed accessory structure that
exceeds 200 square feet in size. A signed nonconversion agreement is
required as a condition of receiving the variance.
D. Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other
requirements pertaining specifically to development regulated by
special permit (§§ 246-29 through 246-36) or to § 246-25, Development
which may endanger human life.
E. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary
to provide relief.
F. In granting any variance, the City of Lock Haven shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve the
objectives of this chapter.
G. Whenever a variance is granted, the City of Lock Haven shall notify the
applicant in writing that:
108. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 246-34 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 246-36
1:200
§ 246-37. Word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 246-38. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year-flood" or
"one-percent-annual-chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.
(2) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
H. In reviewing any request for a variance, the City of Lock Haven shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
(1) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(2) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(3) That the granting of the variance will:
(a) Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
(b) Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public,
or conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances
and regulations.
I. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be
maintained by the City of Lock Haven. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual report
to the FEMA.
J. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual-chance flood.
§ 246-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-38
1:201
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Flood-related damages
sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period
for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on
average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before
the damages occurred.
DECLARATION OF LAND RESTRICTION (NONCONVERSION
AGREEMENT) — A form signed by the property owner to agree not to
convert or modify in any manner that is inconsistent with the terms of the
permit and these regulations, certain enclosures below the lowest floor of
elevated buildings and certain accessory structures. The form requires the
owner to record it on the property deed to inform future owners of the
restrictions.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by the City of Lock Haven.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The Official Map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of
special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the City of
Lock Haven.
§ 246-38 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 246-38
1:202
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the City of Lock Haven has selected to
enforce floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as
the special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study, but may include additional areas identified by the City of
Lock Haven. See §§ 246-17 and 246-18for the specifics on what areas the
City of Lock Haven has included in the identified floodplain area.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 246-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-38
1:203
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area, is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after June 16, 2016, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after February
2, 1977, and before June 16, 2016, is subject to the ordinance in effect at the
time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was within
180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by the City of Lock Haven.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the City of Lock Haven's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated
February 2, 1977, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the City
of Lock Haven's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated February
2, 1977, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
§ 246-38 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 246-38
1:204
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet. The freeboard safety factor also applies
to utilities and ductwork.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks/subdivisions and
substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such development is
located in all, or a designated portion of a floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 246-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-38
1:205
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by The Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by the Zoning Hearing Board of the City of
Lock Haven from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the City of Lock Haven's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in
44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed
to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 246-39. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith be and the same
are hereby repealed.
Chapter 257
INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 59.
§ 246-38 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 246-39
1:206
ARTICLE I
Fire Loss Claims
[Adopted 6-19-2017 by Ord. No. 973]
§ 257-1. Designated officer.
The City Manager or such official's designee is hereby appointed as the
designated officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and
duties stated herein.
§ 257-2. Restriction on payment for casualty losses.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within
City of Lock Haven (hereinafter the "municipality") where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds
$7,500, unless the named insured or insuring agent is furnished by the
municipal treasurer with a municipal certificate pursuant to Section 508(b)
of Act 93 of 1994109 and unless there is compliance with Section 508(c) and
(d) of Act 93 of 1994110 and the provisions of this article.
§ 257-3. Establishment of escrow.
Where pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(i) of Act 98 of 1992,111 the municipal
treasurer issues a certificate indicating that there are no delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties or user charges against real property, the insuring
agent shall pay the claim of the named insured; provided, however, that
if the loss is agreed upon by the named insured and the insuring agent
equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies
covering the building restructure, the following procedures must be
followed:
A. The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
designated officer of the City of Lock Haven in the aggregate of $2,000
for each $15,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that amount of a
claim, this section to be applied such that if the claim is $15,000 or less,
the amount transferred to the municipality shall be $2,000; or
B. If at the time of a loss report, the named insured has submitted a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure, in an amount less than the
amount calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the insuring
agent shall transfer to the municipality from the insurance proceeds the
amount specified in the estimate.
109. Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b).
110. Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(c) and (d), respectively.
111. Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b)(1)(i).
§ 257-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-3
1:207
C. The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rata basis by all companies,
associations or exchanges insuring the building or other structure.
D. After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
other structure, and the designated officer shall return the amount of
the funds transferred to the municipality in excess of the estimate to the
named insured, if the municipality has not commenced to remove,
repair or secure the building or other structure.
E. Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the municipality shall do
the following:
(1) The designated officer shall place the proceeds in the separate fund
to be used solely as security against the total costs of removing,
repairing, or securing the building or structure which are incurred
by the municipality. Such costs shall include, without limitation,
any engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the
municipality in connection with such removal, repair or securing of
the building or any proceedings related thereto;
(2) It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the municipality with the name and address of
the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the
name and address of the named insured, the designated officer
shall contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have
been received by the municipality and notify the named insured
that the procedures under this subsection shall be followed;
(3) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the municipality and the required proof of
such completion received by the designated officer, and if the
municipality has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or
securing, the funds shall be returned to the named insured. If the
municipality has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of
the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the
fund and if excess funds remain, the municipality shall transfer the
remaining funds to the named insured; and
(4) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
municipality pursuant to this section, and not returned to the
named insured, such interest shall belong to the municipality. To
the extent that proceeds are returned to the named insured,
interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named
insured at the time that the proceeds are returned.
F. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
municipality to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to prohibit the municipality and the
named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the
§ 257-3 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 257-3
1:208
§ 257-4. Adoption of procedures and regulations.
The City of Lock Haven may adopt procedures and regulations to implement
Act 93 of 1994112 and this article and may by resolution fix reasonable
fees to be charged for municipal activities or services provided pursuant
to Act 93 of 1994 and this article; including but not limited to issuance of
certificates and bills, performance of inspections and opening separate fund
accounts.
§ 257-5. Severability.
The provisions of this article shall be severable and, if any of the provisions
hereof shall be invalid or unenforceable, the remaining provisions of this
article shall remain in effect.
§ 257-6. Effect on other provisions.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with any of the provisions
of this article are hereby repealed insofar as same affects this article.
§ 257-7. Filing with Department of Community and Economic
Development.
The City Manager or his designee shall file an exact copy of this article with
the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development
together with the name, position, and phone number of the municipal
official responsible for compliance with its provisions.
§ 257-8. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any name insured or any insuring agent who violates
this article shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 per violation.
transfer of funds to the named insured or some other reasonable
disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
112. Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 257-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-8
1:209
Chapter 268
LIBRARY
§ 268-1. Designation of library.
The library shall be known and designated as the "Annie Halenbake Ross
Library." The library's branches shall be known and designated as "Renovo
Area Library" and the "Friendship Community Library," respectively.
§ 268-2. Appointment of Board of Trustees.
The management and control of said library shall be vested in a Board of
Trustees comprised of 11 members, each of whom shall serve for a term of
three years, seven of whom shall be appointed by the Council of the City of
Lock Haven and four of whom shall be appointed by the Board of County
Commissioners of Clinton County. If a vacancy should occur by reason of the
death, disqualification, resignation or removal of a member, a successor to
fill the remainder of his or her term should be appointed by the governing
body that he or she had represented on the Board.
§ 268-3. Powers of Board of Trustees.
The Board of Trustees shall have the power: to adopt bylaws and rules
regulating their organization and the conduct of said library, subject to the
approval and ratification of City Council, to employ such employees as may
be deemed necessary for such purpose and to do all other things necessary
and incident to the proper and successful management of said library.
§ 268-4. Investment and expenditure of fund; reports required.
The Board of Trustees shall have full control of the fund bequeathed by Mrs.
Annie Halenbake Ross for the maintenance of said library and shall make all
investments and collect all interest and income from said investments, and
expend the said income for the maintenance and support of said library, the
purchase of books, compensation of the Executive Director and librarians
and such others employed for the assistance as may be necessary for the
proper carrying on of said library, and shall submit annual statements of
all receipts and expenditures to the Council of the City of Lock Haven and
Board of County Commissioners of Clinton County. The Board of Trustees
shall annually report to the Council of the City of Lock Haven and to
the Board of County Commissioners of Clinton County the manner of
performing the duties of their appointment, the condition of said library, the
improvements and additions thereto and generally all matters of interest to
the public in regard to the functioning of the library.
§ 268-5. Compensation.
The members of the Board of Trustees shall serve without compensation.
§ 257-8 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 268-6
1:210
§ 268-6. Treasurer's bond.
The Treasurer of the Board of Trustees shall give bond to be approved by
the Board of County Commissioners of Clinton County and by the Council
of the City of Lock Haven for the faithful performance of his or her duties,
and the expense of obtaining the same shall be paid out of the income of the
said bequest.
§ 268-7. Initial expenditures; maintenance of fund.
The Board of Trustees shall, in the first instance, spend a sufficient sum
out of the principal of said bequest for the purchase of books and other
necessary equipment for said library not, however, to exceed the sum of
$5,000 set forth in the will of Annie Halenbake Ross, deceased. Thereafter,
all expenditures of the income derived from said bequest shall be limited
so that at all times after said initial expenditures shall have been made, the
principal sum of said bequest shall be kept intact and without diminution.
Chapter 273
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 307.
§ 273-1. Unlawful deposits upon streets.
No person shall deposit, or permit to be deposited, dump or place any
leaves, grass cuttings, snow or refuse of any kind or nature whatsoever,
in, on or along the streets and alleys of the City of Lock Haven, excepting
leaves or snow falling on the public sidewalks.
§ 273-2. Exceptions; violations and penalties. [Amended 3-7-1977
by Ord. No. 9B; 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
Chapter 279
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the Council of the
City of Lock Haven from establishing dates and periods of time in
emergencies and occasions which may arise, for allowing such placing
of refuse in or along the streets of the City of Lock Haven.
B. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said
fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each
day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 268-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 273-2
1:211
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 220.
§ 279-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Lock Haven Loitering
Ordinance."
§ 279-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
LOITERING — Remaining idle essentially in one location; lingering;
spending time idly; loafing or walking aimlessly in one vicinity or
neighborhood; or hanging around.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including
any public street or public sidewalk, the front of or the area immediately
adjacent to any school, parking lot, store, restaurant, tavern or other place
of business, and also public grounds, areas or parks.
§ 279-3. Public places; annoyance.
It shall be unlawful for any person:
§ 279-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
Any person who causes or commits any of the conditions above, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
A. To loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone or in consort
with others in a public place in such a manner so as to obstruct any
public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place
or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the
free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians.
B. Commit in or upon any public place, public highway, public sidewalk or
any other public place or building an act of which is an obstruction or
interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any
business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon, facing or fronting on
any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or other public
place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted
ingress, egress and regress therein, thereon and thereto.
C. Create or cause to be created any annoyance to any person or persons.
§ 273-2 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 279-4
1:212
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 284
MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 298. Sidewalk cafes — See Ch. 332.
§ 284-1. Purpose.
The general purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety,
comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of the citizens of
the City of Lock Haven by requiring that new and existing mobile food
vendors provide residents and customers with a level of cleanliness, quality
and safety. It is also the intent of this chapter to establish reasonable
guidelines and restrictions for mobile food vendors and encourage the safe
and convenient use of the City's public right-of-way.
§ 284-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
APPLICANT — Any person or business who applies for a license under the
provisions of this chapter.
COMMISSARY — A facility to which a mobile food facility returns daily for
such things as vehicle and equipment cleaning, discharging liquid or solid
wastes, refilling water tanks and ice bins, and where food is kept, handled,
prepared, packaged, or stored.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer of the City
of Lock Haven or any sworn officer of the City of Lock Haven Police
Department.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR — A person who sells, intends to sell or offers to
sell food products in or about the streets of the City from a mobile food
vendor facility.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR FACILITY — Either a street vending facility or a
sidewalk vending facility.
RESTAURANT — An establishment where meals are generally served and
eaten on premises; prepares and serves food and drink to customers in
return for money, either paid before the meal or after the meal is provided.
§ 284-3. License required.
§ 279-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-3
1:213
§ 284-4. General regulations.
A. No person shall commence operation of a mobile food vendor facility in
the City of Lock Haven unless the required license has been obtained
for the facility and, if required by the state, its commissary from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture. Mobile food
vendor facilities not requiring license by the state must show proof of
application and inspection by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Department of Agriculture as required by state law.
B. All licenses from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
Agriculture shall be prominently displayed at all times during operation
of a mobile food vendor facility. If not prominently displayed, a copy of a
current license from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
Agriculture must be produced to the enforcement officer upon request.
C. Upon request from the enforcement officer, a mobile food vendor
facility must show proof of general liability insurance in the amount of
$100,000 per individual and $300,000 per occurrence.
D. Any mobile food vendor operating without the required license(s) shall
be deemed in violation of this chapter, and the mobile food vendor shall
be subject to penalties and fines as provided within this chapter and
otherwise provided by law.
E. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be authorized to deny, revoke or
suspend operations for any mobile food vendor found in noncompliance
with the established requirements.
A. No mobile food vendor facility shall hereafter sell or offer for sale any
products or services within 500 feet of the designated boundaries of
any City-organized, City-sponsored or City-sanctioned event or activity
to which vendor access is restricted or regulated, provided that this
restriction shall not apply to a mobile food vendor facility who receives
a written permission from the director of the department sponsoring
the event to operate within the boundaries of any City-organized, Citysponsored
or City-sanctioned event or activity.
B. No mobile food vendor facility on public property or within the public
right-of-way shall provide or allow any dining area, including but not
limited to tables, chairs, booths, bar stools, benches, and stand-up
counters.
C. Consumers shall be provided with single-service, break-resistant
dinnerware, drinkware, and serving containers.
D. For mobile food vendor facilities on public property including the City's
right-of-way, the City reserves the right to temporarily move a mobile
food vendor facility if the approved location needs to be used for
emergency purposes, snow removal, construction, or other public
benefit or if the location is required for a City-sponsored event.
§ 284-3 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 284-4
1:214
E. On school days from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., no mobile food vendor
facility may operate within 500 feet of the grounds of any building used
as a public kindergarten, elementary school or secondary school.
F. City trash receptacles may not be used by mobile food vendor facilities.
All mobile food vendors must provide a waste bin and a recycle bin
which shall be removed by the mobile food vendor at the close of the
mobile food vendor's business day and shall pick up and remove all
papers, wrappers, bottles or other refuse dropped by the customers
thereof within 30 feet of the vicinity of the mobile food vendor facility.
Under no circumstances shall a mobile food vendor use containers or
receptacle for the use of the general public.
G. No mobile food vendor facility shall make or cause to be made any
unreasonable or excessive noise and shall comply with City ordinances
including, but not limited to, nuisance elements as defined in Article
XIX, General Regulations, of Chapter 410, Zoning, with respect to
music, from whatever source, and all noise. No mobile food vendor
facility shall use or maintain any outside amplified equipment, flashing/
animated lights or noisemakers; nor shall they broadcast music or loud
advertisements while stationary.
H. A mobile food vendor facility may not operate within any City park in
the City limits, or on property owned by the City of Lock Haven.
I. No mobile food vendor facility is permitted to park or stop to serve
customers within one-hundred-fifty-foot radius of any principal
customer entrance to any restaurant or food establishment serving food
products within the City during that establishment's hours of operation
or within 150 feet from any permitted mobile food vendor facility
location, and shall locate the mobile food vendor facility at the curb in
such a way as to cause any line which forms to do so along the curb.
J. No mobile food vendor facility may park in any parking areas in
districts zoned residential longer than two hours or the maximum
permitted period for parking in any one block, whichever is less.
K. No operator of a mobile food vendor facility shall park, stand, or move a
vehicle and conduct business within areas of the City where the mobile
food vendor has not been authorized to operate.
L. Mobile food vendor facilities are permitted to park and serve customers
on private property within all zoning districts except those denoted as
residential only if given express written consent of the property owner
and such written consent is kept in the mobile food vendor facility at all
times when the mobile food vendor facility is operating on the property.
In all residential zoning districts, mobile food vendor facilities are
permitted to park and serve customers on private property only if given
express written consent of the property owner and such written consent
is kept in the mobile food vendor facility at all times when the mobile
food vendor facility is operating on the property.
§ 284-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-4
1:215
M. No mobile food vendor shall hereafter sell or offer for sale any food or
nonfood products and services in a manner that would substantially
obstruct a public right-of-way, impair the movement of pedestrians or
vehicles, or pose a hazard to public safety.
N. No mobile food vendor facility may park within 15 feet of a fire hydrant,
or in any no parking or unloading zone.
O. Mobile food vendor facilities may not operate between the hours of 2:30
a.m. and 6:30 a.m. and mobile food vendor facilities must be removed
from public property by 2:45 a.m. each day.
P. Mobile food vendor facilities parking in metered parking spaces will be
required to deposit coins to keep the meter in paid status and are
required to abide by the maximum time limit as required in the metered
parking area.
Q. All mobile food vendor facilities shall be attended by at least one
operator who is at least age 18 at all times.
R. Upon request by the City of Lock Haven, mobile food vendors must
submit proof of payment of the City of Lock Haven's mercantile tax,
Pennsylvania sales tax, and all other taxes under the Local Tax Enabling
Act.113
S. All mobile food vendor facilities occupying a public space must be in
operation within 30 minutes of occupying the space.
T. No mobile food vendor facility shall use electric, water or wastewater
facilities of the City without the written consent of the City Manager.
U. All signage not affixed to the mobile food vendor facility shall meet the
requirements of Chapter 410, Zoning.
V. No liquid waste or grease is to be disposed in tree pits, storm drains or
onto the sidewalks, streets, or other public space. Under no
circumstances shall grease be released or disposed of in the City's
sanitary sewer system; however, mobile food vendor facilities shall be
eligible to dispose of waste at the City's wastewater treatment plant for
the applicable fee.
W. Unattended vehicles prohibited. No mobile food vendor facility shall be
left unattended and unsecured at any time food is kept in the mobile
food truck. Any mobile food vendor facility which is found to be
unattended shall be considered a public safety hazard, shall be ticketed
in accordance with existing City ordinance and may be impounded.
X. A mobile food vendor facility operating outside of an approved route, at
an unauthorized location, or beyond the hours for which the operation
has been permitted shall be deemed operating in violation of this
chapter and may be subject to enforcement under § 284-5.
113. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 284-4 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 284-5
1:216
§ 284-5. Enforcement.
§ 284-6. Denial; suspension.
A. Authority is hereby conferred upon the enforcement officer to
promulgate rules and regulations with respect to the specific matters
for which such authority is herein granted and to change and modify
any and all such rules and regulations from time to time in the manner
provided by law, subject to the approval of the City Manager, provided
that such rules and regulations shall not be inconsistent with the
provisions herein, local, state and federal law. A copy of such rules and
regulations shall be available in the office of the City Clerk.
B. When it appears to the enforcement officer that the operation of the
mobile food vending facility poses an immediate and imminent threat to
the public health and safety that will occur if the mobile food vending
facility is not immediately closed, the enforcement officer shall have the
power to order the immediate closure of mobile food vendor facility
until such time that the violations complained of have been corrected or
the City Council or other appropriate hearing board overrules the
determination of the enforcement officer.
C. Nothing set forth in this section may limit the pursuit of other
appropriate actions or proceedings at law or in equity available to the
City.
A. Operation may be denied or suspended by the Code Enforcement Office
for any of the following reasons:
(1) The mobile food vendor or any of its principals fail to satisfy any
qualification of requirements imposed by this chapter, or other
local, state or federal laws or regulations;
(2) The mobile food vendor or any of its principals has engaged in
operating without a valid license;
(3) The mobile food vendor facility is operated in such a manner as to
constitute a public nuisance or safety hazard; or
(4) The mobile food vendor, its principals or agents, repeatedly violates
any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Notice of denial, revocation or suspension will be sent via first-class
mail to the name and address of the applicant for license with the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture. If no
applicant for license with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Department of Agriculture is on records, the notice shall be sent via
first-class mail to the registrant of the vehicle license plate or handdelivered
to the vendor facility. Upon notice of denial, revocation, or
suspension, an aggrieved party may appeal to the City Manager by
submitting a written notice of appeal to the Code Enforcement Office
within 10 days following the date of the adverse action.
§ 284-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-6
1:217
§ 284-7. Exemptions.
§ 284-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an
offense; and for every such violation, upon conviction, shall be sentenced
to pay a fine of not less than $250, nor more than $1,000, and the costs
or prosecution, and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 90 days.
Chapter 287
NOISE
§ 287-1. Purpose.
The City of Lock Haven intends to preserve the health, safety and welfare
of the residents, downtown and neighborhoods in the municipality by
eliminating unreasonable noise.
§ 287-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NOISE — Any sound emitted by a person, an appliance, equipment,
instrument, other device or an animal other than a barking dog.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by a person of normal
sensibilities using his or her unaided hearing facilities.
SOUND — Something audible; something that can be heard; vibrations
sensed by ear; vibrations traveling through air, water, or some other
medium, especially those within the range of frequencies that can be
perceived by the human ear. The description of sound may include any
characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency.
C. The provisions of this section are not exclusive. This section shall not
preclude the enforcement of any other provisions of this chapter or
state or federal laws and regulations. The City of Lock Haven may
impose additional requirements to protect against health hazards
related to the operation of mobile food vendor facility.
A. This chapter and its requirements, rights and privileges shall not apply
in any respect to mobile food vendors at events regulated and permitted
under Chapter 298, Parks and Recreation Areas.
B. The City Council may temporarily suspend the rules, regulations or
requirements of any section of this chapter with the exception of any
state or federal law for not more than 10 days by resolution.
§ 284-6 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 287-2
1:218
UNREASONABLE NOISE — Sound that is of a volume, frequency, or pattern
that prevents, disrupts, injures, or endangers the health, safety, welfare,
comfort or repose of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivities within the
City of Lock Haven, given the time of day, day of week, location, and/or
other relevant factors in which and where the sound is made.
§ 287-3. Prohibited conduct; exemptions.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person to make or cause to be made any unreasonable noise or to allow
any unreasonable noise to be caused or made in or on any real or
personal property occupied or controlled by that person to include:
(1) The playing of amplified sound or musical instruments which are
plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet beyond the property line
from which the sound is generated between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 11:00 p.m.
(2) The playing of amplified sound or musical instruments which are
plainly audible beyond the property line from which the sound is
generated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(3) Continuous or repeated yelling, shouting, loud whistling, or loud
singing, so as to disturb the peace, comfort, or repose of others
within the City by being plainly audible to persons within any
dwelling, hotel, hospital, office or other type of residence other
than that from which it originates.
(4) The playing of amplified sound or musical instruments at a
restaurant, bar, or private club which are plainly audible at a
distance 250 feet beyond the property line from which the sound is
generated between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
B. Exemptions. Subsection A shall not apply to the following:
(1) Safety or warning devices: safety signals and warning devices (e.g.,
stationary emergency signal devices, intrusion alarms, backup
alarms on trucks, police/fire/ambulance sirens) or any other device
used to alert persons to an emergency or used during emergency
work.
(2) Emergency vehicles as defined by Pennsylvania Title 75, Section
102.114
(3) Highway and utility maintenance and construction.
(4) Any events approved by the Lock Haven City Council.
(5) Bells, chimes and carillons bells, chimes and carillons used for
religious purposes or in conjunction with national celebrations or
114. Editor's Note: See Pa.C.S.A. § 102.
§ 287-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-3
1:219
§ 287-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $600 plus costs
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment
for not more than 30 days.
§ 287-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word, or other portion
of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or invalid, in
whole or in part, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall
be deemed severable, and such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter, which remaining
portions shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 287-6. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect 20 days days following its final passage and
adoption.
Chapter 290
OUTDOOR FUEL-BURNING APPLIANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 410.
§ 290-1. Purpose; intent.
With the adoption of this chapter, it is the intention of the Council of the City
of Lock Haven to establish and impose restrictions upon the construction
and operation of outdoor fuel-burning appliances within the limits of the
City for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort,
convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the City and its inhabitants.
public holidays; existing bells, chimes and carillons and clock strike
mechanisms that are currently in use for any purpose.
(6) Appliances, lawn and garden equipment or household power tools:
appliances, lawn and garden equipment or household power tools
in use between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., provided such
are operated within the manufacturer's specifications and with all
standard noise-reducing equipment is in use, unmodified and in
proper operating condition.
(7) The operation of snow-removal equipment.
§ 287-3 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 290-2
1:220
§ 290-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OUTDOOR FUEL-BURNING APPLIANCE — A device constructed to burn
oil, wood, coal or other fuels manufactured for placement outdoors for the
hearing of the living, work, and/or recreation areas of a structure.
§ 290-3. Outdoor fuel-burning appliances prohibited.
All future outdoor fuel-burning appliances are hereby prohibited within the
City of Lock Haven.
§ 290-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $300, nor more than $1,000, plus costs. Each day's violation
shall constitute a separate offense and notice to the offender shall not be
necessary in order to constitute a separate offense, nor shall notice to
the offender be necessary in order to constitute an offense. In default of
payment of the fine stated herein, such offender may be subject to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
§ 290-5. Existing outdoor fuel-burning appliances.
This chapter shall not be construed to be retroactive and shall not require
the removal of any outdoor fuel-burning appliance in existence within the
City at the effective date of this chapter. All outdoor fuel-burning appliances
in existence at the effective date of this chapter shall have or must erect
a flue or chimney which has a minimum termination height of 20 feet
above the natural ground level upon which the appliance is located. If an
outdoor fuel-burning appliance is more than 50% torn down, physically
deteriorated or decayed, any rebuilding or restoration of said outdoor fuelburning
appliance shall be a violation of this chapter.
Chapter 298
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation and Parks Board — See Ch. 30,
Art. VIII.
§ 290-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-5
1:221

ARTICLE I
Flood Protection Levee Areas
[Adopted 7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 470B (Ch. 16, Part 1, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 298-1. Definitions. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
The following words, as used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed
thereto, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AMPHITHEATER — A concrete seating area located on the Susquehanna
River side of the levee and located just east of Veterans' Bridge.
AUTHORIZED VEHICLE — A vehicle or type of vehicle other than an
emergency vehicle for which special operating or equipment privileges are
given by the City.
BEACH — The area designated by the City of Lock Haven as a swimming
and bathing area located on the Susquehanna River.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — A Fire Department vehicle, police vehicle, sheriff
vehicle, ambulance, blood delivery vehicle, armed forces emergency
vehicle, one vehicle operated by a coroner or chief county medical examiner
and one vehicle operated by a chief deputy coroner or deputy chief county
medical examiner used for answering emergency calls, or any other vehicle
designated by the State Police under § 6106 (relating to designation of
emergency vehicles by Pennsylvania State Police of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code)115 or a privately owned vehicle used in answering an
emergency call when used by any of the following:
FOOTPATH — That paved portion of the levee system constructed and
intended for use of pedestrians.
A. A Police Chief or Assistant Chief.
A Fire Chief, Assistant Chief and, when a fire company has three or
more fire vehicles, a Second or Third Assistant Chief.
B.
C. A Fire Police Captain and Fire Police Lieutenant.
D. An Ambulance Corps Commander and Assistant Commander.
E. A River Rescue Commander and Assistant Commander.
F. A County Emergency Management Coordinator.
G. A Fire Marshal.
H. A Rescue Service Chief and Assistant Chief.
I. Levee Superintendent or other officer authorized by the City Manager.
115. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6106.
§ 298-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-1
1:223
LEVEE SYSTEM — The flood protection project (or levee) consists of some
36,600 feet of earthen and rock embankment and an additional 1,000 feet
of concrete flood wall running from Houston Street in Flemington Borough
through the International Paper Company property, Castanea Township,
along U.S. 220, around the airport and upstream along the river bank to
a tie-out at Lock Haven University. It includes five closure structures and
storage buildings associated with these closures, 35 drainage structures,
five miniparks, the new beach and beach house, the new amphitheater, the
paved walking and jogging path along the top of portions of the levee and
the many benches, pole lights, bicycle racks and picnic tables located in
these areas.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is self-propelled including, but not
limited to, minibikes, motorcycles, trail bikes, go-carts, snowmobiles, allterrain
vehicles, except ones which are propelled by human power.
PEDESTRIAN — A natural person afoot.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, organization of persons,
company, association or partnership.
PLAY OR RECREATION AREA — Any area designated by City Council as
being for public use for purposes of recreation, amusement or pleasure.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
my be transported or drawn upon the levee including, but not limited to,
skateboards, bicycles, tricycles, in-line skates, coasters, sleds, skis, except
devices used exclusively to transport handicapped persons or infants and
small children by a pedestrian.
§ 298-2. Operation of motorized vehicles and nonmotorized vehicles
on levee areas prohibited.
§ 298-3. Permitting children to operate motorized vehicles on levee
areas prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person being the parent or guardian of any child
under the age of 16 years to permit or cause to permit said child to operate
any motorized vehicle including, but not limited to, minibikes, motorcycles,
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorized vehicle or
nonmotorized vehicle including, but not limited to, minibikes,
motorcycles, scooters, trail bikes, go-carts, snowmobiles, and allterrain
vehicles in or upon the levee owned by or under the control of
the City.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorized or
nonmotorized vehicle or device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon the levee including,
but not limited to, skateboards, bicycles, tricycles, in-line skates,
coasters, sleds, skis, except devices used exclusively to transport
handicapped persons or infants and small children by a pedestrian.
§ 298-1 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 298-3
1:224
scooters, trail bikes, go-carts or snowmobiles, and ATVs in or upon the levee
owned or under the control of the City.
§ 298-4. Inapplicability to certain vehicles and operators.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to equipment owned by or
under the control of the City of Lock Haven which is being used for the care
or maintenance of the grounds or facilities, or emergency or authorized
vehicles.
§ 298-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
Any person, who shall violate any provision of §§ 298-2 or 298-3 shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $200 nor
more than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each succeeding
offense shall cause to be issued a fine to increase no less than $100 and
costs of prosecution. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 298-6. Rules and regulations.
Any rules and regulations hereby or hereinafter established by ordinance of
the City of Lock Haven:
A. Levee usage hours. The levee shall be opened daily to the public at such
hours as the City of Lock Haven may from time to time designate, but in
no event shall any person be permitted to be in attendance on the levee
between 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless specific permission be
granted by the City of Lock Haven.
B. Prohibited conduct. No person in attendance on the levee shall:
(1) Injure, deface, remove, cut or damage any of the trees, plants,
shrubs, turf, buildings, structures, signs or fixtures, any other
property of the City of Lock Haven located within the levee system.
(2) Litter any area of the levee with garbage, paper, bottles, cans or
other waste material; they shall not dispose of the same in any way,
except in receptacles designated for the respective purpose.
(3) Kindle or maintain any fire on the levee system.
(4) Remove any bollard, bench, handrail, seat, table or other item from
the levee system without permission of the City.
(5) Injure, deface, destroy or remove any notice, rule or regulation
posted at any place within the levee system of the City of Lock
Haven, nor shall any notice or placard be posted within the levee
other than by authority of the City.
§ 298-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-6
1:225
(6) Set up any booth, table or stand for the sale of any article or service
whatsoever within the limits of the levee system without
permission of the City.
(7) Operate, stop or park any vehicle, bicycle or other means of
conveyance, except in areas where permitted or designated by
proper authority of the City.
(8) Bring onto the premises, possess or consume any alcoholic
beverages or illegal drugs of any kind; no person shall enter the
levee system under the influence of alcohol or controlled
substances.
(9) Carry or discharge any slingshots, firecrackers, fireworks or other
missile-propelling instruments or explosives, or arrows or other
dangerous weapons (with the exception of firearms) which have
such properties as to cause annoyance or injury to any person or
property, unless permission has been granted by the City in
designated areas; law enforcement officers in the performance of
their duties shall be exempt from these provisions. [Amended
10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 862]
(10) Discharge any firearms. [Added 10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 862]
(11) Play ball, swim, golf, pitch horseshoes, engage in archery, sled ride,
cross country skiing or launch, dock or land any boat, engage in
finding buried objects with special detectors or participate in any
other form of recreation, sporting endeavor or pastime, except in
those areas which may be designated from time to time for that
purpose by the City. [Amended 10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 862]
(12) Disturb the peace by any act or conduct himself in an indecent or
boisterous manner within the levee system so as to annoy any other
person using the levee system for recreational purposes.
[Amended 10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 862]
(13) Operate a vehicle on the levee system. [Amended 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 862]
(14) Use threatening, abusive, insulting, profane or obscene language
or words. [Amended 10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 862]
(15) Commit any disorderly acts. [Amended 10-18-2010 by Ord. No.
862]
(16) Hold any public meeting or engage in any marching as members if
a military, political or other organization without permission of the
City. [Amended 10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 862]
(17) Be on the levee system other than the footpath, beach area,
amphitheater and fishing access area. [Amended 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 862]
§ 298-6 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 298-6
1:226
§ 298-7. Reservations for specific uses.
The use of the amphitheater shall be on a first-come, first-served basis:
§ 298-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
Any person, who shall violate any provision of § 298-6 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $600
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each succeeding offense shall cause
to be issued a fine to increase no less than $100 and costs of prosecution.
Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(18) Disobey a proper order of a police officer or City authorized
personnel, or disobey or disregard or fail to comply with any rule or
regulation, warning, prohibition, instruction or direction posted or
as to its existence by the City of Lock Haven. [Amended
10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 862]
(19) Hunt for, capture or kill, or attempt or capture to kill or aid or assist
in the capturing or killing of, in any manner, any wild bird or wild
animal of any description, either game or otherwise, unless specific
permission is granted for a designated area by some authority of
the City. [Amended 10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 862]
A. By annual permissions granted by the City for the scheduling of various
events.
B. By permission granted by the City for a specific requested use.
§ 298-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-8
1:227

ARTICLE II
Operation of Motorized Vehicles
[Adopted 6-5-1972 by Ord. No. 827A (Ch. 16, Part 2, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 298-9. Operation of motorized vehicles in play or recreation areas
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorized vehicle
including, but not limited to, minibikes, motorcycles, scooters, trail bikes,
go-carts or snow mobiles in or upon any playgrounds, parks, ball fields,
tennis courts or other areas owned or under the control of the City and
designated as a play or recreation area.
§ 298-10. Permitting children to operate motorized vehicles in play
or recreation areas prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, being the parent or guardian of any child
under the age of 16 years, to permit said child to operate any motorized
vehicle including, but not limited to, minibikes, motorcycles, scooters, trail
bikes, go-carts or snowmobiles in or upon any playground, park, ball field,
tennis court or other area owned by or under the control of the City and
designated as a play or recreation area.
§ 298-11. City may establish areas for operation of motorized
vehicles.
Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the City from establishing or
designating a specific play or recreational area where the operation of
such vehicles shall be permissible under such regulations as the City shall
establish.
§ 298-12. Inapplicability to certain vehicles and operators.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to properly registered vehicles
being operated by properly licensed operators on public streets or highways
within a play or recreation area, nor shall it apply to equipment owned by or
under the control of the City of Lock Haven which is being used for the care
or maintenance of the grounds or facilities of said play or recreation area.
§ 298-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
Any person who shall violate any provision of § 298-9 or 298-10 of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
§ 298-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-13
1:229

ARTICLE III
Park Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 7-19-1976 by Ord. No. 963A (Ch. 16, Part 3, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 298-14. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
PARK or PARKS — Unless specifically limited, shall be deemed to include
all parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, tennis courts, beaches, recreation
structures and facilities and also entrances and approaches thereto, and all
other land or property or structures under the jurisdiction of the Recreation
and Parks Board, now or hereafter owned or acquired by the City of Lock
Haven for park or recreational purposes.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, organization of persons,
company, association or partnership.
RULES and REGULATIONS — Any rules and regulations hereby or
hereafter established by the ordinance of the City of Lock Haven as
promulgated by the Recreation and Parks Board under the authority herein
conferred.
§ 298-15. Park hours. [Amended 6-7-2010 by Ord. No. 858]
All parks shall be opened daily to the public at such hours as the Recreation
and Parks Board may from time to time designate, but unless a special
exception has been made, no person shall be permitted to be in attendance
in any park from dusk to dawn except Hanna Park and Peddie Memorial
Park where the time will be extended one hour beyond dusk. The Recreation
and Parks Board or other authority of the City may grant special exceptions
extending the park hours.
§ 298-16. Prohibited conduct.
No person in attendance at any park shall:
A. Injure, deface, remove, cut or damage any of the trees, plants, shrubs,
turf, buildings, structures or any other property of the City located
within the park.
B. Litter any area of the park with garbage, paper, bottles, cans or other
waste material, nor shall they dispose of the same in any way, except in
receptacles designated for the respective purposes.
C. Kindle or maintain any fire in the park, except in fireplaces or areas
specially designated for that purpose and located by authority of the
City.
D. Remove any bench, seat, table or other appliance from the park without
permission of the City.
§ 298-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-16
1:231
E. Injure, deface, destroy or remove any notice, rule or regulation posted
at any place within the park by authority of the Recreation and Parks
Board or other proper authority of the City, nor shall any notice or
placard be posted within the park other than by authority of said Board
or other proper authority of the City.
F. Set up any booth, table or stand for the sale of any article or service
whatsoever within the limits of the park without permission of the City.
G. Operate, stop or park any vehicle, bicycle or other means of
conveyance, except in areas where permitted or designated by the
proper authority of the City, or operate the same in a reckless manner
or in a negligent manner or in excess of any posted speed limit.
H. Bring onto the premises, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage or
illegal drugs of any kind, no person shall enter the park in an
intoxicated state or otherwise be under the influence of alcohol or
illegal drugs.
I. Carry or discharge any slingshots, firecrackers, fireworks or other
missiles propelling instruments or explosive arrows, or other dangerous
weapons (with the exception of firearms) which have such properties as
to cause annoyance or injury to any person or property, unless
permission has been granted by the City in designated areas; police
officers in the performance of their duties will be exempt from these
provisions. [Amended 10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 862]
J. Discharge any firearms. [Added 10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 862]
K. Play ball, swim, golf, pitch horseshoes, engage in archery or launch,
dock or land any boat, engage in finding any objects with special
detectors and dig or probe into the ground for any objects or participate
in any other form of recreation, sporting endeavor or pastime, except in
those areas which may be designated from time to time for that purpose
by the Recreation and Parks Board. [Amended 10-18-2010 by Ord.
No. 862]
L. Disrobe or change clothing, except in buildings or facilities made
available for that purpose. [Amended 10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 862]
M. Disturb the peace by any act or conduct himself in an indecent or
boisterous manner within the parks so as to annoy any other person
using the park for recreation purposes. [Amended 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 862]
N. Operate a snowmobile, minibike, motorcycle or any vehicle,
recreational or otherwise, except on designated roads, trails or areas
set aside for their use. [Amended 10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 862]
O. Use threatening, abusive, insulting, profane or obscene language or
words. [Amended 10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 862]
§ 298-16 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 298-16
1:232
§ 298-17. Reservation for specific uses.
The use of all parks shall be on a first come/first served basis unless
otherwise reserved:
§ 298-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus
costs for the first offense and, in default of payment of said fine and costs,
to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each succeeding offense
shall cause to be issued a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $600 and
costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
P. Commit any disorderly or immoral acts. [Amended 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 862]
Q. Hold any public meeting or engage in any marching or driving as
members of a military, political or other organization without
permission of the City. [Amended 10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 862]
R. Disobey a proper order of a police officer or Recreation and Parks
Department personnel, or disobey or disregard or fail to comply with
any rule or regulation, warning, prohibition, instruction or direction
posted or displayed by sign, notice, bulletin, card, poster or when
notified or informed as to its existence by Recreation and Parks
Department personnel or authorized person. [Amended 10-18-2010
by Ord. No. 862]
S. Hunt for, capture or kill, or attempt to capture or kill or aid or assist in
the capturing or killing of, in any manner, any wild bird or wild animal
of any description either game or otherwise, unless specific permission
is granted for a designated area by some authority of the City.
[Amended 10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 862]
A. By annual permissions granted by the Recreation and Parks Board for
the scheduling of various league games, etc.
B. For school or college athletic games, practice, contests or exhibitions.
C. For regularly scheduled school district recreation programs.
D. By permission granted by the City for a specific requested use.
§ 298-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-18
1:233
Chapter 302
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms and other weapons — See Ch. 241.
§ 298-18 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 298-18
1:234
ARTICLE I
Public Urination and Defecation
[Adopted 3-5-2018 by Ord. No. 982]
§ 302-1. Purpose.
The City of Lock Haven intends to preserve the health, safety, and welfare
of the residents, downtown, and neighborhoods in the municipality of
eliminating public urination and defecation.
§ 302-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms have the following
meanings:
APPROPRIATE SANITARY FACILITY — A urinal, toilet, commode or other
facility that accommodates or is designed for the sanitary disposal of human
bodily fluids or waste and that is enclosed from public view.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any walkway, street, highway, sidewalk, building facade,
bridge, overpass, alley or alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, transportation
facility, park, recreational area, parking lot, vacant or undeveloped lot or
the stairwells, alcoves, doorways and entranceways to such places.
§ 302-3. Prohibited conduct.
§ 302-4. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who urinates or defecates in, on, or about any of the
following places, other than in an appropriate sanitary facility, commits
a violation:
(1) Any public place;
(2) Any private property into or upon which the public is admitted by
easement or license; or
(3) Any private property without the consent of the owner.
B. It is a separate violation for any person who has urinated or defecated
in, or about any public place, other than in an appropriate sanitary
facility, to fail to clean or remove the material deposited immediately, or
to fail to dispose immediately of the material used in the cleaning or
removal process in a container designed for such disposal.
A. Any person who violates § 302-3 is guilty of a summary offense
punishable by a fine of not less than $250 for the first offense and $500
for any subsequent offense plus court costs for each violation.
B. A penalty provided for under Subsection A of this section may be
imposed in addition to any penalty that may be imposed for any other
criminal offense arising from the same conduct.
§ 302-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302-4
1:235
§ 302-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word, or other portion
of this article is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or invalid, in
whole, or in part, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall
be deemed severable, and such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article, which remaining
portions shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 302-6. When effective.
This article shall take effect 20 days following its final passage and
adoption.
C. Each act of violation and every day upon which such violation occurs
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 302-4 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 302-6
1:236
Chapter 307
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 194.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 212.
Rental property — See Ch. 321.
§ 307-1. Adoption of standards.
The City hereby adopts as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of
Lock Haven the 2003 Edition of the International Property Maintenance
Code, published by International Code Council, Inc. (hereinafter collectively
referred to as the "code"), as supplemented and amended by this chapter.
§ 307-2. Modifications and amendments to standards.
The City amends the code as follows:
A. Section 101.1 of the code is hereby supplemented by inserting "Lock
Haven, Pennsylvania" as the name of jurisdiction.
B. Section 102.5 is amended by adding the following: "The Code Official
shall be guided by manufacturers specifications and/or architectural
graphics standards in determining compliance with this section."
C. Section 102.3 is amended as follows:
102.3 Application of other codes. Any repairs or alterations to a
structure, or changes of use therein, which may be caused directly or
indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be done in accordance
with the procedures and provisions of the building code, plumbing
code, mechanical code and national electrical code.
D. Section 105.1 is amended as follows:
105.1 General. The Code Official shall enforce all the provisions of
this code unless otherwise provided herein or by other ordinance.
E. Section 105.3 is amended as follows:
105.3 Right of entry. The Code Official is authorized to enter
structures and premises for the purpose of making inspections and
performing duties under this code only with the consent of an
individual entitled to possession of or access to the area to be
inspected or upon warrant or court order issued upon probable cause
that violations of this code exist.
F. Section 106, Violations, is amended as follows:
§ 302-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-2
1:237
106.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish,
use or occupy any structure or equipment regulated by this code and
any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this code.
106.3 Prosecution.
106.3.1 Criminal proceedings.
In case any violation order is not promptly complied with, the Code
Official may institute summary proceedings before the Magisterial
District Judge. Any person, firm, or corporation, who shall violate any
provision of this code shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served,
in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a
separate offense.
106.3.2 Civil proceedings.
The Code Official may refer the matter to legal counsel for
commencement of proceedings at law and/ or equity against the
person(s) who may reasonably be held responsible for the violation
of the of the ordinance for the purpose of obtaining a court order
requiring that person(s) to correct or remove the violation, to abate
the nuisance or to refrain from any further performance of work which
has been conducted in violation of this chapter.
1. To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any
further execution of work.
2. To halt or correct erection, installation or alteration activities that
have violated or which would violate this chapter.
3. To require the removal of work which has been conducted in
violation of this chapter.
4. To prevent the occupancy or use of the structure or part thereof
erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of, or not
in compliance with, the provisions of this code or in violation
of a plan or specification under which an approval, permit or
certificate was issued.
G. Section 107, Notices and orders, is amended as follows:
107.1 Notice to person responsible. Whenever the Code Official
determines that there has been a violation of this code or has
reasonable grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice
of the violation and compliance requirements shall be given to the
owner or the person or persons responsible therefor in the manner
prescribed below.
107.2 Form. Such notice prescribed in Section 107.1 shall:
1. Be in writing.
§ 307-2 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 307-2
1:238
2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
3. Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being
issued.
4. Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time for the
repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or
structure into compliance with the provisions of this code.
5. Include an explanation of the owner's right to seek modification
or withdrawal of the Code Official's notice of violation and
compliance order utilizing a petition to the Code Enforcement
Board of Appeals and Review.
6. Include an explanation of remedies available to the municipality
upon noncompliance.
107.3 Method of service. Such notice of violation and compliance
order is effectively served when service is personal (that is, actually
delivered to the person to be served) or by leaving the notice at the
usual place of abode of the person to be served, in the presence
of someone in the family of suitable age and discretion who shall,
generally, be informed of the contents thereof or by certified or
registered mail addressed to the person to be served at the last known
address with return receipt requested, or if the certified or registered
letter is returned with receipt showing that it has not been delivered,
by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the
structure affected by such notice and at least one publication of such
notice in a local newspaper of general circulation.
107.5 Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
the person or persons responsible therefore of any dwelling unit or
structure which has been made subject to a compliance order or upon
whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage,
lease or otherwise dispose of the dwelling unit or structure until the
violation has been resolved or corrected or until such owner shall first
furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of
any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the Code Official
and shall furnish to the Code Official a signed and notarized statement
from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee acknowledging the
receipt of such compliance order or notice of code violation. The party
whose duty it is to provide the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or
lessee with this information on compliance orders and code violation
shall also inform that receiving party about any compliance time
frames and necessary corrections/repairs required to abate the code
violations within the time frame required by the ordinance and/or
compliance order or notice of violation.
§ 307-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-2
1:239
107.6 Options upon condemnation. A party or person who has
received a compliance order or notice of violation and who does not
timely do those things required by this code and by the rules and
regulations applicable to this code, shall be subject to condemnation
proceedings, prosecution under the ordinance and demolition of
dwellings or structures which have been the subject of compliance
orders or notices of violation and may be subject to any combination of
these three activities.
H. Section 108.0, Unsafe structures and equipment, is amended as
follows:
108.1 General. When a structure or part thereof is found by the
Code Official to be unsafe, or when a structure or part thereof is
found unfit for human occupancy or use or is found unlawful, it may
be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this code and may be
placarded and vacated. It shall not be reoccupied without approval of
the Code Official. Unsafe equipment shall be placarded and placed out
of service.
108.1.1 Unsafe structure. An unsafe structure is one in which all or
part thereof is found to be dangerous to life, health or the safety of
the public or its occupants and/or which poses an unreasonable risk
of causing economic or other harm to property close enough to be
within the scope of that economic or other harm, because the structure
lacks minimum safeguards for the protection from and notice of fire,
is an "attractive nuisance" as that phrase has come to be defined
by applicable law or because it is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated,
structurally unsafe or unsound or of such faulty construction or
unstable foundation, that there is an unreasonable risk of the complete
or partial collapse of the structure or an unreasonable risk that the
physical condition of the structure will result in harm to the life, health
or safety of those who may foreseeably become located within the
scope of the risk or an unreasonable risk that the condition of the
property will cause significant economic harm to other property within
the scope of the risk.
108.1.2 Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler,
heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or
device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment which is
operated utilizing, as its energy source, coal, electricity, natural gas,
propane, etc., on the premises or within the structure which is in
such disrepair or condition that it is found to be a hazard to life,
health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises
or structure. Unsafe equipment may contribute to the finding that the
structure is unsafe or unfit for human occupancy or use.
§ 307-2 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 307-2
1:240
108.1.3 Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit
for human occupancy or use whenever the Code Official finds that
it is unsafe, unlawful or because of the degree in which it lacks
maintenance or is in disrepair, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested,
contains filth and contamination or lacks ventilation, illumination,
sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by
this code, or because its location constitutes a hazard to its occupants
or to the public.
108.1.4 Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in
whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under
this code or was erected, altered maintained or occupied contrary to
law.
108.2 Closing of vacant structures. If the structure or part thereof
is vacant and unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use and is
not in danger of structural collapse, the Code Official may post a
placard of condemnation on the premises and may order the structure
closed up so it will not be an attractive nuisance to youngsters. Upon
failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified
in the order, the Code Official shall cause it to be closed through
any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private
persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate
upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real
estate.
108.3 Notice. The Code Official shall give written notice of
condemnation to the owner and to the occupants, if any, which notice
shall include a copy of the previous notice pursuant to § ES-106.2116
and an order to vacate the property or to cease use of equipment.
Non-owner-occupants who are not responsible for compliance with the
initial notice pursuant to § ES-106.2117 shall be given a reasonable time
to vacate the premises. Owners or persons responsible for compliance
must vacate at the time of receipt of the notice hereunder. Service of
the notice of condemnation shall be in the manner provided in Section
107.3.
108.4 Placarding. Contemporaneously with the service of the
condemnation notice, the Code Official shall post on the premises
or structure or parts thereof or on defective equipment, a placard
stating the words: "Condemnation as unfit for human occupancy or
use," and a statement of penalties provided for any occupancy or use
or for removing the placard. Occupants shall vacate as hereinbefore
provided in Section 107.2.
116. Editor's Note: So in original.
117. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 307-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-2
1:241
108.4.1 Removal of placard. The Code Official shall remove the
condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the
condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated.
Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without
the approval of the Code Official shall be subject to the penalties
provided by this code.
108.5 Prohibited use. Any person who shall occupy a placarded
premises or structure or part thereof, or shall use placarded
equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises
who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises, shall be liable for
the penalties provided by this code.
I. Section 109, Emergency measures, is amended as follows:
109.1 General.
Whenever a Code Official finds that an emergency exists on any
premises, or in any structure or part thereof, or on any defective
equipment which requires immediate action to protect the public's
health and safety or that of the occupants thereof, the Code Official
shall, with proper notice and service in accordance with the provisions
of Section 107.1, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and requiring the vacating of the premises or requiring
such action be taken as the Code Official deems necessary to meet
such emergency. Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, such
order shall be effective immediately and the premises or equipment
involved shall be placarded immediately upon service of the order.
109.6 Hearing.
Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith.
They may thereafter, upon petition directed to the appeals board, be
afforded a hearing as prescribed in this code. Depending upon the
findings of the board at such hearing as to whether the provisions of
this code have been complied with, the board shall continue such order
or modify or revoke it.
J. Section 110, Demolition, is amended as follows:
§ 307-2 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 307-2
1:242
110.1 General.
When a person with responsibility to do so fails to obey a final order
requiring activity to come into compliance with this chapter, the Code
Enforcement Officer will order the owner (or other persons having
responsibility for the property/structure) of the premises to raze and
remove such structure or part thereof which, in the reasonable
judgment of the Code Enforcement Officer, is so old, dilapidated,
damaged, decayed, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction
or unstable foundation, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use, that it is unreasonable to expect, under
all of the relevant circumstances, that a timely and effective
remediation of the problems could occur other than by razing and
removing the structure, or the relevant part thereof. If the structure,
or the part of the structure which is the source of the problems, can
reasonably and cost effectively be made safe by repairs, the Code
Enforcement Officer may order the owner or other responsible person
to select between the repair option, converting the dwelling or
structure into a safe and sanitary one or the raze and remove option. In
such an event, the Code Enforcement Officer will indicate to the owner
or other responsible person that a failure to select the repair option
or a failure to timely implement the repair option, will be deemed
selection of the raze and remove option. An owner or other responsible
person who has selected, under the circumstances, the repair option
will be given a reasonable period of time to start and complete the
process of repairing the dwelling or structure and making it safe and
sanitary and in compliance with this Act. In no case will such a period
extend longer than two years. Depending upon the circumstances of a
particular situation, the reasonable period for completing the repairs
may be of much shorter duration than two years.
110.2 Unreasonable repairs.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the cost of
repairs and removal would exceed 100% of the current value of the
dwelling or structure, such repairs shall be presumed unreasonable
and the owner or other responsible person shall be ordered to raze
and remove the structure. An owner or other responsible person can
avoid this result, under the circumstances where the costs of repairs
and removal would exceed 100% of the current value of the dwelling or
structure only be presenting a concrete plan for the rapid conversion
of the dwelling or structure into one which meets the requirements of
this chapter and by further demonstrating the financial wherewithal
and commitment to make such repairs.
§ 307-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-2
1:243
110.3 Order.
The order shall specify a time in which the owner shall comply
therewith by demolition or repairs as specified in the notice under
Section 107.3. It shall be served on the owner of record, or an agent
where an agent is in charge of the building, and upon the holder
of any encumbrance of record in the manner provided for service of
a summons by a court of record. If the owner or a holder of any
encumbrance of record cannot be found, the order shall be served by
posting it on the main entrance of the building and by publishing it
once each week for three successive weeks in a newspaper authorized
to provide service by publication.
110.4 Restraining actions.
Any affected by a Section 110.3 order may, within 30 days after service
of such order, apply to the Clinton County Court of Common Pleas for
an order restraining the Code Enforcement Officer from razing and
removing such structure or parts thereof. The Court shall determine
whether the order of the Code Official is reasonable and, if found
reasonable, shall issue an order reflecting that determination and,
if found not reasonable, shall issue an order reflecting that
determination.
110.5 Failure to comply.
Whenever the owner of a property fails to comply with a demolition
order within the time prescribed, the Code Official shall cause the
structure or part thereof to be razed and removed, either through an
available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private
persons, and the cost of such razing and removal, including but not
limited to attorney's fees, engineering fees, and other professional
fees incurred by the City in connection therewith as well as the costs
of preparing and filing any lien, including attorney's fees, shall be
charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and
shall be a lien upon such real estate. [Amended 5-7-2018 by Ord.
No. 989]
110.6 Salvage materials.
When any structure has been ordered razed and removed, the
governing body or other designated officer under said contract or
arrangement aforesaid, may sell the salvage and valuable materials
at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after
deducting the expenses of such razing and removal, shall be promptly
remitted with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items
of expense and the amounts deducted, for the use of the persons who
may be entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If such a
surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state.
K. Section 111 is amended as follows:
§ 307-2 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 307-2
1:244
111.0. Registration of rental units.
111.1 General.
No person shall rent to another for occupancy any structure or part
thereof governed by this code unless he holds a current, unrevoked
registration certificate issued by the Code Enforcement Officer in his
name for the specific identified structure. Every registration certificate
shall be valid for a period of five years from its date of issuance unless
sooner revoked and may be renewed for successive periods of five
years.
111.2 Application.
No registration certificate shall be issued or renewed unless the
applicant owner has first made application therefor on an application
form provided by the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code
Enforcement officer shall develop such forms and make them available
to the public. The fee for each registration certificate or renewal
thereof shall be $5 per structure. This fee has been calculated to be
less than the actual cost of administration processing, registration
certificates or of renewal of a registration certificate. No prior
inspections shall be required.
111.3 Transferability of registration certificate.
No registration certificate shall be transferable to another person or to
another structure or dwelling unit. Any person holding a registration
certificate shall give notice, in writing, to the Code Enforcement
Officer within seven days after having transferred or otherwise
disposed of the legal ownership or control of any registered structure.
Such notice shall include the name and address of the person or
persons succeeding to the ownership or control of such structure.
111.4 Existing units.
This section shall immediately become applicable to any currently
existing structure or part thereof being rented to another for
occupancy. The owner of any such structure currently being rented to
another for occupancy shall have a period of 60 days from the effective
date of this chapter to apply for the registration certificate required by
this section.
111.5 Public housing.
Nothing in this section shall be applicable to or require the registration
of any housing unit, the conditions of occupancy of which is regulated
by a governmental agency or the Clinton County Housing Authority.
111.6 Transient housing.
Nothing in this section shall be applicable to or require the registration
of any structure designated for transient housing use (i.e., hotel,
motel).
§ 307-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-2
1:245
111.7 Revocation of registration certificate.
Whenever, in the exercise of his duties, the Code Enforcement Officer
finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of the
provisions of Section 111.0, he shall serve the owner with notice of
such violations stating that unless the violations cited are corrected
within a reasonable time, the registration certificate will be
suspended. At the expiration of the time allowed for correction of any
violation cited, the Code Enforcement Officer shall, with the voluntary
consent of the owner or pursuant to a warrant issued upon probable
cause by a Magisterial District Judge after notice and opportunity
for a hearing, inspect the structure and, if he determines that such
conditions have not been corrected, he shall issue an order revoking
the registration certificate.
111.8 Appeal.
Any person who shall be refused a registration certificate or whose
registration certificate has been revoked shall be entitled to a hearing
pursuant to the procedures established in Section 112.1 of this code.
L. Section 112.0 shall be added to read as follows:
112.0 Right to Appeal.
112.1 Appeals. With the execution of an order issued pursuant to
Section 110.3, any person affected by any notice which has been issued
in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this code or
of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto shall have a right
of appeal to the Code Enforcement Board of Appeals and Review.
A petition requesting a hearing and containing a statement of the
grounds therefore shall be filed in the Code Office within 30 days after
the day the notice was served in accordance with Section 107.3.
M. Section 202, General Definitions, is amended as follows:
(1) The definition of "family" is added to read as follows:
FAMILY. An individual or married couple and the children thereof
with not more than two other persons related directly to the
individual or married couple by blood or marriage, or a group of
not more than four unrelated (excluding servants) persons, living
together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
(2) The definition of "rooming house" is amended to read as follows:
ROOMING HOUSE/BOARDINGHOUSE. A building arranged or
used for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation, by
more than four individuals.
N. Section 302.3, Sidewalks and driveways, is amended to read as follows:
[Added 1-7-2013 by Ord. No. 915]
§ 307-2 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 307-2
1:246
302.3 Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs,
driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper
state of repair and maintained free from hazardous conditions.
Sidewalks within the public right-of-way and any sidewalks accessible
for free use by the public shall be repaired or replaced if they meet
any of the sidewalk repair deficiency criteria adopted under the City's
Sidewalk Replacement Program guidelines.
O. Section 302.4, Weeds, is amended by inserting "eight inches" as the
maximum height for weeds or plant growth.
P. Section 304.7, Roofs and drainage, is amended by changing the last
sentence to read as follows: "Roof water shall not be discharged in a
manner that creates a nuisance to owners or occupants of adjacent
property or creates a public nuisance."
Q. Section 304.14, Insect screens, is amended by inserting the dates "May
1 to October 1."
R. Section 404.3, Minimum ceiling heights, is amended by deleting the
word "laundry" from Exception No. 2 and adding the following
sentence: "Laundry areas are exempt from ceiling height requirements
in basements." Section 404.3 is further amended by adding a fourth
exception to read as follows:
4. Dwellings that were originally constructed with ceiling heights in
areas intended for use as living or habitable space are exempt from
the ceiling height requirements of this code.
S. Section 404.4.2, Access from bedrooms, is amended to read as follows:
404.4.2 Access from bedrooms. Bedrooms that constitute the only
means of access to other bedrooms or habitable space shall not be
equipped with any type of locking device on the entry side of the door
used for separation.
T. Section 404.4.3, Water closet accessibility, is amended to read as
follows:
404.4.3 Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit
shall have access to at least one water closet and lavatory located in
the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent story.
U. Section 504.3, Plumbing system hazards, is amended to read as follows:
[Added 1-7-2013 by Ord. No. 915]
§ 307-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-2
1:247
Chapter 316
REAL ESTATE REGISTRY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 212.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 307.
Rental property — See Ch. 321.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
352.
Zoning — See Ch. 410.
§ 316-1. Registration of Real Estate Department established;
supervision.
There be, and is hereby, established and created in the City of Lock Haven,
a department for the registration of the ownership of all real estate situated
in said City, which said department shall be under the direction and
supervision of the City Engineer.
504.3 Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing
system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the
structure by reason of inadequate venting, cross-connection,
backsiphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for
similar reasons, the Code Official shall require the defects to be
corrected to eliminate the hazard. The water service line serving each
property shall contain a main shutoff valve on the line immediately
inside the building ahead of the water meter and shall contain a
double-check valve on the line at the outlet side of the meter.
V. Section 507, Storm Drainage, is amended to add Section 507.2,
Infiltration, to read as follows:
507.2 Infiltration. The discharge of stormwater runoff to sanitary
sewers is prohibited. No person connected to a sanitary sewer shall
connect any roof drain or foundation drain or permit any such drains to
remain connected thereto, nor allow or cause to enter into any sanitary
sewer any springwater or surface water from any source.
W. Section 602.3, Heat supply, is amended by inserting the dates
"September 15 to May 15."
X. Section 602.4, Occupiable work spaces, is amended by inserting the
dates "September 15 to May 15."
Y. Section 605.2, Receptacles, is amended by having the last sentence
read as follows: "All bathroom receptacle outlets shall have ground
fault circuit interrupter protection."
§ 307-2 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 316-2
1:248
§ 316-2. Duties of City Engineer; maintenance of books, maps and
plans; approval required.
The City Engineer of said City shall cause to be made all necessary books,
maps and plans of the City showing the situation and dimensions of each
property therein, with the street number and name of the owner or owners
of each lot, with provisions for the names of future owners and dates of
future transfers of title, and for such purpose, said Engineer shall cause
to be made search in any of the public records wherein the information
necessary to determine said ownership may be obtainable and in any other
place for any monuments or evidences of title requisite for the completion
of said books, maps or plans. Said books, maps and plans shall be carefully
preserved in the office of the City Engineer of said City and shall be so
kept by addition, from time to time, or otherwise, as to show the ownership
of every lot or piece of real estate or subdivision thereof within the City
of Lock Haven, with the successive transmissions of title from the date of
the commencement of such plans; but nothing herein shall invalidate any
municipal or tax claim by reason of the fact that the same is not assessed
or levied against the registered owner. Said books, maps and plans so
prepared by the City Engineer, before the final adoption thereof, shall be
approved by the City Solicitor and by the City Council.
§ 316-3. Duty of owners of unregistered real estate; duty of
purchasers of real estate.
It shall be the duty of all owners of unregistered real estate within the City
of Lock Haven, within 10 days of the date of the approval of this chapter
and of every subsequent purchaser, devisee or person acquiring title by
partition or otherwise, to any real estate in said City, within one month after
acquiring said title, to furnish the City Engineer, at his office, descriptions
of their respective properties upon blanks to be furnished by the City, and
at the same time to present their conveyance to be stamped by the City
Engineer, without charge, as evidence of the registration thereof. Provided,
that, the presentation of said deeds for registry and certification by the
Recorder of Deeds or Sheriff, as now provided by law, shall be in lieu of such
presentation by the owner.
§ 316-4. Duty of persons acquiring real estate or interest therein.
It shall be the duty of all persons acquiring real estate, or any interest
therein, within the limits of the City of Lock Haven, whether by will or by
inheritance under the Intestate Law of Pennsylvania,118 within 10 days after
acquiring such interest in real estate, to furnish the City Engineer, at his
office, descriptions of any such property or properties, upon blanks to be
furnished by the City. If said property or properties are acquired by will,
the devisees thereunder at the same time shall furnish a certified copy of
said will for registry with the City Engineer; and if said property is acquired
under the Intestate Law of Pennsylvania, said owner or owners shall at the
118. Editor's Note: See 20 Pa.C.S.A. § 2101 et seq.
§ 316-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-4
1:249
same time advise said City Engineer of the name of the decedent, the date
of his or her death and the names of all persons acquiring title by reason of
said death.
§ 316-5. Duty of County Sheriff in reference to judicial sales; fees
and expenses. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
The Sheriff of Clinton County shall present for registry, on forms furnished
by the City Engineer prior to the recording thereof, the deeds for all
properties within the limits of the City of Lock Haven sold by him at any
judicial sale or sales, whether by execution, in partition or otherwise. On
all such deeds which the Sheriff is required to present for registry, he shall
be entitled to a fee for each deed, as provided in the Sheriff Fee Act, 42
Pa.C.S.A. § 21101 et seq., in addition to the mileage provided by law, which
fees and mileage shall be paid by the purchaser.
§ 316-6. Duty of County Recorder of Deeds; fees. [Amended
2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
The Recorder of Deeds of Clinton County shall, within 10 days after any
deed conveying real estate within the limits of the City of Lock Haven
bearing date subsequent to the approval of this chapter has been received
by said Recorder for record, unless said deed shall have been already
registered, present such deed for registry with the City Engineer on a form
furnished by said City Engineer, as herein provided, before delivery of such
deed to the party entitled to receive the same. On all such deeds which the
Recorder is required to have registered, he shall be entitled to a fee, as
provided for Recorder of Deeds in the Judicial Code, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 21051.
§ 316-7. Storage of books, maps and plans.
The books, maps or plans made by the City Engineer, or under his direction,
under the provisions of this chapter shall remain in the office of the City
Engineer and under his custody and control, and in no event, for any
purpose, shall be removed therefrom by any person or persons.
§ 316-8. Availability of records to Board of Revision of Taxes and
Appeals.
The Board of Revision of Taxes and Appeals shall at all times have full and
free use of said books, plans, etc., without removal from the office of the
City Engineer.
§ 316-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
Any person, firm or corporation neglecting or refusing to comply with
the provisions of this chapter for a period of 30 days after public notice
of the requirements thereof and 10 days' notice by the City Engineer to
said person, firm or corporation of the requirements of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
§ 316-4 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 316-9
1:250
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this
chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 321
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Real estate registry — See Ch. 316. Property maintenance — See Ch. 307.
§ 316-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-9
1:251

ARTICLE I
Inspection of Residential Units
[Adopted 1-21-1993 by Ord. No. 442B (Ch. 11, Part 1, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 321-1. Definitions. [Amended 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 541B]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
CITY — The City of Lock Haven, Clinton County, Pennsylvania.
CODE — The code setting forth maintenance standards for existing
structures.
ICC — International Code Council, Inc.[Amended 12-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 757]
INSPECTION COMPLIANCE OFFICIAL — The official who is charged with
the administration of this article, or any duly authorized representative of
said official.
OWNER — The legal or beneficial holder of title to a premises. The parent
or child of the legal or beneficial holder of title of a single-family residence
residing in said single-family residence shall be considered an "owner."
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Any structurally enclosed area, including or
intended to include sleeping facilities.
§ 321-2. Appointment and duties of inspection compliance official.
For the administration of this article, an inspection compliance official
shall be appointed by City Council. The inspection compliance official shall
administer this article in accordance with its terms. The inspection
compliance official shall be responsible for instituting enforcement
proceedings on behalf of the City.
§ 321-3. Prohibition of occupancy.
No residential unit shall be occupied by other than the owner thereof unless
there is displayed at the structure in which the unit is located a certificate
of inspection as required by the provisions of this article.
§ 321-4. Inspection requirements. [Amended 8-25-1996 by Ord. No.
509B]
Residential units occupied or to be occupied by other than the owner
thereof shall be subject to inspection in accordance with the provisions of
this article:
A. Purpose. Inspections required by this article shall be for the purpose of
determining compliance with the provisions of the code as in effect in
the City on the date of inspection.
§ 321-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-4
1:253
B. Permitted inspectors. Inspections required by this article shall be
conducted only by individuals or agencies certified as an inspector by
ICC, as to the type of premises to be inspected to include individuals
that are only certified as to the current International Property
Maintenance Code who have at least three years of field experience
performing property maintenance inspections. No employee of the City
shall be permitted to conduct such inspections. Any individual or
agency desiring to conduct inspections required by this article shall
provide proof of current certification to the City. [Amended
12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 757]
C. Timing of inspections.
(1) As for any residential unit unoccupied or occupied by the owner on
or after the effective date hereof, a certificate of inspection shall be
issued and displayed prior to occupancy of such residential unit by
anyone other than the owner and subsequent inspections shall
occur as set forth in Subsection C(2).
(2) As for any residential unit occupied by other than the owner as of
the effective date hereof and for all subsequent inspections,
inspections required by this article shall be completed and the
certificate of inspection issued and displayed not later than
December 31 of the year for which inspection is required. In no
event shall such an inspection be conducted prior to January 1 of
the year for which inspection is required. The City shall be divided
into districts as follows:
(a) District I: First Ward of the City.
(b) District II: Second Ward of the City.
(c) District III: Third Ward of the City.
(d) District IV: Fourth Ward of the City.
(e) District V: Fifth Ward of the City.
(3) Residential units subject to the inspection requirements of this
article and located in District I shall be inspected during the
calendar year in which this article shall become effective and every
fifth year thereafter. Residential units subject to the inspection
requirements of this article and located in District II shall be
inspected during the first calendar year subsequent to the year in
which this article becomes effective and every fifth year thereafter.
Residential units subject to the inspection requirements of this
article and located in District III shall be inspected during the
second calendar year subsequent to the year which this article
becomes effective and every fifth year thereafter. Residential units
subject to the inspection requirements of this article and located in
District IV shall be inspected during the third calendar year
subsequent to the year in which this article becomes effective and
§ 321-4 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 321-4
1:254
§ 321-5. Issuance and display of certificate of compliance.
§ 321-6. Notice requirements.
every fifth year thereafter. Residential units subject to the
inspection requirements of this article and located in District V
shall be inspected during the fourth calendar year subsequent to
the year in which this article becomes effective and every fifth year
thereafter.
D. Exceptions.
(1) Any residential unit occupied or to be occupied by other than the
owner thereof shall be excepted from the inspection requirements
of this article upon proof submitted to the inspection compliance
official that such unit is subject to a requirement by other
governmental agency of safety inspection similar to inspection
under Subsection A, above, at least once every five years and in
compliance with such inspection requirements.
(2) No residential unit which would otherwise be subject the
inspection requirements of this article shall be required to be
inspected within the five calendar years subsequent to the year in
which any certificate of occupancy required before occupancy of
new construction is issued.
(3) When a certificate of inspection has been issued prior to a
residential unit being occupied by other than the owner, said
residential unit shall not be subject to reinspection under the terms
of this article prior to the first applicable calendar year occurring
after the calendar year subsequent to issuance of the initial
certificate of inspection.
A. General provision. Upon submission of proof that an inspection
required by this article has been completed and that there were no
violations found of the code as in effect on the date of inspection, or that
any such violations have been corrected in accordance with said code,
the inspection compliance officer shall issue a certificate of inspection
for the structure with each residential unit therein which was inspected
listed upon said certificate. The certificate of inspection shall be
displayed in plain view within the unit or structure.
B. Form of proof of inspection. Proof of inspection and absence of any
violations of the code shall be in such form as approved, from time to
time, by the inspection compliance official.
C. Time of issuance of certificate of compliance. The inspection
compliance official shall either issue the certificate of compliance or a
written rejection with the reasons for rejection specified within 14 days
of submission of the required form.
§ 321-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-6
1:255
§ 321-7. Responsible party.
The owner of any residential unit which is subject to the inspection
requirements of this article shall be responsible for compliance with the
provisions of this article.
§ 321-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
The owner of any residential unit who has violated or permitted the violation
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each violation of
this article and each day the same is continued shall be deemed a separate
offense.
§ 321-9. Fee schedule. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
The fee schedule for issuance for certificates of inspection shall be
established from time to time by resolution of City Council.
§ 321-10. Effective date. [Amended 8-1-1994 by Ord. No. 471B;
8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 492BA; 8-25-1996 by Ord. No. 509B]
This article shall become effective January 1, 1997.
A. Newspaper advertisement. The inspection compliance official shall
each year cause notice to be published two times in newspaper of
general circulation within the City. The first notice shall be published
during January of each calendar year and the second notice shall be
published during October of each calendar year. The notice shall set
forth the district for which inspection of residential units occupied by
other than the owner is required during the year of publication, that
inspection may be required before a residential unit is occupied by
other than the owner, and where a copy of this article may be obtained.
B. Deeds and agreements of sale. Every deed and agreement of sale
executed and delivered on or after the effective date of this article with
respect to any premises within the City which includes one or more
residential units shall include therein a notice substantially in the form
which follows:
(1) "Residential units within the City of Lock Haven which are
occupied other than by the owner thereof are subject to the
inspection requirements of Ordinance No. 442B."
§ 321-6 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 321-10
1:256
Chapter 328
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 346. Water — See Ch. 394.
§ 321-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-10
1:257

ARTICLE I
Individual and Community Sewage Systems
[Adopted 8-7-1968 by Ord. No. 668A (Ch. 18, Part 3A, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 328-1. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Lock Haven Sewage Disposal System
Ordinance."
§ 328-2. Permit for construction. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
§ 328-3. Permit fee. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
A fee, in an amount as established from time to time by resolution of City
Council, shall be paid to the City Clerk, or such other person as may be
designated by the City Council, when an application is made for a permit for
an individual or a community sewage disposal system.
§ 328-4. Council may adopt regulations.
The City Council shall adopt and do hereby adopt any forms or regulations
which in their judgment may be required pursuant to this article.
§ 328-5. Inspections. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
The City Council of the City of Lock Haven does hereby designate the
Sewage Enforcement Officer of said City as the person to inspect and
A. No person, firm or corporation shall construct, install, alter, repair or
extend an individual or a community sewage disposal system of any
type, or construct, extend or alter any building of any type or construct,
extend, alter, establish, set up or locate any type of trailer, mobile home,
portable structure, to which or with which an individual or community
sewage disposal system shall be used or connected in the City of Lock
Haven, Clinton County, Pennsylvania, until a permit has been obtained
indicating that the site, plans and specifications of such proposed
individual or community sewage disposal system comply with the terms
and provisions of Act 537, known as the "Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act,"119 and the rules and regulations adopted by the
Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania issued from time to time pursuant to such Act.
B. This article shall apply to all individual or community sewage disposal
systems hereafter installed or constructed in the City of Lock Haven,
regardless of the size of the sewage system or the size of acreage of the
parcel of land in or on which the sewage system may be installed or
constructed.
119. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 328-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-5
1:259
approve individual and/or community sewage disposal system or systems
constructed and installed in the City of Lock Haven.
§ 328-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-7-1977 by Ord. No.
8B; 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 328-7. Interpretation. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
This article shall be construed as implementing for the City of Lock Haven
the provisions of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act No. 537 and the
rules and regulations adopted by the Department of Environmental
Protection, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania issued pursuant to said Act.
§ 328-5 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-7
1:260
ARTICLE II
Sewer Rental Charges
[Adopted 3-7-1977 by Ord. No. 22B (Ch. 18, Part 2, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 328-8. Quarterly rental; manner of determination. [Amended
12-29-1977 by Ord. No. 53B; 1-7-1985 by Ord. No. 211B; 9-13-1990
by Ord. No. 358B; 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 457B]
There is hereby imposed, and all owners of property now or hereafter
connected with the sanitary sewers or the sewerage system (hereinafter
called "sewer system") of the City of Lock Haven, Pennsylvania, and having
the use of said sewer system shall pay an annual rental or charge payable
as hereinafter provided, for the use, whether directly or indirectly, of such
sewer system, based on the following schedule:
A. Rents.
(1) The sewer rent for collection of sanitary sewage discharged into
the sewer system shall be quarterly rent based upon the actual
volume of water metered per quarter as determined from meters
installed and maintained by the City of Lock Haven and the
Suburban Lock Haven Water Authority. The minimum quarterly
rent for each meter property shall be $17.70 per quarter, and rents
will be charged in accordance with the following schedule:
(a) Up to 4,000 gallons per quarter: $41.40 flat rate.
(b) Next 6,000 gallons per quarter: $6.20 per 1,000 gallons.
(c) Next 15,000 gallons per quarter: $6.59 per 1,000 gallons.
(d) Next 35,000 gallons per quarter: $6.06 per 1,000 gallons.
(e) Next 140,000 gallons per quarter: $6.29 per 1,000 gallons.
(f) Next 100,000 gallons per quarter: $5.12 per 1,000 gallons.
(g) Next 700,000 gallons per quarter: $4.54 per 1,000 gallons.
(h) All over 1,000,000 gallons per quarter: $3.78 per 1,000
gallons.
(2) Provided, however, that in cases where a single meter is used to
measure water furnished to two or more families, family dwelling
units, premises, properties or commercial establishments, the
quantity so measured will be divided equally for billing among such
families, family dwelling units, premises, properties and
commercial establishments, and the above rate shall then apply.
B. Whenever a property upon which a sewer rental or charge is hereby
imposed uses water, all or part of which water so used is not discharged
into the sewer system, the quantity of water so used and not discharged
§ 328-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-8
1:261
§ 328-9. Private haulers without access to system; discharge only at
designated sites; rates. [Amended 7-6-1992 by Ord. No. 409B;
4-18-1994 by Ord. No. 466B; 8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 492BB]
into the sewer system may be excluded in determining the sewer rental
or charge of said property; provided, the quantity of water so used
and not discharged into the sewer system is measured by a device or
devices approved by the City and installed without cost to the City. For
the purpose of determining the sewer rental, the quantity of such water
not discharged into the sewer system shall be deducted from the water
meter readings; provided further, however, when, in the opinion of the
City, it is not practical to install measuring devices to continuously
measure the quantity of water not discharged into the sewer system,
the City shall determine in such manner and in such method as it may
prescribe, the percentage of metered water discharged into the sewer
system and the quantity of water used to determine the sewer rental
shall be the percentage so determined of the quantity measured by the
water meter or meters. Any dispute as to estimated amount shall be
determined by the City after notice of the estimate, the decision as to
which manner shall be final for the period covered by such estimate.
All meters or other measuring devices installed or required to be used
under this subsection shall be under the control of the City. The owner
of the property upon which any such measuring device is installed shall
be responsible for its maintenance and safekeeping, and all repairs
thereto shall be made at the property owner's expense, whether such
repairs are made necessary by wear and tear or any other cause or
causes.
C. There is hereby imposed a penalty of 10% on all sewer rental invoices
that remain unpaid after 30 days from the date the invoice is rendered.
A. Any private hauler, except recreation vehicles, serving establishments
not having access to a sewage treatment system shall be permitted to
discharge sanitary sewage into the sewer system of the City of Lock
Haven, provided that he makes application therefor to the Director of
Public Works.
B. All sanitary sewage discharged into the sewage system as specified in
Subsection A, above, shall be discharged only at such site or sites as
shall be designated by the Director of Public Works, and the Director of
Public Works is authorized to establish such administrative rules and
regulations as he may deem necessary. The violation of any such rules
and regulations shall result in revocation by the Director of Public
Works of the privilege of so discharging sanitary sewage.
C. Hauled waste shall be classified in one of the following categories of
waste:
(1) Septic tank waste: concentrated domestic waste as pumped from a
septic tank.
§ 328-8 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-9
1:262
§ 328-10. Billing and payment; right of City to shut off water.
The above rentals or charges shall be paid quarterly and quarterly billings
will be made with or at the same time water rent billings for each quarter
(2) Trucked domestic waste: unconcentrated domestic waste with a
holding tank detention of 24 hours or less.
(3) Holding tank waste: unconcentrated domestic waste with a holding
tank detention greater than 24 hours.
(4) Commercial waste: unconcentrated commercial waste with a
holding tank detention greater than 24 hours.
(5) Portable toilet waste: domestic waste collected from portable
toilets or pit toilets.
(6) Other: odd wastes which do not fall into the above categories.
D. Charges for treatment of hauled waste shall be based on the category of
waste discharged and shall be billed monthly.
(1) The amounts charged shall be based on the number of gallons of
waste discharged in the month and shall be based on the following
rates:
(a) Septic tank waste: $30/1,000 gallons.
(b) Holding tank and trucked domestic waste:
[1] First 5,000 gallons: $5/1,000 gallons.
[2] Next 50,000 gallons: $3.50/1,000 gallons.
[3] Next 50,000 gallons: $2.50/1,000 gallons.
[4] Over 105,000 gallons: $1.50/1,000 gallons.
(c) Portable toilet waste: $40.54/1,000 gallons.
(d) Commercial waste: $30/1,000 gallons.
(2) The above rates shall be reviewed annually and revised to reflect
the actual costs of treating the hauled wastes.
(3) The charges due from each producer of waste shall be calculated
separately and the City may, at its option, invoice the producer of
the waste or the discharger who hauls the waste to the disposal
plant.
E. Owners of recreation vehicles shall be permitted to discharge sanitary
sewage into the system and such discharge will only be made at the
treatment plant. A fee of $3 shall be charged for each and every time
sewage is accepted for discharge to the system and shall be paid at the
time of discharge to the treatment plant attendant.
§ 328-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-10
1:263
are made by either the City of Lock Haven or the Suburban Lock Haven
Water Authority. Quarterly charges for sewerage service shall be payable on
or before the 30th day of the date of the bill. The City shall have the right
to cut off sewerage service from delinquent premises and not restore the
same until all delinquent and the cost of cutting off and restoring service
shall have been paid.
§ 328-11. Late payment; action by City.
The sewer rent or charge hereby imposed shall be a lien on the property
served. All such sewer rentals or charges not paid on or before the end of
one year from the date on which such bill was rendered shall be deemed to
be delinquent for the purposes of this article. All delinquent sewer rentals
or charges shall be filed and entered as a lien against the property served,
in the office of the Prothonotary of Clinton County, in the manner provided
by law for the filing and collection of municipal claims.
§ 328-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 328-13. Rates and charges for laboratory analysis. [Added
12-26-1990 by Ord. No. 349B; and 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
Rates for the collection and analysis of industrial waste samples shall be as
established from time to time by resolution of City Council.
§ 328-10 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-13
1:264
ARTICLE III
Sewer Connections and Uses
[Adopted 3-7-1977 by Ord. No. 23B (Ch. 18, Part 1, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 328-14. Definitions.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following words
and terms used in this article shall have the following meanings:
ABNORMAL INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any industrial waste having a
suspended solids content or BOD appreciably in excess of that normally
found in municipal sewage. For the purposes of this article, any
industrial waste containing more than 350 parts per million of
suspended solids or having a BOD in excess of 300 parts per million
shall be considered an abnormal industrial waste, regardless of
whether or not it contains other substances in concentrations differing
appreciably from those normally found in municipal sewage.
BOD OF SEWAGE OR INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Biological oxygen
demand; shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of the organic matter in said sewage or industrial waste
under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20° C., expressed
in parts per million by weight. It shall be determined by one of the
acceptable methods described in the latest edition of "Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by
the American Public Health Association.
CITY COUNCIL — The elected and appointed members of the City
Council of the City of Lock Haven, as now or hereafter constituted, and
its duly authorized agents or representatives.
CITY ENGINEER — The duly appointed registered professional
engineer acting in accordance with Chapter 115 of the Third Class City
Code.120
CITY — The City of Lock Haven, Clinton County, Pennsylvania.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer designed to receive both sanitary
sewage and stormwater runoff and approved for such purposes.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous waterborne
wastes from industrial processes or commercial establishments, as
distinct from sanitary sewage.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Any structure erected and intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings
or animals, and from which structure sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes, or either thereof, is or may be discharged.
120. Editor's Note: See 11 Pa.C.S.A. § 11501 et seq.
§ 328-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-14
1:265
PERSON — Includes natural persons, partnerships, associations and
corporations, public or private.
pH — The negative logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of
hydrogen ion concentration expressed in moles per liter. It shall be
determined by one of the acceptable methods described in the latest
edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association.
PREMISES ACCESSIBLE TO THE PUBLIC SANITARY SEWAGE
SYSTEM — Any real estate abutting on or adjoining or having access
to any street, alley or right-of-way in which a sewer is located which
ultimately connects to the public sanitary sewage system.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale
of produce that have been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWAGE SYSTEM (sometimes called the "SEWER
SYSTEM") — All sanitary or combined sewers, all pumping stations,
all force mains, all sewage treatment works and all other sewerage
facilities owned or leased and operated by the City for the collection,
transportation and treatment of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes,
together with their appurtenances and any additions, extensions or
improvements thereto. It shall also include sewers within the City's
service area which serve one or more persons and discharge into the
public sanitary sewerage system even though those sewers may not
have been constructed by the City and are not owned by the City. It
does not include separate storm sewers or culverts which have been
constructed for the sole purpose of carrying storm and surface runoff,
the discharge from which is not and does not become tributary to the
sewage treatment facilities.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
and commercial establishments, exclusive of stormwater runoff, surface
water or groundwater.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sanitary sewage and to
which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial and commercial
establishments.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
STORM SEWER — A sewer which is intended to carry stormwater
runoff, surface waters, groundwater drainage, etc., but which is not
intended to carry any sanitary sewage or polluted industrial waste.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — That portion of the rainfall which reaches a
channel, trench, sewer or sink.
§ 328-14 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-14
1:266
§ 328-15. Discharge of sanitary sewage to public system required.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface or are
in suspension in water, sewage, industrial waste or other liquids and
which are removable by laboratory filtration. The quantity of suspended
solids shall be determined by one of the acceptable methods described
in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association.
UNPOLLUTED WATER OR WASTE — Any water or waste containing
none of the following: free or emulsified grease or oil; acid or alkali;
phenols or other substances imparting taste or odor to receiving
waters; toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or
solution; obnoxious or odorous gases. It shall contain no more than
10,000 parts per million by weight of dissolved solids of which not
more than 2,500 parts per million shall be as chloride and not more
than 10 parts per million each of suspended solids and BOD. The
color shall not exceed 50 parts per million. Analyses for any of the
above mentioned substances shall be made in accordance with the
latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association.
WATER COMPANY — Any publicly or privately owned duly authorized
agency, corporation or organization which is the approved purveyor of
the public water supply within and without the limits of the City.
B. As used herein, "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
A. Connections of buildings presently erected. All persons owning any
occupied building now erected within the City upon premises
accessible to the public sanitary sewage system shall, at their own
expense, make connection with the public sanitary sewage system, if
they are not presently so connected.
B. Connections of buildings subsequently erected. All persons owning any
premises within the City accessible to the public sanitary sewage
system upon which an occupied building is subsequently erected shall,
at the time of erection of such building and at their own expense, make
connection with the public sanitary sewage system.
C. Connections of buildings subsequently becoming accessible. All
persons owning any occupied building within the City upon premises
which subsequently become accessible to the public sanitary sewage
system shall, at their own expense, make connection with the public
sanitary sewage system within the time period stipulated after proper
notice to do so has been given.
D. Manner of connection pursuant to this part. All connections to the
public sanitary sewage system shall be made in accordance with this
article.
§ 328-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-15
1:267
§ 328-16. Exclusion of stormwater runoff.
§ 328-17. Sewerage service charges.
E. Unlawful connections. No privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, mine hole
or similar receptacle for human excrement shall presently or at any
time hereafter be connected with the public sanitary sewage system.
A. Stormwater discharge unlawful. The discharge of stormwater runoff to
sanitary sewers is prohibited.
B. Means to exclude stormwater required. All persons connecting to the
public sanitary sewage system shall provide adequate means for
excluding stormwater runoff in the event the connection is made to a
sanitary sewer.
C. Connection of drains unlawful; exclusion of surface waters. No person
connected to a sanitary sewer shall connect any roof drain or
foundation drain thereto or permit any such drains to remain connected
thereto, nor shall be permit, allow or cause to enter into any sanitary
sewer any spring water or surface water from any other source.
D. Combined sewers and storm sewers unaffected by provisions. The
provisions of these rules and regulations do not prohibit the present or
future discharge of stormwater runoff to combined sewers or storm
sewers or to natural watercourses within the City.
A. Charges imposed for use of sewers. There is imposed upon the owners
of or the users of water in or on all properties served by the public
sanitary sewage system, service charges for the use of said system,
payable in the amounts and as provided in the Sewer Rate Ordinance121
adopted by the City Council, and as it is hereafter from time to time
amended and modified. Said owners and users will be jointly and
severally liable for the payment of said service charges and the
penalties therein prescribed for delinquent payments thereof.
B. Manner of billing. All bills for service charges shall be due when
rendered and shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in the
City's Sewer Rate Ordinance.122 Owners and, where adequate
arrangements have been made with the City, users will be billed
periodically for the sewage service charges in accordance with the
billing practices of the City.
C. City may bill multiple meters as one if upon same property. The
measurement by two or more meters of the quantity of water used in or
on one property by one owner or user may be combined and the service
charge billed to said owner or user as though the quantity of water was
measured by one meter if the City Council so elects.
121. Editor's Note: See Article II of this chapter.
122. Editor's Note: See Article II of this chapter.
§ 328-15 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-17
1:268
D. Manner of measuring and billing for water not supplied by City. In the
event an owner obtains part or all of the water used in or on a property
from sources other than the water company, such owner or user shall,
after written notice from the City, at no expense to the City or the water
company, install and maintain a water meter or meters satisfactory to
the City for measuring all water used other than that obtained from the
water company, and the quantity of water used to determine the sewage
service charges shall be the quantity of water measured by all such
meters plus the quantity of water obtained from the water company. In
lieu of such additional meters, the City Council has established under
the Sewer Rate Ordinance123 a flat rate charge which shall be
applicable to such nonmetered water usage.
E. Measurement and charge for partial service. In the event it is
established to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that a portion of the
water used in or on any property served by the public sanitary sewage
system does not and cannot enter said system, the City Engineer may
determine in such manner and by such method as he may deem
practical, the percentage of the water entering the public sanitary
sewage system or the City Engineer may require or permit the
installation of additional meters in such manner as to determine either
the quantity of water excluded from the public sanitary sewage system
or the quantity of water, sewage or industrial waste actually entering
the public sanitary sewage system, exclusive of stormwater runoff. In
such case, the sewage service charge shall be based upon the quantity
of water estimated, measured or computed by the City Engineer to be
actually entering the public sanitary sewage system, exclusive of
stormwater runoff, and shall be subject to the sewage service charges
set forth in the City's Sewer Rate Ordinance.124
F. Manner of requesting reduction of charge. Any person requesting
consideration for a reduction of the amount of the sewage service
charges because of water not entering the public sanitary sewage
system shall make written application to the City Engineer for such
consideration, giving the name of such person, his address and setting
forth supporting data fully describing other sources of water, if any, as
well as the disposition of water alleged not to be entering the public
sanitary sewage system. The application shall be accompanied by a
sketch to approximate scale showing the plan of the property, the water
distribution system, sewer layout, existing meters and proposed meters
in the scheme to determine the quantity of flow entering or not entering
the public sanitary sewage system. The cost of furnishing, installing and
maintaining any meters other than those utilized to measure water
purchased from the water company shall be borne by the applicant. The
type, size, location, arrangement and maintenance of such meters shall
be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
123. Editor's Note: See Article II of this chapter.
124. Editor's Note: See Article II of this chapter.
§ 328-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-18
1:269
§ 328-18. Surcharge imposed for abnormal wastes.
Although the sewage treatment works will be capable of treating certain
abnormal industrial wastes as heretofore defined in § 328-14, the actual
treatment of such wastes may increase the cost of operating and
maintaining the public sanitary sewage system. Therefore, there will be
imposed upon each person discharging such industrial waste into the public
sanitary sewage system a surcharge, or surcharges, which are intended
to cover such additional cost. Such surcharges shall be in addition to the
regular sewage service charges set forth in the Sewer Rate Ordinance125 of
the City and shall be payable as otherwise provided.
§ 328-19. Determination of abnormal wastes. [Amended 2-24-2003
by Ord. No. 670]
The strength of any industrial waste, the discharge of which is to be subject
to surcharge, shall be determined monthly, or more frequently as the City
Engineer shall determine, from samples taken either at the manhole or
metering chamber hereof, or at any other sampling point mutually agreed
upon by the City and the producer of such waste. The frequency and
duration of the sampling period shall be such as, in the opinion of the City
Engineer, will permit a reasonably reliable determination of the average
composition of such waste, exclusive of stormwater runoff. Samples shall
be collected or their collection supervised by a representative of the City
Engineer and shall be in proportion to the flow of waste, exclusive of
stormwater runoff, and composited for analysis in accordance with the
latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater," as published by the American Public Health Association.
Except as hereinafter provided, the strength of the waste so found by
analysis shall be used for establishing the surcharge or surcharges.
However, the City Engineer may, if he so elects, accept the results of routine
sampling and analyses by the producer of such wastes in lieu of making his
own samplings and analyses.
§ 328-20. Biochemical oxygen demand surcharge rate.
A. In the event any industrial waste is found by the City Engineer to have a
BOD in excess of 300 parts per million, the producer of said waste shall
be surcharged an amount equal to the product of the actual volume of
wastes in thousand gallons per billing period, exclusive of stormwater
runoff, discharged to the public sanitary sewage system and the BOD
surcharge rate. The BOD surcharge rate shall be determined by the
following formula:
Rc = 0.00834 P (C-300)
125. Editor's Note: See Article II of this chapter.
§ 328-18 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-20
1:270
§ 328-21. Suspended solids surcharge rate.
Where:
Rc = The BOD surcharge rate in cents per 1,000 gallons of waste
discharged.
P = The average annual fixed, operating and maintenance cost of
secondary treatment processes per pound of BOD received
at the treatment works. (Prior to completion of the first year
of operation the value of "P" shall be assumed to be $0.04;
and thereafter, the value will be adjusted annually.)
C = The average BOD of the industrial waste expressed in parts
per million as determined in accordance with § 328-19
above.
B. The figure "300" appearing in the above formula corresponds to the
maximum BOD permissible without surcharge. The figure "0.00834" is
the factor to convert parts per million to pounds per 1,000 gallons. No
discount will be permitted for sewage or industrial wastes having a
BOD less than 300 parts per million.
A. In the event any industrial waste is found by the City Engineer to have
an average suspended solids concentration in excess of 350 parts per
million, the producer of such waste shall be surcharged an amount
equal to the product of the actual volume of wastes in thousand gallons
per billing period, exclusive of storm runoff, discharged to the public
sanitary sewage system and the suspended solids surcharge rate. The
suspended solids surcharge rate shall be determined by the following
formula:
Rs = 0.00834 x B (S-350)
Where:
Rs = The suspended solids surcharge rate in cents per 1,000
gallons of waste discharged.
B = The average annual fixed, operating and maintenance cost
of the sludge digestion, sludge drying and sludge disposal
operations per pound of suspended solids received at the
treatment works. (Prior to completion of the first year of
operation, the value of "B" shall be assumed to be $0.04; and
thereafter, the value will be adjusted annually.)
S = The average suspended solids concentration of the abnormal
industrial waste expressed in parts per million as
determined in accordance with § 328-19 above.
B. The figure "350" appearing in the above formula corresponds to the
maximum suspended solids concentration permissible without
surcharge. The figure "0.00834" is the factor to convert parts per
million to pounds per 1,000 gallons. No discount will be permitted for
§ 328-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-21
1:271
§ 328-22. Total nitrogen surcharge rate. [Added 8-20-2012 by Ord.
No. 908]
§ 328-23. Total phosphorus surcharge rate. [Added 8-20-2012 by
Ord. No. 908]
sewage or industrial wastes having a suspended solids concentration
less than 350 parts per million.
A. In the event any industrial waste is found by the City Engineer or
designated staff to have a discharge of total nitrogen in excess of that
particular discharge's twenty-four-month historical average of allotted
total nitrogen discharge, the producer of said waste shall be
surcharged. This surcharge shall be determined by the following
formula:
ITNs = [(TNIm (1-Re) - (TNIm/TNPm)/(7516))/(TNIm)] x (P) x (TNIc)
Where:
ITNs = The total nitrogen surcharge in dollars.
TNJm = Industrial discharger's average total nitrogen discharge
in pounds per month for the two water years
immediately preceding the billing period.
Re = The annual removal efficiency for the sewage plant for
total nitrogen, calculated by the City, expressed as a
decimal fraction.
TNPm = The treatment plant's average total nitrogen influent
loading in pounds per month for the two water years
immediately preceding the billing period.
P = The annual operating and maintenance cost of nitrogen
removal in dollars by SBRs and filtration processes in
dollars per pound of total nitrogen removed for the
prior calendar year. (Prior to completion of the new
treatment plant and during the first full year of
operation, the value of "P" shall be the cost per credit/
pound of total nitrogen purchased to meet the City's
NPDES permit limits; and thereafter, the value will be
adjusted annually based on costs of removal.).
TNIe = The industrial discharger's current average daily
discharge of total nitrogen in pounds for the billing
period.
B. The figure "7516" appearing in the above formula corresponds to the
City's monthly allowable total nitrogen in pounds discharged per
current NPDES permit.
A. In the event any industrial waste is found by the City Engineer or
designated staff to have a discharge of total phosphorus in excess of
§ 328-21 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-23
1:272
§ 328-24. Surcharges in addition to normal charges. [Amended
8-20-2012 by Ord. No. 908]
The surcharges provided for in this article shall be added to the sewage
service charges imposed by the City Council under the Sewer Rate
Ordinance.126
§ 328-25. Pretreatment of wastes. [Amended 8-20-2012 by Ord. No.
908]
To insure proper operation of the treatment plant, the City Council may
require pretreatment of certain industrial wastes before they are
that particular discharger's twenty-four-month historical average of
allotted total phosphorus discharge, the producer of said waste shall
be surcharged. This surcharge shall be determined by the following
formula:
ITPs = [{TPIm (l-Re)-(TPIm/TPPm)(761)}/(TPIm)]x(P)x(TPIe)
Where:
TTPs = The total phosphorus surcharge in dollars.
TPIm = Industrial discharger's daily average total phosphorus
discharge in pounds per month for the two water years
immediately preceding the billing period.
Rt = The annual removal efficiency for the sewage plant for
total phosphorus, calculated by the City, expressed as a
decimal fraction.
IPPm = The treatment plant's average total phosphorus influent
loading in pounds per month for the two water years
immediately preceding the billing period.
P = The annual operating and maintenance cost of
phosphorus removal in dollars by SBRs and filtration
processes in dollars per pound of total phosphorus
removed for the prior calendar year. (Prior to completion
of the new treatment plant and during the first full year
of operation, the value of "P" shall be the cost per credit/
pound of total phosphorus purchased to meet the City's
NPDES permit limits; and thereafter, the value will be
adjusted annually based on costs of removal.)
TPIe = The industrial discharger's current average daily
discharge of total phosphorus in pounds for the billing
period.
B. The figure "761" appearing in the above formula corresponds to the
City's monthly allowable total phosphorus in pounds discharged per
current NPDES permit.
126. Editor's Note: See Article II of this chapter.
§ 328-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-25
1:273
discharged into the sanitary system. Plans for pretreatment facilities will
be submitted to the City Engineer, prior to construction, for approval as to
adequacy and reliability.
§ 328-26. Delivery of bills and notices.
Bills and notices relating to the sewage service charges and surcharges will
be mailed or delivered to the property owner's last address or, where proper
arrangements have been made with the City water office, to the user's last
address, as shown on the billing books of the City.
§ 328-27. Connection to system. [Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No.
485B; 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
A. Application for permit. Applications for connection to the public
sanitary sewage system shall be made to the City Engineer upon the
permit form to be formulated and furnished by the City Engineer.
B. Information required of applicant. All information requested on said
form shall be furnished by the applicant, including the character and
use of each structure located upon the property.
C. Connection fee; certain service lateral installation costs borne by City. A
connection and inspection fee in an amount as established from time to
time by City Council will be required at the time of making application
for permission to make a connection to the City's sanitary sewer
system. The fee is to be used to recover the ordinary and reasonable
expenses incurred by the City in making the connection. Connections to
the City mains may be made only by City forces. Service laterals shall
be installed from the main to the curbline of the property or a distance
of 35 feet, whichever is the lesser, by and at the expense of the City.
Where an existing sanitary sewer main is not available, the cost of
extending the main shall be by and at the expense of the property
owner(s) making the request of the extension.
D. Work to commence only upon payment of all fees. No work shall
commence before the payment of any aforementioned tap connection
and inspection fee and issuance of the aforementioned connection
permit.
E. Separate connection required; exceptions. Unless written permission is
obtained from the City Engineer, separate connections and
corresponding tap connection and inspection fees will be required for
each individual occupied building, whether constructed as a detached
unit or as one of a pair or row, but a single connection will be permitted
to serve a school, factory, apartment house or other permanent multiple
unit structure whose individual apartments or units may not be subject
to separate ownership.
F. Time limit to connect. Connections to sanitary sewers shall be
completed within 60 calendar days after receipt of an approved permit.
§ 328-25 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-27
1:274
§ 328-28. Connection to be entirely inspected at one time;
additional inspections.
It is the intention of these rules and regulations that the entire connection
be inspected at one time; however, if the property owner feels that special
conditions warrant more than one inspection, he may request the same,
subject to such additional inspection fees as the City Council shall
determine.
§ 328-29. Types of piping permitted.
All pipe installed shall be either asbestos cement, plastic or ductile iron
pipe. Pipe shall meet City standards currently in effect and shall be of
nominal size of at least four inches. Where the ground is firm and provides
a good foundation, plastic or asbestos cement pipe may be used. On filled
ground or on ground which is not firm, ductile iron pipe shall be used.
Each section of pipe shall be stamped with the manufacturer's certification.
Couplings for the asbestos-cement pipe shall conform to the standards of
the manufacturer of the pipe with which the couplings will be used. All
joints for ductile iron pipe or plastic pipe shall conform to the standards of
the manufacturer.
§ 328-30. Compliance with manufacturer's recommendations
required; rock foundations.
All sewer pipe shall be installed in strict accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations. Where rock trench foundation exists, a
four-inch gravel cradle shall be provided under the pipe.
G. Connections subject to restriction. All connections to the sanitary
sewers shall be subject to certain restrictions as to unacceptable
sanitary sewage which are set forth in §§ 328-18 to 328-22.
H. Inspection of connection. The designated inspector of the City shall be
given at least 24 hours' notice of the time when such connection shall
be made in order that said inspector can be present to inspect and
approve the work of connection. The inspector shall signify his approval
of the connection by endorsing his name and the date of approval on the
aforementioned connection permit in the possession of the
permittee(s).
I. Right of inspector to enter premises. At the time of inspection of the
connection, the owner or owners of property shall permit the inspector
full and complete access to all sanitary and drainage arrangements and
facilities in each building and in and about all parts of the property. No
building sewer line shall be covered over or in any manner concealed
until after it is inspected and approved by said inspector.
§ 328-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-31
1:275
§ 328-31. Installation requirements.
All pipe shall be installed with a minimum slope of 1/8 inch per foot and
a minimum cover of 2 1/2 feet. All pipe shall be laid to an even grade and
straight alignment to the public sanitary sewer. All pipe shall be laid with
full and even bearing, and no block supports will be allowed. Bell holes shall
be dug to allow sufficient space to properly make each joint. Backfill shall be
tamped uniformly around the pipe. All work shall be done in a workmanlike
manner and shall provide a durable installation.
§ 328-32. Installation of vents.
A four-inch soil pipe vent shall be installed a maximum of five feet from the
building. The soil pipe vent shall be installed with a trap and a four-inch
vent within the building. The vent shall be so situated as not to allow the
discharge of any surface water to the sanitary sewer.
§ 328-33. Compliance with local regulations.
Commercial installations must also comply with all local construction
regulations.
§ 328-34. Maintenance of building sewers.
Maintenance and repair of all building sewers shall be the responsibility of
the property owner.
§ 328-35. Plans required for proposed extensions.
Five copies of plans for proposed extensions shall be submitted to the City
Council on twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch sheets showing plan views to
a minimum scale of one inch equals 50 feet, and profiles to a minimum scale
of one inch equals 10 feet vertically and one inch equals 50 feet horizontally,
a North point, a suitable title block, date and the name of the engineer and
imprint of his registration seal.
§ 328-36. Sewer design. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
All sewers shall be designed in accordance with the latest edition of
"Sewerage Manual" of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and these rules and regulations.
§ 328-37. Permits for construction.
Construction of sewers will not be permitted until the proper state permits
have been obtained in the name of the City.
§ 328-38. As-built plans to be filed.
Prior to final acceptance of any sewer extensions by the City Council, it
will be necessary for the developer to furnish to the City Council "as-
§ 328-31 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-38
1:276
built" plans showing the angle and distance between manholes, the top
and invert elevation of each manhole and the exact location of all house
sewer connections relative to the nearest manhole both downstream and
upstream. Such plans shall be properly referenced to allow location of
connections, etc., in the field.
§ 328-39. Recording of easements.
Easements shall be recorded in the name of the City for all sewers to be
constructed outside of dedicated street rights-of-way.
§ 328-40. Standards for sewer pipe.
All sewer pipe shall meet current City standards. The type of pipe proposed
for installation shall be indicated on the plan sheets.
§ 328-41. Dimensions of pipe sections.
All sewer main pipe shall be a minimum of eight inches in diameter and
have a minimum of laying length of not less than five feet.
§ 328-42. Jointing connections.
The details of any jointing connection which is proposed for use must be
submitted to the City Engineer for prior approval and shall be detailed on
the plan sheets.
§ 328-43. Installation of pipe.
The installation of sewers shall start at the lower end of the line and
proceed upstream so that the spigot ends point in the direction of flow. The
pipe shall be carefully laid to line and grade. The handling, placing and
jointing of pipe shall be in strict accordance with the pipe manufacturer's
recommendations.
§ 328-44. Manhole construction.
All manholes shall be constructed in accordance with the current standards
established by the City Engineer. Frames and covers for all manholes shall
be fabricated of cast iron and shall conform to the standards established by
the City Engineer. Manholes shall be furnished at the ends of lines.
§ 328-45. Tests for leakage. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
Sewers shall be hydrostatically, pneumatically and/or smoke tested for
leakage at the discretion of, and in the manner required by, the City
Engineer. Sewers shall meet leakage requirements of the pipe
manufacturer, the Department of Environmental Protection and the City
standards.
§ 328-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-46
1:277
§ 328-46. Filing of permits; payment of fees.
The developer shall file all necessary connection permits and pay the
applicable tap connection and inspection fee for each house or building to
the City Treasurer, which shall become due and payable prior to inspection
and approval by the inspector for each respective house service sewer.
§ 328-47. Inspection costs.
The developer shall also reimburse the City in full for all costs of inspection
of construction of all sanitary sewers. The amount and type of inspection
required shall be determined by the City Engineer during construction.
§ 328-48. Conditions for final approval.
No sewer extensions constructed by a developer will be approved for use
and acceptance by the City until said sewers are formally approved by the
City Council, all building tap connection and inspection fees have been paid
for each building connected to the system and the City has been reimbursed
in full for all inspection costs incurred by the inspector during construction
testing and approval.
§ 328-49. Delinquencies; violations and penalties.
A. Late payment; action by City. Each sewage service charge, surcharge
and penalty imposed by the Sewer Rate Ordinance of the City127 shall
be a debt due the City and shall be a lien on the property served, and if
not paid within the period prescribed in the Sewer Rate Ordinance after
the date of the bill, shall be deemed delinquent. In such event, the City
shall proceed to file a lien in the office of the Prothonotary of Clinton
County and collect the same in the manner provided by law for the filing
and collection of municipal claims. In the event of failure to pay the
sewage service charge or surcharge or penalty after they become
delinquent, the City Council may also authorize the appropriate
personnel to shut off water service to said property or to remove or
close the sewer connection and to take such steps as may be necessary
to accomplish such shutoff or removal or closing. The expense of such
shutoff or removal or closing as well as the expense of restoring any
such service shall likewise be a debt due the City and a lien on the
property served and may be filed and collected as hereinbefore
provided. Such sewage service shall not be restored until all sewage
service charges, surcharges and penalties, including the expense of
removal, closing and restoration shall have been paid or adequate
provisions for their payment shall have been made.
B. Disconnection of water. All persons violating any provisions of these
rules and regulations shall be given notice of such violation either
personally or by means of the United States Mail, and if no action to
correct said violation is taken within 30 days of the date of such notice,
127. Editor's Note: See Article II of this chapter.
§ 328-46 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-49
1:278
water to said premises may be shut off or the sewer connection may be
removed or closed. Reconnection will not be made until after correction
of the violation has been accomplished. The expense of such shutoff or
removal or closing and the expense of restoring the water or sewage
service shall be a debt due the City and a lien upon the property served
and may be filed and collected as provided in Subsection A hereof.
C. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said
fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days and
may, in addition, be assessed for any damages to person, property,
transmission lines or the City's sewage treatment facility, as well as any
other penalties provided for in this article. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 328-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-49
1:279

ARTICLE IV
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 10-5-1998 by Ord. No. 564B (Ch. 18, Part 3B, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 328-50. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of existing and new holding tanks designed to receive and
retain sewage, whether from residential or commercial uses, and it is
hereby declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the
protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of this City.
§ 328-51. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle, whether permanent or
temporary, which receives and retains sewage conveyed by a water-carrying
system and is designed and constructed to facilitate the ultimate disposal of
the sewage at another site.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the City upon which there
is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Lock Haven, Clinton County, Pennsylvania.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the City.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals,
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation.
§ 328-52. Approval.
The City reserves the right to allow only temporary and limited use facilities
to install a holding tank. The City will review all requests on a case-by-case
basis and may refuse any or all such requests.
§ 328-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-53
1:281
§ 328-53. Right and privileges granted.
The City is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the City
the control and methods of holding tank use, sewage disposal and sewage
collection and transportation thereof.
§ 328-54. Rules and regulations.
The City is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and
regulations concerning sewage which it may deem necessary from time to
time to effect the purposes herein.
§ 328-55. Rules and regulations to be in conformity with applicable
law.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the City shall be in conformity
with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the City and all applicable
laws and applicable rules and regulations of administrative agencies of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 328-56. Rates and charges.
The City shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect
rates, assessments and other charges in the area served by its facilities at
reasonable and uniform rates, as authorized by applicable law.
§ 328-57. Exclusiveness of rights and privileges.
§ 328-58. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
A. The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved
property utilizing a holding tank shall be done solely by or under the
direction and control of the City, and the disposal thereof shall be made
only at such site or sites as may be approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The City will receive, review and retain pumping receipts from
permitted holding tanks.
C. The City will complete and retain annual inspection reports for each
permitted tank.
A. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this or any ordinance of
this City, the provisions of any applicable law and the rules and
regulations of the City and any administrative agency of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Permit only the City or its agent to inspect holding tanks on an annual
basis.
§ 328-53 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-58
1:282
§ 328-59. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
§ 328-60. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation of
§ 328-57, above, shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated by the City
by either seeking mitigation of the nuisance or appropriate equitable or
legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
C. Permit only the City or its approved hauler to collect, transport and
dispose of the contents therein.
§ 328-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-60
1:283

ARTICLE V
Industrial Pretreatment Program
[Adopted 4-19-2010 by Ord. No. 854]
§ 328-61. Policy.
This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned
treatment works for the City of Lock Haven and enables the City to comply
with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations [Title 40 of
the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 403].
§ 328-62. Objectives.
A. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will interfere with its operation or
contaminate the resulting sludge, increase the difficulty or cost of
operation of the system or reduce the efficiency or effectiveness of
the sewer system;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will pass-through the publicly owned
treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or
otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment
works;
(3) To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who
may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their
employment and the general public from exposure to toxic or other
dangerous substances;
(4) To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and
sludge from the publicly owned treatment works;
(5) To provide for the equitable distribution of the cost of
administration, operation, maintenance, enforcement and
improvement of the publicly owned treatment works and the
industrial pretreatment program;
(6) To enable the City to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the
publicly owned treatment works is subject; and
(7) To protect the sewer system from any damage.
B. Administration.
(1) This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment
works. This article authorizes the issuance of individual
§ 328-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-62
1:285
§ 328-63. Abbreviations and definitions.
wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring,
compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative
review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the
setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from
the program established herein.
(2) Except as otherwise provided herein, the Superintendent shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article.
Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Superintendent
may be delegated by the Superintendent to a duly authorized City
employee.
(3) Sewer usage and discharge regulations.
A. Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this article,
shall have the designated meanings:
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
BMP Best management practice
BMR Baseline monitoring report
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CIU Categorical industrial user
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
gpd Gallons per day
IU Industrial user
mg/l milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NSCIU Non-significant categorical industrial user
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIU Significant industrial user
SNC Significant noncompliance
TSS Total suspended solids
U.S.C. United States Code
B. Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following
terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated.
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 328-62 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-63
1:286
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The administrator or the regional
administrator of Region III of the EPA.
AUTHORIZED OR DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE
USER — An authorized representative of an industrial user may be:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in § 328-64
[40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment requirements,
operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage
or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials
storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
If the user is a corporation:
The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any
other person who performs similar policy or decisionmaking
functions for the corporation; or
(a)
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to
make management decisions that govern the operation of the
regulated facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty
of making major capital investment recommendations, and
initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws
and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are
established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate
information for individual wastewater discharge permit
requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been
assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures.
(b)
(1)
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner
or proprietor, respectively.
(2)
If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the
operation and performance of the activities of the government
facility, or their designee.
(3)
The individuals described in Subsections (1) through (3), above,
may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization
is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which
the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, and the written
authorization is submitted to the City.
(4)
§ 328-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-63
1:287
laboratory procedures for five days at 20° C., usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g., mg/l).
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
of a user to the sewer system.
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of wastewater from any portion of
an industrial user's pretreatment facility through which the wastewater
normally passes.
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the
Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that
appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A registered professional engineer
under the laws of the State of Pennsylvania.
CHAIN OF CUSTODY — A record of sample collection indicating the
place and time of collection and the person collecting the sample. It
shall also include a record of each person involved in possession of the
sample, including the laboratory person who takes final possession of
the sample for the purpose of analysis.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD — A measure of the oxygen
required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
CITY — The City of Lock Haven, Clinton County Pennsylvania, and the
City Council thereof, its agents and officials.
CLEAN STREAMS LAW — The Act of June 22, 1937, as amended and
reenacted by the act of October 10, 1980, P.L. 894, 35 P.S. §§ 691.1
through 691.702.
COLOR — Color of light transmitted through waste after removal of all
suspended matter, including pseudo-colloidal particles, and measured
in platinum-cobalt units.
COMBINED WASTE FORMULA — A procedure for calculating
discharge concentrations of constituents of industrial waste, as defined
in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
COMPLIANCE — Adherence to conditions or requirements of this
article or the industrial pretreatment program, any written directions
issued by the City or any wastewater discharge permit or other permit
issued under the provisions of this article.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A sample composed of individual subsamples
taken at regular intervals over a specified period of time. Subsamples
may be proportioned by time interval or size according to flow (flowproportioned
composite sample) or be of equal size and taken at equal
time intervals (equal-time composite samples).
§ 328-63 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-63
1:288
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The City.
COOLING WATER — The water from any use such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
DAILY MAXIMUM — The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for
a pollutant collected during a calendar day.
DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT — The maximum allowable discharge limit
of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits
are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass
discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits
are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the
arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived
from all measurements taken that day.
DISCHARGE — The conveyance of any water or wastewater into the
sewer system, direct or indirect.
DOMESTIC WASTE — Normal household wastes from kitchens, water
closets, lavatories and laundries, or any waste form a similar source and
possessing the same characteristics.
ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN — A plan and guide developed
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.8(f)(5) providing for the enforcement of the
industrial pretreatment program.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional
Water Management Division Director, the Regional Administrator, or
other duly authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge that is not a new source.
GARBAGE — Solid or semisolid wastes resulting from preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food and from handling storage and sale of
produce.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample that is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.
GROUNDWATER — Water which is contained in or passing through the
ground.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuumpump
tank trucks.
INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT PROGRAM — The sum of the provisions
of this article, amendments thereto and any regulations or activities by
this article as regards the regulation and control of industrial users.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any person who discharges industrial waste into
the sewer system.
§ 328-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-63
1:289
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form
of energy, which is produced as a result, whether directly or indirectly,
of any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or activity,
or in the course of developing, recovering or processing of natural
resources, but not sanitary sewage.
INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT — The maximum concentration of a pollutant
allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis
of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the
industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the
POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes,
use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the City's
NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions
or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local
regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act,
including Title II, commonly referred to as the "Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act" (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid
Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act;128 the Toxic Substances Control
Act,129 and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
LOCAL LIMIT — Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by
the City upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the
general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1)
and (b).
MANHOLE — A structure allowing access from the surface of the
ground to a sewer.
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts,
contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated
laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
MONTHLY AVERAGE — The sum of all daily discharges measured
during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges
measured during that month.
MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT — The highest allowable average of daily
discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily
discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number
of daily discharges measured during that month.
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is
(or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
(1)
128. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq.
129. Editor's Note: See 15 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.
§ 328-63 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-63
1:290
NONCOMPLIANCE — Not in compliance.
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable
to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located;
(a)
The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge
of pollutants at an existing source; or
(b)
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent,
factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as
the existing source, should be considered.
(c)
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting
the criteria of Subsection (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters,
replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
(2)
Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program;
Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment;
[1]
Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly,
or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
[2]
(a)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase
or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and
design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this subsection.
(b)
(3)
§ 328-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-63
1:291
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling that does
not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate
product, waste product, or finished product.
OPERATOR — Any person having charge, care, control or management
of a pretreatment facility for industrial wastes or of a truck used in the
removal, transport or disposal of sewage or industrial wastes.130
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole
or partial, of an improved property.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the City's NPDES permit,
including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal
representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal,
state, and local governmental entities.
pH — A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
POLLUTANT — Any substance, including but not limited to, dredged
spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial
wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
POLLUTION — The contamination of any waters of the state such as
will create or is likely to create a nuisance or to render such waters
harmful, detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare,
or to domestic, municipal, commercial, industrial, agricultural,
recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild
animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life; or contamination of air, soil,
or of the environment so as to produce or is likely to produce similar
deleterious effects.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such
pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained
by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or
by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants
unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
130. Editor's Note: The original definition of "ordinance," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 328-63 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-63
1:292
PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR — Agent of the City designated to
administer the provisions of the industrial pretreatment program.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS — Prohibited discharge
standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any wastewater resulting from the direct
contact of water with any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, by-product or waste during any manufacturing process, or
water other than cooling water which results from a manufacturing
process.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED
DISCHARGES — Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances; these prohibitions appear in § 328-64 of this article.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW — A treatment
works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which
is owned by the City. This definition includes any devices or systems
used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation
of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances,
which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
QUALIFIED ANALYST — Any person who has demonstrated
competency in the analysis of wastewater by submission of their
general recognized documentation of competency to the City, or who
is normally employed in the capacity of an analyst by a professional
analytical laboratory.
REFRIGERATION — Maintenance of temperature for storage,
preservation of food or as a process of manufacturing.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried domestic wastes from
any improved property, but excluding effluent from septic tanks or
cesspools; rain, snow or stormwater; groundwater; or other collected
water from roofs, drains or basements.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer carrying only sanitary sewage or
industrial wastes and to which storm, surface or ground waters are not
intentionally admitted.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE — Any sewage from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
SEWAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM — All facilities of the City or any
municipality party to a service agreement with the City, as of any
particular time, used or usable for collecting, transporting, pumping
and disposing of wastewater, which facilities are connected to and
served by the sewage treatment plant.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the sewer system
owned by the Lock Haven City Authority and operated by the City,
§ 328-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-63
1:293
which is designed to provide treatment of wastewater and discharge of
treated effluent to the environment.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for conveying wastewater.
SEWER SYSTEM — The sewage collection system, sewage treatment
plant and any sewers that convey wastewater to the sewage treatment
plant. For the purposes of this article, "sewer system" shall also include
any sewers that convey wastewater to the sewage treatment plant from
persons who are, by contract or agreement with the City, users of the
sewer system.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU) —
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — A noncompliance which meets or
exceeds standards of significant noncompliance determined by the City
and contained in § 328-69 of this article.
SIGNIFICANT VIOLATOR — Any industrial user in significant
noncompliance.
SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE — Any discharge at a flow rate
or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited
discharge standards in § 328-64 of this article. A slug discharge is any
discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited
to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has
a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass-through, or in
any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit
conditions.
SPCC PLAN — Spill prevention, control and countermeasure plan
prepared by an industrial user to minimize the likelihood and intensity
of a slug load or spill and to expedite control and cleanup activities
should a slug, load or spill occur.
SPILL — Any discharge or pollutants resulting from the spilling,
overflowing, rupture or leakage of any storage, process or transfer
An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards;
or
(1)
An industrial user that:
Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact
cooling and boiler blow-down wastewater);
(a)
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity
of the POTW treatment plant; or
(b)
Is designated as such by the City on the basis that it has
a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.
(c)
(2)
§ 328-63 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-63
1:294
container, or the control or cleanup activities associated with such an
occurrence.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual," issued
by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and
Budget, 1972.
STANDARD METHODS — The latest edition of "Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the Water
Pollution Control Federation (Water Environment Federation), the
American Public Health Association and the American Waterworks
Association.
STATE — Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated by the City to supervise
the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this article. The term also means a duly authorized
representative of the Superintendent.
TOTAL ORGANIC MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan submitted in lieu
of testing for total toxic organics in which an industrial user specifies
methods of control to assure that total toxic organics do not routinely
enter the sewer system.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS or SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total
suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in,
water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory
filtering.
TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS — The sum of all quantifiable values of
various organic pollutants as determined by the City or, for certain
categorical industrial users, as defined in the applicable categorical
standard.
TOXIC POLLUTANTS — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants
listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of § 307(a) of the
Act, or other acts, or is present in sufficient quantity, either singly or
in combination with other wastewater, so as to present risk of causing
interference or pass-through, causing harm to humans, animals or
plants or creating a hazard to persons or property, either in the sewage
collection system, the sewage treatment plant or the environment into
which it is released.
UNAUTHORIZED DISCHARGE — Discharge of an unauthorized waste,
or a discharge which otherwise is not in compliance with the
requirements of the industrial pretreatment program or other rules or
regulations of the City.
§ 328-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-63
1:295
§ 328-64. Prohibited wastes, discharges, pollutant limitations and
standards.
UNAUTHORIZED WASTE — Any substance which discharged into the
sewage collection system which is not in compliance with provisions of
the industrial pretreatment program or which is discharged by a person
in violation of any of the provisions of this article.
USER — Any person, who contributes, causes or permits the discharge
of wastewater into the sewer system.
WASTEWATER — Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and
sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial
and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or
untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — As set forth in § 328-67 of this
article.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT — That
portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of
municipal sewage and industrial waste.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All steams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourse, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or
any portion thereof.
A. General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all Users of the
POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment
standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards
or requirements.
B. Discharge of stormwaters. No person shall discharge or cause or permit
to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof
water, subsurface drainage or building foundation drainage into any
sanitary sewer.
C. Specific prohibitions.
(1) No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the
operation or performance of the sewer system. These prohibitions
apply to all users, whether or not the users are subject to
categorical standards or any other pretreatment requirement. No
user may discharge any of the following substances to the sewer
system:
(a) Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by
§ 328-63 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-64
1:296
interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or
be injurious in any other way to the sewer system or to the
operation of the sewer system. At no time shall two successive
readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of
discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be
more than 5%, nor any single reading over 10 of the lower limit
(LEL) of the meter. At no time shall the closed cup flashpoint of
the wastewater be less than 140° F. (60° C.) using the methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21. Prohibited materials include, but
are not limited to, the following substances in concentrations
which cause exceedance of the above standard: gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, benzene, others, alcohols, peroxides,
chlorates, perchlorates, bromates and carbides.
(b) Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 10, or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of
causing structural damage to the POTW, its equipment or
personnel.
(c) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
sewer system, such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with
particles greater than 1 1/2 inches in any dimension, animal
guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or flashings,
entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent
lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass
clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood,
plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or
processing of fuel or lubricating oils, mud or glass grinding or
polishing wastes.
(d) Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD,
etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with the sewage treatment
plant or interfere with the operation of the sewer system. In no
case shall a slug load be discharged.
(e) Wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in
no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104° F. (40° C.).
(f) Any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or
pass-through, but in no case exceeding 20 mg/l.
(g) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors,
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.
§ 328-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-64
1:297
(h) Any trucked or hauled wastewater or pollutants, except an
discharge points designated by the City in accordance with
Subsection N of this section.
(i) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to
life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for
maintenance or repair.
(j) Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by
the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts
color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the
City's NPDES permit.
(k) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes
of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the City or applicable state or federal
regulations.
(l) Any substance which may cause the sewage treatment plant's
effluent or any other product of the sewage plant such as
residues, sludges, or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation
and reuse, or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no
case shall a substance discharge to the sewer system cause the
sewage treatment plant to be in noncompliance with sludge
use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting
sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control
Act or state criteria applicable to the sludge management
method being used.
(m) Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
City in an individual wastewater discharge permit.
(n) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other constituents
of the wastewater, to injure or interfere with any wastewater
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals,
create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant or to exceed the limitation set forth in an
applicable categorical standard.
(o) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which
that night cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
(p) Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 100 mg/l.
(q) Any wastewater containing any compounds or salts of aldrin,
dieldrin, endrin, lindane, methoxychlor, toxaphenc,
§ 328-64 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-64
1:298
dichlorophenoxyacetic acid, trichlorophenoxyproprionic acid
or other persistent herbicides, pesticides or rodenticides.
(r) Any wastewater which is incompatible with treatment
processes in use at the sewage treatment plant so as to cause
interference or pass-through.
(s) Any substance which will cause City to violate its NPDES and/
or state water quality management permit or applicable
receiving water quality standards.
(2) Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section
shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could
be discharged to the POTW.
D. Unauthorized discharges. Discharge of any prohibited substance listed
under Subsection C of this section shall be considered an unauthorized
discharge and the City may take whatever steps are necessary to halt
such a discharge, as set forth in § 328-69 of this article.
E. National categorical pretreatment standards. If the categorical
standards for a particular industrial user are more stringent than local
limits or other requirements imposed under this article, then the users
must comply with the categorical pretreatment standards found at 40
CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471. The City shall
notify in writing all affected industrial users of the applicable reporting
requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. The national categorical
pretreatment standards are hereby incorporated into the industrial
pretreatment program as program requirements for those industrial
users subject to such categorical standards.
(1) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in
wastewater, the City may impose equivalent concentration or mass
limits in accordance with Subsection E(4) and (5) of this section
[see 40 CFR 403.6(c)].
(2) When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are
expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production,
the City may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed
either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent
concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations
applicable to individual industrial users [see 40 CFR 403.6(c)(2)].
(3) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
City shall impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR
403.6(e).
(4) The City may convert the mass limits of the categorical
pretreatment standards of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419, and 455 to
concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations
§ 328-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-64
1:299
applicable to individual industrial users. The conversion is at the
discretion of the City.
(5) Once included in its permit, the industrial user must comply with
the equivalent limitations developed in this section in lieu of the
promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent
limitations were derived [see 40 CFR 403.6(c)(7)].
(6) Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for
calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit
for calculating maximum monthly average, or four-day average,
limitations. Where such standards are being applied, the same
production or flow figure shall be used in calculating both the
average and the maximum equivalent limitation [see 40 CFR
403.6(c)(8)].
(7) Any industrial user operating under a permit incorporating
equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a
production-based standard shall notify the Superintendent within
two business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know
that the production level will significantly change within the next
calendar month. Any user not notifying the Superintendent of such
anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or
concentration limits in its permit that were based on the original
estimate of the long-term average production rate [see 40 CFR
403.6(c)(9)].
F. Removal credits. Where the sewage treatment plant achieves
consistent removal of pollutants limited by categorical standards, the
City may apply to the approval authority for modifications of specific
limits in the categorical standards if the requirements contained in 40
CFR 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority
is obtained. Any such action shall be at the sole discretion of the City.
G. State pretreatment standards. State requirements and limitations on
discharge shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than
national requirements and limitations or those established under this
article.
H. Local limits.
(1) The City Council shall establish, review and amend from time to
time, local limits which control or limit the discharge or specific
pollutants by industrial users.
(a) The City is authorized to establish local limits pursuant in 40
CFR 403.5(c).
(b) Local limits may be established for any substance which is
discharged, or likely to be discharged, to the sewer system to
protect against pass-through and interference; the discharge
of toxic materials in toxic amounts; threats to worker health
§ 328-64 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-64
1:300
and safety; and physical, chemical or biological damage to the
sewer system.
(c) Local limits may limit concentration, mass or a combination of
the two.
(d) Local limits shall be applied to all significant industrial users
and shall be included in all wastewater discharge permits.
Local limits may be applied to other industrial users if deemed
appropriate by the City.
(e) Discharging any pollutant in excess of a local limit established
for that pollutant shall constitute an unauthorized discharge.
Such discharge is subject to the actions and penalties set forth
herein.
(f) The local limits are established as follows: [Added 7-2-2018
by Ord. No. 993]
Pollutant
Daily Maximum
Local Limit
(mg/l) Allocation Method
Arsenic 0.020 Sludge
Cadmium 0.096 Sludge
Chromium (T) 5.500 Inhibition
Copper 2.000 Sludge
Cyanide 1.000 Water quality
Lead 0.530 Sludge
Mercury 0.014 Water quality
Nickel 1.000 Sludge
Silver 1.500 Water quality
Zinc 0.950 Inhibition
Ammonia
(NH3-N)
81.000 Design
Oil and
grease
100.000 Design
Phenols 2.000 Inhibition
(2) The City has developed technology-based local limits which are
specifically set forth in each wastewater discharge permit. These
local limits are incorporated herein by reference, as if set forth at
length.
I. The City's right of revision. The City reserves the right to establish, by
ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits, more
§ 328-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-64
1:301
stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW
consistent with the purpose of this article.
J. Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process wastewater, or
in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a
discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable
pretreatment standard or requirement. The City may impose mass
limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
K. Slug loads and spills. Each industrial user shall provide protection from
spills resulting in prohibited discharges and slug load discharges.
Facilities to prevent spills and slug loads shall be provided and
maintained at the owner or industrial user's own cost and expense. The
City shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge/
slug discharge control plan or other action to control slug discharges.
The City may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and
implement such a plan or take such other action that may be necessary
to control slug discharges. Alternatively, the Superintendent may
develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug
discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
(1) SPCC plans. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating
procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the City
for review and shall be approved by the City before construction of
the facility. All existing industrial users shall complete a spill
prevention control and countermeasures (SPCC) plan or provide
evidence that such a plan is not necessary for their facility. No
industrial user who commences discharge to the sewer system
after the effective date of this article shall be permitted to
introduce pollutants into the sewer system until this requirement
has been fulfilled. Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the
responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of the industrial pretreatment program. In the case of
a spill, it is the responsibility of the industrial user to immediately
telephone and notify the City of the incident. The notification shall
include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume, corrective actions being taken or planned and expected
duration.
(2) Written notice. Within five days following a spill, slug load or other
accidental discharge, the industrial user shall submit to the City a
detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and
the measures to be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar
future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the
industrial user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which
may be incurred as a result of damage to the sewer system, fish kill,
or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such
§ 328-64 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-64
1:302
notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties
or other liability which may be imposed by this article or applicable
law.
(3) Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising
employees whom to call in the event of a spill or other accidental
discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees who may
cause or suffer such a discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
(4) Description of stored chemicals.
(5) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants,
including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(6) SIU immediate notification to the City. Significant industrial users
are required to notify the City/Superintendent immediately of any
changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge.
L. Notification requirements; hazardous wastes and hazardous
substances.
(1) All industrial users shall notify the City, the EPA Regional Waste
Management Division Director and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, in writing, of any discharge into the
POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be
hazardous waste under 40 CFR, Part 261. Such notification shall
include the name of the hazardous waste, as set forth in 40 CFR,
Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number and the type of
discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the industrial user
discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar
month, the notification shall also include the following information,
to the extent that it is known and readily available to the industrial
user:
(a) An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
waste.
(b) An estimate of the mass and concentration in the wastewater
of all such constituents discharged in the most recent month.
(c) An estimate of the mass and concentration of such constituents
expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
§ 328-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-64
1:303
(2) Industrial users that commence discharge after the effective date
of this article shall submit the report within 180 days of first
discharge of the hazardous waste, except as provided in Subsection
L(4).
(3) The required report need be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharge. Industrial users regulated under
categorical standards which have already submitted such
information in baseline monitoring reports or periodic compliance
reports do not have to report this information again.
(4) Industrial users that discharge less than 15 kilograms of hazardous
wastes in a calendar month do not have to comply with these
reporting requirements. This exemption does not apply to acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).
(5) An industrial user shall notify the City within five days of becoming
aware of any discharges of reportable quantities of listed or
unlisted hazardous substances, as defined at 40 CFR 302.4
(CERCLA hazardous substances). This notification shall include the
time of release; the name of the substance; the identifying CAS
number, if known; and the approximate quantity discharge. If the
discharge constitutes a spill, change in wastewater constituents or
slug load, other reporting requirements of the industrial
pretreatment program may also apply.
(6) Each notification required by this section shall include a statement
certifying that the industrial user has a program in place to reduce
the volume and/or toxicity of the discharge wastes to the extent
that it is economically practical. This statement shall be designed
by the authorized representative of the industrial user.
M. Drainage of water filtration systems. Discharge of filter backwash to the
sewer system shall be regulated as follows:
(1) Granular media filter backwash water may be discharged to the
sewer system, subject to all of the applicable provisions of this
article.
(2) Diatomaceous earth filter backwash, if discharged to the sewer
system, shall be connected to the sewer system through tanks with
no less than three months storage capacity of spent diatomaceous
earth, which tanks shall be accessible for removing solid waste for
disposal.
N. Trucked and hauled wastes.
(1) Trucked or hauled waste may be introduced into the POTW only at
locations designated by the City, and at such times as are
established by the Superintendent. Such waste shall not violate
Subsections A through N of this section or any other requirements
established by the City.
§ 328-64 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-64
1:304
(2) The City may require haulers of industrial waste to obtain
individual wastewater discharge permits. The City may require
generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain individual
wastewater discharge permits. The City also may prohibit the
disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled
industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this article.
(3) Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the City or Superintendent. No load may be
discharged without prior consent of the Superintendent. The
Superintendent may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure
compliance with applicable standards. The City may require the
industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior
to discharge.
(4) Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for
every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and
address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck
identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and
volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the
type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and
whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
O. Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions.
(1) If another municipality, or user located within another municipality,
contributes wastewater to the POTW, the City shall enter into an
intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality.
(2) Prior to entering into an agreement required by Subsection O(1)
above, the City shall request the following information from the
contributing municipality:
(a) A description of the quality and volume of wastewater
discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality;
(b) An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
(c) Such other information as the City may deem necessary.
(3) An intermunicipal agreement, as required by Subsection O(1)
above, shall contain the following conditions:
(a) A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a
sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this
article and local limits, including required baseline monitoring
reports (BMPs) which are at least as stringent as those set out
in § 328-68 of this article. The requirement shall specify that
such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to
reflect changes made to the City's ordinance or local limits.
§ 328-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-64
1:305
§ 328-65. Pretreatment of wastewater.
(b) A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a
revised user inventory on at least an annual basis.
(c) A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including individual wastewater discharge permit
issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be
conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these
activities will be conducted by the City; and which of these
activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing
municipality and the City.
(d) A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
City with access to all information that the contributing
municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities.
(e) Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to
the POTW.
(f) Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge.
(g) A provision ensuring the City access to the facilities of users
located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional
boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any
other duties deemed necessary by the City.
(h) A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the
terms of the intermunicipal agreement.
A. Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as
necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with
all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the
prohibitions set out in § 328-64 of this article within the time limitations
specified by EPA, the state, or the City, whichever is more stringent. Any
facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and
maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such
facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the City for
review, and shall be acceptable to the Superintendent before such
facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating
procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge
acceptable to the City under the provisions of this article.
B. Additional pretreatment measures.
(1) Whenever deemed necessary, the City may require users to restrict
their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/
or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams
§ 328-64 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-65
1:306
§ 328-66. Fees.
from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may
be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's
compliance with the requirements of this article.
(2) The City may require any person discharging into the POTW to
install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a
suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of
flow. An individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued
solely for flow equalization.
C. Grease and sand traps. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be
provided when, in the opinion of the City, they are necessary for the
proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease
and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the City, and shall be so located to be easily accessible for
clearing and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned,
and repaired, if deemed necessary by the City, by the user at their
expense.
D. Garbage grinders. The use of mechanical garbage grinders producing a
finely divided mass, properly flushed with an ample amount of water,
shall be permitted, upon the condition that no such mechanical grinder
used for commercial business purposes shall be installed until
permission for such use has been obtained from the City.
E. Flammable substances. Users with the potential to discharge
flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an
approved combustible gas detection meter.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of
costs from industrial users of the sewer system for the implementation
of the industrial pretreatment program established herein. The
applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the City's schedule of
charges and fees.
B. Fees that may be charged.
(1) The City may adopt charges and fees which may include:
(a) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating
the industrial pretreatment program.
(b) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures.
(c) Fees for reviewing accidental discharges procedures and
construction.
(d) Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications.
(e) Fees for filing appeals.
§ 328-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-66
1:307
§ 328-67. Permits and reports for industrial waste discharges.
(f) Fees for consistent removal (by the sewage treatment plant) of
pollutants otherwise subject to categorical standards.
(g) Other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
(2) These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and
are separate from all other fees chargeable by the City.
A. Wastewater analysis. When requested by the Superintendent, a user
must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its
wastewater within five days of the request. The Superintendent is
authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically
require users to update this information.
B. Individual wastewater discharge permit requirement. Discharge of any
industrial waste to the sewer system without a wastewater discharge
permit, except as authorized by the City in accordance with the
provisions of this article, is an unauthorized discharge and subject to
the penalties provided herein. Each industrial user has an obligation to
make reasonable efforts to determine if it is a significant industrial user
and therefore subject to the permitting requirements of Subsection C of
this section.
C. Significant industrial user. All significant industrial users proposing to
discharge wastewater into the POTW shall first obtaining an individual
wastewater discharge permit from the City, except that a significant
industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to
Subsection F of this section may continue to discharge for the time
period specified therein.
D. Other industrial users. Industrial users which are not significant
industrial users do not require a wastewater discharge permit, but are
required to comply with all other provisions of this article. If an
industrial user makes changes to processes, flow, wastewater
concentration, wastewater characteristics or other changes which
result in the industrial user meeting the definition of significant
industrial user, the industrial user shall, immediately upon becoming
aware that such a change has occurred or 90 days prior to such change
if it is planned, notify the City and apply for a wastewater discharge
permit. The City may require other users to obtain individual
wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of
this article.
E. Permit violations. Any violation of the terms and conditions of an
individual wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of
this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the
sanctions set out in § 328-69 of this article. Obtaining an individual
wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its
§ 328-66 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-67
1:308
obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards
or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and
local law.
F. Individual wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections. Any
user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who
was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of
this article and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future,
shall, within 90 days after said date, apply to the City or an individual
wastewater discharge permit in accordance with Subsection H of this
section, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to
continue after 180 days of the effective date of this article except in
accordance with an individual wastewater discharge permit issued by
the City.
G. Individual wastewater discharge permitting; new connections. Any user
required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who
proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must
obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such
discharge. An application for this individual wastewater discharge
permit, in accordance with Subsection H of this section, must be filed at
least 90 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or
recommence.
H. Individual wastewater discharge permit application contents.
(1) All users required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge
permit must submit a permit application in the form prescribed by
the City and accompanied by the fee prescribed in the City's
schedule of fees. The City may require users to submit all or some
of the following information as part of a permit application:
(a) The name and address of the facility (or location, if different
than the address), including the name of the operator and
owner.
(b) Contact information, including the telephone and fax numbers
of the personal responsible for the operation of the facility.
(c) SIC number or numbers according to the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as
amended.
(d) Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility.
(e) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be
discharged.
(f) Time and duration of wastewater discharges.
§ 328-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-67
1:309
(g) Wastewater constituents and characteristics as required by the
City, as determined by a qualified analyst.
[1] Sampling and analyses shall be performed in accordance
with procedure established by the EPA pursuant to Section
304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as
amended.
[2] Sample results shall be accompanied by a signed
statement of the authorized representative that the
samples analyzed are representative of the normal
discharge during the routine operation of the discharging
facility.
(h) A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
including each product produced by type, amount, processes,
and rate of production, and standard industrial classifications
of the operation(s) carried out by such user.
(i) Types of wastes generated, and a list or all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could
accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW.
(j) Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and
proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment facility.
(k) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by
size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge.
(l) The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit.
(m) The measured average daily and thirty-minute peak
wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal
variation in gallons, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the
combined waste stream formula set out in § 328-64E(3) [40
CFR 403.6(e)].
(n) The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by any City, state, or national
pretreatment requirements (including local limits) or
categorical standards, and a statement regarding whether or
not the categorical standard or pretreatment requirements are
being met on a consistent basis and, if not, how the industrial
user proposes to meet the pretreatment standards and
requirements, including whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required for the industrial user to meet the applicable
standard. If the applicant is a categorical industrial user, this
statement shall be signed by a certified professional.
§ 328-67 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-67
1:310
(o) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to
meet categorical standards or other pretreatment
requirements (including local limits), the shortest schedule by
which the industrial user will provide such additional
pretreatment shall be developed and submitted. The
completion date of this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for any applicable categorical
standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
[1] The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to
meet the applicable categorical standards or other
pretreatment requirements (e.g., hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contract for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction, etc.).
[2] No increment referred to in Subsection H(1)(o)[1] shall
exceed nine months.
[3] Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule
and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall
submit a progress report to the City, including, as a
minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment
of the progress to be met on such date and, it not, the date
on which it expects to comply with this increment of
progress, the reason for delay and the steps being taken by
the industrial user to return the construction to the
schedule established. In no event shall more than nine
months elapse between such progress reports to the City.
(p) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process and any new categorically regulated
processes for existing sources.
(q) Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.
(r) Any other information as may be deemed by the City to be
necessary to evaluate the application.
(2) Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and
will be returned to the user for revision.
I. Application signatories and certifications. All wastewater discharge
permit applications, user reports and certification statements must be
signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the
certification statement in § 328-68C. If the designation of an authorized
representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or
position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or
§ 328-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-67
1:311
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new
written authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must
be submitted to the City prior to or together with any reports to be
signed by an authorized representative.
J. Individual wastewater discharge permit decisions. The City will
evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information. The City will then determine whether to issue an individual
wastewater discharge permit. The City may deny any application for an
individual wastewater discharge permit.
K. Confidentiality of applications.
(1) All information required by the City in the permit application shall
be provided by the industrial user to the best of its ability.
(2) If information regarding raw materials, processes, production rates
or other manufacturing information is regarded as confidential by
the industrial user, such information shall be marked "confidential"
on the application form.
(3) Confidentiality shall not apply to information regarding the flow of
or the constituents in the industrial wastewater discharge.
(4) Information accepted by the City as confidential shall be handled as
detailed in § 328-68N of this article.
L. Individual wastewater discharge permit duration. An individual
wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. An
individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less
than five years, at the discretion of the City. Each individual wastewater
discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
The industrial user shall apply for reissuance of the wastewater
discharge permit a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the
industrial user's existing wastewater discharge permit. The terms and
conditions of the wastewater discharge permit may be subject to
modification by the City during the term of the wastewater discharge
permit as limitations or requirements as indicated in § 328-64 are
modified or other just cause exists. The industrial user shall be
informed of any proposed changes in its wastewater discharge permit
at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or
new conditions in the wastewater discharge permit shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance.
M. Delayed permit renewal.
(1) If the industrial user has complied with the terms of the wastewater
discharge permit and this article, and has applied for renewal as
provided for in Subsection L of this section and the wastewater
discharge permit is not renewed on or before the expiration date
through no fault of the industrial user, then the existing wastewater
§ 328-67 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-67
1:312
discharge permit shall remain in effect until it is reissued or
rescinded by the City.
(2) If the wastewater discharge permit is not renewed because of a
failure of the industrial user to apply for renewal in a timely fashion
or through an act or omission of the industrial user, then discharge
of industrial waste by the industrial user without a wastewater
discharge permit is an unauthorized discharge and is subject to the
enforcement provisions of this article.
N. Appeal of wastewater discharge permits.
(1) Any industrial user that is issued a wastewater discharge permit
may appeal the permit conditions, in whole or in part. Appeal
procedures shall be set forth in § 328-69J of this article.
(2) During the process of appeal, the wastewater discharge permit
shall remain in effect and shall be enforced with the exception of
those conditions specified in writing in the appeal. Conditions
imposed by federal or state regulations (e.g., categorical
standards) shall not be waived. Conditions which, in the opinion of
the City, would set hazard or pose potential threat of pollution, if
waived, shall not be waived during an appeal.
O. Individual wastewater discharge permit contents. An individual
wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are
deemed reasonably necessary by the City to prevent pass-through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the
treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate
sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the
POTW.
(1) Individual wastewater discharge permits must contain:
(a) A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit
issuance date, expiration date and effective date.
(b) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the City in
accordance with Subsection P of this section, and provisions
for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the
existing wastewater discharge permit.
(c) Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards.
(d) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include
an identification of pollutants (or best management practice) to
be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and
sample type based on federal, state, and local law.
§ 328-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-67
1:313
(e) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not
extend the time for compliance beyond that required by
applicable federal, state, or local law.
(f) Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the
City to be necessary.
(2) Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user
charges and fees established by the City. Individual wastewater
discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the
following conditions:
(a) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time
of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization.
(b) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents
and characteristics, including local limits and/or categorical
standards, as applicable.
(c) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the
introduction of pollutants into the treatment works.
(d) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including
management practices necessary to adequately prevent
accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges such as
slug load as per § 328-64K.
(e) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans
to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW.
(f) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW.
(g) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities and equipment, including flow
measurement devices.
(h) A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of
responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and
state pretreatment standards, including those which become
effective during the term of the individual wastewater
discharge permit.
(i) List of prohibited discharges, as presented in § 328-64 of this
article.
§ 328-67 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-67
1:314
(j) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports, including the information to be contained and the
signatory requirement of these reports.
(k) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule.
(l) Requirements for maintaining and retaining records relating to
industrial waste and wastewater discharges and
characteristics as specified by the City and affording the City
access thereto.
(m) Requirements for installation and maintenance of
pretreatment facilities.
(n) Compliance schedules.
(o) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure
compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules,
and regulations.
P. Transferability of permits. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to
a specific industrial user for specific operation. A wastewater discharge
permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new person,
new industrial user, different premises or a new or changed operation
without the approval of the City. Any succeeding industrial user shall
also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing wastewater
discharge permit. The City may, at its discretion, deny the transfer of a
wastewater discharge permit and require application for a new
wastewater discharge permit under the provision of this section.
Q. Permit modification. The City may modify an individual wastewater
discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the
following reasons:
(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
(2) To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the
time of the individual wastewater discharge permit issuance.
(3) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.
(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the City's POTW, City personnel, or the receiving waters.
(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater
discharge permit.
§ 328-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-67
1:315
§ 328-68. Monitoring and inspection requirements.
(6) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required
reporting.
(7) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the individual
wastewater discharge permit.
(9) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator where requested in accordance with Subsection
P of this section.
R. Change in operations. Each user must notify the City of any significant
changes to the user's operations or system including manufacturing
processes, raw materials, auxiliary processes, pretreatment processes,
or other changes which might alter the nature, quality, volume of flow
rate of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change, of if
unplanned, immediately upon making the change. The report shall
include all information necessary to determine the effect on the
wastewater of the change.
(1) The City may require the user to submit such information as may be
deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the
submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
Subsection H of this section.
(2) The City may, on receipt of such a report:
(a) Continue an existing wastewater discharge permit in effect.
(b) Require application for a new wastewater discharge permit.
(c) Modify an existing wastewater discharge permit to reflect the
changed nature of the waste.
(d) Rescind and reissue an existing wastewater discharge permit
in order to make substantial changes in wastewater discharge
permit conditions.
(e) Revoke an existing wastewater discharge permit or require the
industrial user to cease or prevent the discharge.
(f) Take such action as it deems appropriate.
A. Baseline monitoring reports.
(1) As soon as possible following the promulgation of a categorical
standard, the wastewater discharge permit of industrial users
subject to such standards shall be revised, if necessary, to require
§ 328-67 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-68
1:316
compliance with such categorical standards within the time frame
prescribed by the categorical standard.
(2) Where an industrial user, subject to newly promulgated categorical
standard, has not previously submitted an application for a
wastewater discharge permit as required by § 328-67H, the
industrial user shall, within 180 days after the promulgation of the
applicable categorical standard:
(a) Apply for a wastewater discharge permit.
(b) Provide the baseline monitoring information required by 40
CFR 403.12(b). This information may be incorporated into the
application for a wastewater discharge permit.
(3) Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is
later, existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to
or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the City a
report which contains the information listed in Subsection A(4)
below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge,
new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the City a report which contains the
information listed in Subsection A(4) below. A new source shall
report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet
applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give
estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be
discharged.
(4) Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
(a) All information required in Subsection H of this section [see 40
CFR 403.12(b)(1)].
(b) Measurement of pollutants.
[1] The user shall provide the information required in
§ 328-67H(1)(g), (n), (p) and (q) of this article.
[2] The user shall take a minimum of one representative
sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the
requirements of this subsection.
[3] Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately
downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment
exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure
the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the
combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to
§ 328-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-68
1:317
evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards.
Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been
calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this
adjusted limit, along with supporting data, shall be
submitted to the Control Authority;
[4] Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance
with Subsections F and G of this section;
[5] The City may allow the submission of a baseline report
which utilizes only historical data so long as the data
provides information sufficient to determine the need for
industrial pretreatment measures;
[6] The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place
of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that
such sampling and analysis is representative of normal
work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the
POTW.
(c) Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's
authorized representative as defined in § 328-63B and certified
by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment
standards and requirements.
(d) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M
will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the
shortest schedule by which the user will provide such
additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must
meet the requirements set out in Subsection B of this section.
B. Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall
apply to the compliance schedule required by Subsection A(4)(d) of this
article.
(1) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required
for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such
events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for
major components, commencing and completing construction, and
beginning and conducting routine operation);
(2) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
§ 328-68 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-68
1:318
(3) The user shall submit a progress report to the City no later than 14
days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the
established schedule; and
(4) In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the City.
C. Signature and report certification: certification of permit applications,
user reports and initial monitoring waiver. The following certification
statement is required to be signed and submitted by users submitting
permit applications in accordance with § 328-67G and H; users
submitting baseline monitoring reports under Subsection A of this
section [see 40 CFR 403.12(1)]; users submitting reports on compliance
with the categorical pretreatment standard deadlines under Subsection
D of this section [see 40 CFR 403.12(d)]; users submitting periodic
compliance reports required by Subsection E of this section [see 40
CFR 403.12(e) and (h)]. The following certification statement must be
signed by an authorized representative as defined in § 328-63B:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather
and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is,
to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete.
I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations."
D. Categorical compliance report. Within 90 days following the date for
final compliance with applicable categorical standards or, in the case of
a new source, following commencement of the discharge of industrial
waste from processes regulated by categorical standards shall submit
to the City a report indicating the nature and concentration of all
pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are
limited by categorical standards and the average and maximum daily
flow for those process units in the industrial user's facility which are
limited by such categorical standards. The report shall certify that the
information contained therein concerning wastewater constituents and
flows is representative of discharges during normal work cycles. The
report shall also state whether the applicable categorical standards are
being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation
and management practices and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring
the industrial user into compliance with the applicable categorical
standards, and including a schedule for completion of the required
actions in the form described in Subsection B of this section.
§ 328-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-68
1:319
E. Periodic compliance reports.
(1) All significant industrial users must, at a frequency determined by
the City but no less than twice per year (June and December)
submit reports indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment
standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum
daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the
pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best
management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative,
the user must submit documentation required by the City or the
pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance
status of the user.
(2) For significant industrial users subject to categorical standards, if
discharge limits are based on mass units per production unit, then
production information regarding the regulated processes during
the reporting period shall be included in the report, along with flow
and concentration values, so that a determination of compliance or
noncompliance with categorical standards can be made.
(3) All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with Subsection C of this section.
(4) All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities
shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good
working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its
monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for
the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its
discharge.
(5) If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling
location more frequently than required by the City, using the
procedures prescribed in Subsection F of this section, the results of
this monitoring shall be included in the report [see 40 CFR
403.12(g)(6)].
F. Reporting and resampling of discharge limit violations.
(1) If, upon receipt of valid sampling and testing results, a significant
industrial user becomes aware that a violation of discharge limits
has occurred, the significant industrial user shall, within 24 hours
of becoming aware of the violation, notify the City of this fact.
Within 30 days of becoming aware of the violation, the significant
industrial user shall also sample and analyze its discharge(s) for
each parameter found to be in violation and report the results of
the re sampling and analysis to the City.
(2) Each significant industrial user shall have a duty, on receipt of
validly obtained sampling and analysis results of inspecting the
§ 328-68 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-68
1:320
results and determining if any wastewater discharge permit
condition has been violated. Failure to examine and compare
testing results with wastewater discharge permit conditions shall
not be a valid defense for failure to comply with these reporting
conditions.
G. Sampling and analysis.
(1) All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be
submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or
report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, unless
otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the
EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical
techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated
analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical
procedures, including procedures suggested by the City or other
parties approved by EPA.
(2) Monitoring results submitted to satisfy reporting requirements
must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and
analysis performed during the period covered by the report that is
representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.
(3) Except as indicated in Subsection G(4) and (5) below, the user must
collect wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flowproportional
composite sampling techniques, unless timeproportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by
the City. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab
sampling is authorized by the City, the samples must be
representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including
appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and
appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during
a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis
as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may
be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics
and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the
laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by
the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA
methodologies may be authorized by the City, as appropriate. In
addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with
instantaneous limits.
(4) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total
phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained
using grab collection techniques.
§ 328-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-68
1:321
(5) For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and
ninety-day compliance reports required in Subsections A and B [40
CFR 403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of four grab samples must be
used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and
volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical
sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical
sampling data are available, the City may authorize a lower
minimum. For the reports required by Subsection E [40 CFR
403.12(e) and 403.12(h)], the industrial user is required to collect
the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure
compliance by with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements.
H. Monitoring facilities.
(1) The City may require an industrial user to provide and operate, at
the industrial user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow
inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the wastewater or
industrial waste discharge. The monitoring facility should normally
be situated on the industrial user's premises, but the City may,
when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship
on the industrial user, allow the facility to be constructed in the
public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be
obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
(2) There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or
facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at
the expense of the industrial user.
(3) Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling
and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
City's requirements and all applicable local construction standards
and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days
following written notification by the City.
I. Individual wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A user with an
expiring individual wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
individual wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a
complete permit application, in accordance with § 328-67H of this
article, a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's
existing individual wastewater discharge permit.
J. Inspections. The City shall have the right to enter the premises of any
user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements
of this article and any individual wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder. Users shall allow the City ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
§ 328-68 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-68
1:322
(1) Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that
upon presentation of suitable identification, The Superintendent or
Pretreatment Coordinator shall be permitted to enter without delay
for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
(2) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the
Superintendent or Pretreatment Coordinator and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
user.
(3) Unreasonable delays in allowing the City access to the user's
premises shall be a violation of this article.
K. Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain an
individual wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate
reports to the Superintendent as the City may require.
L. Date of receipt of reports. Written reports will be deemed to have been
submitted on the date postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed,
postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal
Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern.
M. Recordkeeping.
(1) Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall
retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records
of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities
required by this article, any additional records of information
obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user
independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date,
exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the
person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed;
who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods
used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain
available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation
concerning the user or the City, or where the user has been
specifically notified of a longer retention period by the City.
(2) The City shall keep and maintain all records relating to the
administration and enforcement of the industrial pretreatment
program including, but not limited to, wastewater discharge permit
applications, investigations and calculations, wastewater discharge
permits, inspection reports, industrial user reports, sampling
results and enforcement activities for a minimum of three years. In
case of ongoing litigation, records shall be maintained as long as
they may be required.
§ 328-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-68
1:323
§ 328-69. Enforcement.
N. Confidentiality.
(1) Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, individual wastewater
discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the
Superintendent's inspection and sampling activities, shall be
available to the public without restriction, unless the user
specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the City, that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes, or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such
request must be asserted at the time of submission of the
information or data.
(2) When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report
that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall
not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be
made available immediately upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment
program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics
and other effluent data, as defined at 40 CFR 2.302, shall not be
recognized as confidential information and shall be available to the
public without restriction.
(3) The City shall maintain a secure place to store records containing
confidential information and shall insure that all records marked as
confidential are kept secure from casual or public scrutiny.
(4) When information accepted by the City as confidential is
transmitted to any government agency, a notification to the
industrial user shall be provided listing the confidential information
transmitted and the governmental entity requesting it.
A. Right to refuse. The City reserves the right to refuse to accept
wastewater, or combinations of wastewater, which are discharged in
violation of the terms or conditions of the industrial pretreatment
program or any written directions issued by the City pursuant to the
conditions of the industrial pretreatment program. The City may take
such steps as it deems necessary, as outlined in this article, to compel
discontinuance of use of the sewer system or pretreatment of industrial
wastes in order to comply with the provisions of the industrial
pretreatment program.
B. Individual wastewater discharge permit revocation.
(1) The City may revoke an individual wastewater discharge permit for
good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
§ 328-68 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-69
1:324
(a) Failure to notify the City of significant changes to the
wastewater or the operations prior to the changed discharge;
(b) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application;
(c) Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;
(d) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
(e) Refusing to allow the City timely access to the facility premises
and records;
(f) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(g) Failure to pay fines;
(h) Failure to pay sewer charges;
(i) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
(j) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
(k) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility;
(l) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article.
(2) Discharge of any industrial waste to the sewer system by a
significant industrial user without a wastewater discharge permit is
an unauthorized discharge, as provided in, and is subject to the
penalties provided herein.
(3) Any industrial user notified of a revocation of its wastewater
discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge.
In the event of a failure of the industrial user to comply voluntarily
with the notice of revocation, the discharge shall be considered an
unauthorized discharge and the City shall take such steps as
deemed necessary, which may include immediate severance of the
connection between the building sewer and the sewage collection
system, to prevent or minimize damage to the sewer system or
endangerment to the environment or any property or person.
(4) Individual wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon
cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All
individual wastewater discharge permits issued to a user are void
upon the issuance of a new individual wastewater discharge permit
that user.
C. Suspension of permit.
§ 328-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-69
1:325
(1) The City may suspend the wastewater discharge permit when such
suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the City, in order to stop
an actual or threatened discharge which presents an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to
the environment, causes interference or pass-through or causes the
City to violate any condition of its NPDES permit or any other
national or state law, rule, regulation or permit condition.
(2) Any industrial user notified of a suspension of its wastewater
discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge.
In the event of a failure of the industrial user to comply voluntarily
with the notice of suspension, the discharge shall be considered an
unauthorized discharge and the City shall take such steps as
deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the
connection between the building sewer and the sewage collection
system, to prevent or minimize damage to the sewer system or
endangerment to the environment or any property or person.
(3) If a permit has been suspended as a result of an unauthorized
discharge, which discharge resulted in or contributed to damages
to the sewer system or to any person or property, the permit shall
not be reinstated until such time as all such damages have been
satisfied.
(4) The City shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit upon
submission of proof by the industrial user of the elimination of the
unauthorized discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by
the industrial user describing the causes of the unauthorized
discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence shall be submitted to the City within 15 days of the date
of occurrence.
D. Notice of violation. Whenever the City finds that any industrial user has
violated or is violating this article, its wastewater discharge permit or
any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained herein, the City
may serve upon such industrial user a written notice stating the nature
of the violation and requiring a response within a specified time. Within
five days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation
and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to
include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the
City. Responses required of industrial users may include, but are not
limited to, actions, plans, compliance schedules or written
explanations. Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the user of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
Superintendent to take any action, including emergency actions or any
other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
E. Show cause hearing.
§ 328-69 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-69
1:326
(1) Any industrial user who causes or allows an unauthorized
discharge to enter the sewer system, or who violates any condition
or requirement of the industrial pretreatment program or its
wastewater discharge permit, may request to show cause before
the City Manager why the proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. A written notice shall be served on the industrial user
specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the City
Manager regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to
be taken, the proposed enforcement action and directing the
industrial user to show cause before the City Manager why the
proposed enforcement action should be taken. The notice of the
hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail
(return receipt requested) at least 10 days before the hearing.
Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation if the
industrial user is a corporation.
(2) The City Council may designate any of its members or any
representative to:
(a) Issue in the name of the City notices of hearings requesting the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing.
(b) Conduct the hearing.
(c) Take the evidence.
(d) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with
recommendations for action thereon.
(3) At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must
be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so
recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any
party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
(4) After the City Manager has reviewed the evidence, he shall, in
writing, direct the industrial user to take certain actions to correct
the unauthorized discharge or to achieve compliance. The actions
which may be directed include, but are not limited to:
(a) Installation of pretreatment facilities or equipment.
(b) Modification or additions to existing pretreatment facilities or
equipment.
(c) Initiation of management practices which are required to alter
the nature of the industrial waste being discharged.
(d) Development or implementation of SPCC plans or other
measures.
§ 328-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-69
1:327
(e) Other measures found to be necessary to correct the
unauthorized discharge or other noncompliance.
(f) The direction may be in form of a schedule for compliance,
setting dates by which certain actions shall be taken.
(5) Failure of an industrial user to comply with written directions
issued pursuant to a hearing constitutes a violation of this article.
F. Administrative orders. The City shall issue written directions as
described in Subsection E(4), above, without a show cause hearing if
the City determines that such directions are necessary to correct or
remedy continuing violations of this article or any wastewater
discharge permit or other requirements of the industrial pretreatment
program, the City or federal or state regulations.
G. Compliance orders. When the City finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may issue an order to
the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into
compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into
compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other
related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance
orders also may contain other requirements to address the
noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to
the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for
compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement,
nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any
violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
H. Cease-and-desist orders. When the City finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations
are likely to recur, the City shall issue an order to the user directing it to
cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including hauling operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease-and-desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
I. Consent orders. The City may enter into consent orders, assurances of
compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with
§ 328-69 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-69
1:328
any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include
specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance
within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall
have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued
pursuant to Subsections G and H of this section and shall be judicially
enforceable.
J. Right of appeal.
(1) An industrial user may appeal the enforcement actions enumerated
above in Subsections B, C, E, and F of this section; or wastewater
discharge permit conditions, in whole or in part. An appeal is
subject to the following requirements:
(a) The appeal must be made in writing to City Council.
(b) The appeal must be made within 30 calendar days from the
date of receipt of the wastewater discharge permit, written
directions or notice of denial, suspension, modification or
revocation of a wastewater discharge permit being appealed
by the industrial user.
(c) The appeal must state the specific provision(s) of a wastewater
discharge permit or the specific directions of the City which
are being contested.
(d) The appeal must state the reason for the appeal of each
provision.
(e) The appeal may suggest alternate or revised provisions to
replace those appealed.
(2) Provisions mandated by federal or state regulations (e.g.,
compliance with categorical standards) shall not be appealed.
(3) The appeal shall be reviewed by the City Manager.
(4) Within 30 days of receipt, the City Manager shall report, in writing,
to City Council the results of the review. The report shall contain, at
a minimum:
(a) A summary of each item appealed the appellant's reasons for
appeal and the appellant's proposed remedies, if any.
(b) The finding of merit for each point and the reason(s) for
finding.
(c) For each point found to be with merit, a proposed remedy and a
finding that the remedy is allowable under this article and all
applicable federal, state and local rules, regulations and laws.
(5) Review and decision.
§ 328-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-69
1:329
(a) City Council shall review the report and, at one or more
regular or special public meetings, take any additional
testimony offered by the appellant, reviewer, pretreatment
program coordinator or other interested party. City Council
shall, within 45 days of the conclusion of testimony, decide to:
[1] Grant the appeal or portions of the appeal, applying such
remedies as it deems proper.
[2] Deny the appeal.
(b) Such decision of City Council constitutes final administrative
action.
K. Publication of users in significant noncompliance. The City shall publish
annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides
meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the POTW, a
list of the users which, at any time during the previous 12 months, were
in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" shall be
applicable to all significant industrial users [or any other industrial user
that violates Subsections K(3) and (4) of this section] and shall mean:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the
same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed
(by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or
requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in
§ 328-63B;
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds
the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement
including instantaneous limits, as defined by § 328-63B, multiplied
by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease,
and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(3) Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by § 328-63B (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Superintendent
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass-through, including endangering
the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
(4) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted
in the Superintendent's exercise of his emergency authority to halt
or prevent such a discharge;
(5) Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater
§ 328-69 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-69
1:330
discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(6) Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
L. Records. The City shall maintain records of all enforcement actions
taken, the reasons for those actions and the results of those actions.
These records shall be made available to the public during normal City
business hours.
M. Civil actions. If any person violates the provisions of the industrial
pretreatment program, including local, national or state pretreatment
requirements, categorical standards or any wastewater discharge
permit or written directions issued by the City, the City may commence
an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Court of
Common Pleas of Clinton County or any other appropriate for
appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Court of Common Pleas
of Clinton County or any other appropriate forum.
(1) When the City finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the City may fine such user in an amount
not to exceed $1,000 and costs. Such fines shall be assessed on a
per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other longterm
average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day
during the period of violation. In default of payment of said fines
and costs, user will be subject to a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 30 days.
(2) In addition to the penalties provided herein, the City may recover
reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporters fees and
other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the
person found to have violated this article or the rules, regulations
and permits issued hereunder.
(3) Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for
the City to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine
amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request
has merit, the City may convene a hearing on the matter. In the
event the user's appeal is successful, the payment shall be returned
to the user. The City may add the costs of preparing administrative
enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
(4) Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
§ 328-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-69
1:331
§ 328-70. Supplemental enforcement action.
N. Injunctive relief. When the City finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may petition the
Clinton County Court of Common Pleas through the City's Attorney for
the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate,
which restrains or compels the specific performance of the individual
wastewater discharge permit, or other requirement imposed by this
article on activities of the user. The City may also seek such other action
as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a
requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A
petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against a user.
O. Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are
not exclusive. The City may take any, all, or any combination of these
actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment
violations will generally be in accordance with the City's enforcement
response plan. However, the City may take other action against any
user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the City is empowered
to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant
user.
A. Enforcement response plan. The City shall develop an enforcement
response plan to guide the pretreatment coordinator in the
administration of the industrial pretreatment program. The
enforcement response plan shall meet the requirements of 40 CFR
403.8(f)(5) regarding the contents of enforcement response plans. The
pretreatment coordinator shall be guided by the enforcement response
plan when reviewing industrial user reports, inspection results and
other compliance information, and when recommending to the City
enforcement action in response to noncompliance.
B. Payment of outstanding fees and penalties. The City may decline to
issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge permit to any user
who has failed to pay any outstanding fees, fines or penalties incurred
as a result of any provision of this article, a previous individual
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder.
C. Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to
violate any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will
recommence, at the user's expense, only after the user has
satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
D. Affirmative defenses to discharge violations.
(1) Upset.
§ 328-69 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-70
1:332
(a) For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards
because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user.
An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused
by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
(b) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment
standards if the requirements of Subsection D(1)(c), below, are
met.
(c) A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset
shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
[1] An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of
the upset;
[2] The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent
and workmanlike manner and in compliance with
applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and
[3] The user has submitted the following information to the
City within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset [if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must
be provided within five days]:
[a] A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
[b] The period of noncompliance, including exact dates
and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the
noncompliance is expected to continue; and
[c] Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the
noncompliance.
(d) In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish
the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
(e) Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on
any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
(f) Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical
pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its
treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative
method of treatment is provided. This requirements applies in
§ 328-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-70
1:333
the situation where, among other things, the primary source of
power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
(2) Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative
defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the general prohibitions in § 328-64A of this
article or the specific prohibitions in § 328-64C(1)(a) through (s) of
this article if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to
know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges
from other sources, would cause pass-through or interference and
that either:
(a) A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user
was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during,
the pass-through or interference; or
(b) No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior
discharge when the City was regularly in compliance with its
NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in
compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
(3) Bypass.
(a) For the purposes of this section:
[1] "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams
from any portion of a user's treatment facility.
[2] "Severe property damage" means substantial physical
damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities
which causes them to become inoperable or substantial
and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a
bypass. "Severe property damage" does not mean
economic loss caused by delays in production.
(b) A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but
only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient
operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of
Subsection D(3)(c) and (d) of this section.
(c) Bypass notifications.
[1] If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the City, at least 10 days before the
date of the bypass, if possible.
[2] A user shall submit oral notice to the City of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable
pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it
§ 328-70 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 328-70
1:334
becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
also be provided within five days of the time the user
becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall
contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the
duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times,
and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated
time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned
to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the
bypass. The City may waive the written report on a caseby-
case basis if the oral report has been received within 24
hours.
(d) Bypass is prohibited, and the City may take an enforcement
action against a user for a bypass, unless:
[1] Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage;
[2] There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as
the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of
untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods
of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if
adequate backup equipment should have been installed in
the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to
prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of
equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
[3] The user submitted notices as required under Subsection
D(3)(c) of this section.
(e) The City may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering
its adverse effects, if the City determines that it will meet the
three conditions listed in Subsection D(3)(d) of this section.
§ 328-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-70
1:335
Chapter 332
SIDEWALK CAFES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 170.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 212.
Mobile food vendors — See Ch. 284.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 346.
Zoning — See Ch. 410.
§ 332-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the "Sidewalk Cafe
Ordinance."
§ 332-2. Intent and purpose.
The intent of this chapter shall be to permit sidewalk cafes to operate
on public street rights-of-way and sidewalk areas within the City of Lock
Haven and to set requirements of this chapter except as otherwise provided
elsewhere in the Code of the City of Lock Haven. The Code Officer may
impose additional requirements to protect against health, safety or welfare
hazards related to sidewalk cafe operation and may modify requirements
for physical facilities when health, safety or welfare concerns may arise.
§ 332-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them by this section, unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
ABUTTING PROPERTY — Property contiguous to a street right-of-way on
which a sidewalk cafe will be operated under the terms of this chapter.
CITY ENGINEER — The City Engineer or his/her authorized representative.
CODE OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Lock Haven
or his/her authorized representative.
OWNER — Includes any owner of fee simple title, part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety of the whole of the land contiguous to the street right-of-way on
which a sidewalk cafe is to be operated under the authority of this chapter.
PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY — That portion of a sidewalk area which is free of
any obstruction, fixture or appurtenance and is used for pedestrian travel.
PERSON — Includes a partnership, corporation, association, trust, estate or
other legally recognized entity, as well as an individual.
§ 328-70 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 332-3
1:336
RESTAURANT — A food service facility where food is purchased and served
in individual portions for consumption on the premises. This term shall
not include an establishment which operates exclusively as a catering
establishment, a mobile food unit, a grocery store or a temporary food
service facility.
SIDEWALK AREA — That portion of the street right-of-ways reserved for
sidewalks.
SIDEWALK CAFE — An outdoor dining area operated by a restaurant
located on a public street right-of-way and/or sidewalk area and containing
removable tables, chairs, and related appurtenances, which is not located
on or does not encroach upon the pedestrian walkway as established under
the provisions of this chapter. It shall not be enclosed by fixed walls and
shall be open to the air, except that it may have a canopy.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY — The entire right-of-way of a public highway,
public alley or public road, including the designated sidewalk areas.
§ 332-4. License required.
A. It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, vend, operate, maintain, serve
or give away any item from a sidewalk cafe without a valid license
issued by the City Code Officer.
B. Application for a sidewalk cafe must be made in writing to the City Code
Office.
C. Licenses for sidewalk cafes shall only be available under the terms of
this chapter. The Code Officer shall have no authority to grant licenses
for sidewalk cafes for any reason except as prescribed and approved
hereunder.
D. All sidewalk cafes and attendant facilities shall be inspected and
approved by the Code Officer and shall meet any requirements of this
chapter, and the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture Bureau of
Food Safety prior to the issuance of a sidewalk cafe license.
E. It shall be permissible for sidewalk cafes to operate within the following
designated areas:
(1) Sidewalk areas encompassed within the boundaries of the Central
Business Zoning District.
(2) Such other public places as may be designated by resolution of City
Council.
F. Sidewalk cafes shall be licensed only when such are operated and
serviced by a sponsoring restaurant abutting the sidewalk cafe where
all food preparation, sanitation and related services for the sidewalk
cafe shall be performed. A license shall be valid for one year from the
date it is issued.
§ 332-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-4
1:337
§ 332-5. Application fees.
§ 332-6. Application requirements.
Each applicant for a license under this chapter shall submit three copies of
his or her application and plans for a sidewalk cafe to the Code Officer, who
shall issue a license after a finding that the applicant has complied with the
terms and conditions of this chapter. Applications for sidewalk cafe licenses
shall include the following:
G. Acceptance of a sidewalk cafe license is an express acknowledgment
and consent to the terms contained in this chapter and set by the Code
Officer. The grant and usage of such license is a privilege, not a right,
subject to reasonable restrictions as set out herein or as may be
promulgated by the Code Officer.
H. As an express condition of the acceptance of a license hereunder, the
recipient agrees to police for and remove all trash and debris an area
extending 15 feet in each direction from the outermost portion or
boundary of the sidewalk cafe at least daily.
A. There shall be an annual license fee for a sidewalk cafe.
B. Such license fee shall be fixed, from time to time, by resolution by
Council.
C. There shall be no prorating or rebating of license fees.
A. The name and street address of the applicant.
B. The name and street address of the owner of the sponsoring restaurant,
of the owner (if not the same person) and:
(1) A description of the owner, if other than a natural person, including
the legal status (corporation, partnership, etc.) and a general
description of the type(s) of business operated on the abutting
property.
(2) Written authority in the form of a power of attorney from the owner
to submit the application if the applicant is not the owner.
C. The name and street address of the registered agent for the service of
process, if the applicant or owner is a corporation; or the names and
street addresses of the officers or partners, if the applicant or owner is
an association, partnership or other entity.
D. The name and street address of the operator, manager or other person
responsible for the operation of the sidewalk cafe.
E. The name under which the sidewalk cafe will be operated.
F. The street address and the City food establishment license number of
the restaurant operating and servicing the sidewalk cafe.
§ 332-4 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 332-6
1:338
§ 332-7. Design standards.
All sidewalk cafes shall comply with the following standards:
G. A site plan drawn to a scale of 1/2 inch per one foot, showing:
(1) The entirety of the sidewalk area abutting the property of the
owner;
(2) The frontage of the property proposed for the sidewalk cafe;
(3) All abutting properties;
(4) All existing sidewalk area features, including but not limited to
trees, utility poles, utility access covers, utility grates or panels,
cellar doors, sign poles, fire hydrants, permanent litter receptacles,
telephone booths, news vending racks and mailboxes;
(5) Any bus stops or fire hydrants within 25 feet on either side of the
proposed sidewalk cafe; and
(6) Detailed drawings of legible proportions showing the limits of the
proposed sidewalk cafe site, the design dimension and proposed
location of all proposed temporary structures (i.e., canopies,
umbrellas, planters, landscaping, tables, chairs, all exterior
lighting, electrical outlets, etc.), the proposed pedestrian walkway
and the side and front elevations of the proposed sidewalk cafe.
H. The seating capacity of the proposed sidewalk cafe.
I. A copy or copies of the certificate or certificates of insurance required
to be provided by § 332-9A(2) of this chapter.
J. If the serving of alcoholic beverages is proposed, proof that the
applicant has a state liquor license that will allow or can be amended to
allow applicant to serve alcoholic beverages in the sidewalk cafe.
A. A sidewalk cafe shall have a pedestrian walkway with a clear
unobstructed width of four feet between the sidewalk cafe table and
chairs and any obstacle (tree, pole, post, sign, planting area, bus
shelter, etc., but not including flush-level obstacles such as utility
access covers or utility panels), and sidewalk cafes shall not eliminate a
minimum sixty-inch-by-sixty-inch passing space for all lengths of
sidewalk area greater than 200 feet in length. The pedestrian walkway
shall be provided with an unobstructed height of seven feet between the
ground plane and an overhead obstacle (tree branch, overhead sign,
awning, etc.).
B. No sidewalk cafe may be permanently located within the sidewalk area
by means of raised deck platform, fence, walls or other structures or
enclosed by fixed walls, except that sidewalk cafe boundaries may be
delineated using temporary barriers such as balustrades, cordons or
railings. Any such temporary barriers must be easily removed and be
§ 332-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-7
1:339
three feet or less in height above the sidewalk area. Under no
circumstances shall temporary barriers as authorized hereunder be
allowed in the pedestrian walkway, nor shall a temporary barrier be
affixed to the sidewalk area or to any permanent structure other than
the building associated with the application.
C. No sidewalk cafe shall be situated:
(1) Within six feet of any pedestrian crossing as defined in the Code of
the City of Lock Haven;
(2) Within five feet along the street line of any fire hydrant or other
fire-protection system;
(3) Within five feet of any driveway;
(4) Within four feet of any curbline;
(5) Within 10 feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus
stop;
(6) In a manner which restricts sight easements of vehicular traffic; or
(7) In a manner which obstructs traffic control devices or traffic signs.
D. All sidewalk cafes shall be open to the air.
E. Canopies and awnings may be permitted provided that they comply
with the specifications of Chapter 212, Construction Codes, Uniform,
and Chapter 410, Zoning, relating to height, placement, interference
with pedestrian passage and traffic sight easements.
F. Sidewalk cafes shall in no way obstruct the ingress to or the egress
from any building or business.
G. All sidewalk cafes and their attendant facilities or improvements shall
comply with clearances required for structures in relation to utility
lines as provided in Chapter 212, Construction Codes, Uniform.
H. No sidewalk cafe shall be located on the sidewalk area between a
building facade and a bus stop.
I. No portion of a sidewalk cafe or its facilities, appurtenances, planters,
shrubs, tables, chairs or other materials shall be permitted in the
pedestrian walkway as defined in this chapter.
J. Sidewalk cafes shall provide and maintain adequate lighting in and
around the pedestrian walkway to allow pedestrians to observe and
avoid obstructions.
K. Sidewalk cafes shall not obstruct access to hydrants, streetlights,
telephones, mailboxes, transit stops or any other public service facility
on the sidewalk area or street right-of-way.
§ 332-7 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 332-7
1:340
§ 332-8. Review of application.
§ 332-9. Conditions for issuance of license.
L. No signs shall be hung or attached to any portion of the sidewalk cafe,
except those signs that are in compliance with provisions of Chapter
410, Zoning.
A. Before any license is issued pursuant to this chapter, the plans
submitted to the Code Officer pursuant to this chapter shall be referred
to and approved by the City Engineer, Chief of Police, Fire Code Official,
and, if required under the City Code, Historic District Advisory
Committee (HDAC).
(1) Approval by the HDAC is required if the sidewalk cafe is located
within any area designated as part of an historic district and if the
applicant proposes any facilities which are under the jurisdiction of
the HDAC in the Code of the City of Lock Haven. The HDAC shall
use the review criteria for such plans relating to a sidewalk cafe's
specific location, size and structure, for its compatibility of scale,
design and alteration in the plans for a sidewalk cafe approved by
the HDAC requires a new approval from the HDAC. Once approval
is granted by the HDAC, absent a change in the plans or owner/
applicant, the plans are not required to be reapproved annually.
B. Before granting any license, the Code Officer shall ensure that the
applicant has:
(1) Obtained the approval of the City Engineer and Building Official for
any railing, flooring or other support or enclosure used in the
assembly, operation or enclosure of the sidewalk cafe. No such
railing, flooring or other support or enclosure shall be considered
an erection of, addition to or a structural alteration of a building or
structure unless such railing, flooring or other support or enclosure
is permanently attached to such building or structure.
(2) Obtained the approval of the Historic District Advisory Committee
(HDAC) if required.
(3) Complied with all rules, regulations and specifications of this
chapter.
C. The Code Officer may impose any other restriction on the location, size
or design of the sidewalk cafe that, in his/her sole judgment, protects
the health, safety and welfare of the public.
A. Upon approval by the Code Officer of the plans submitted by the
applicant and when the applicant has furnished to the City of Lock
Haven the following, the Code Officer shall issue a license, valid for one
year from the date it is issued:
§ 332-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-9
1:341
§ 332-10. License renewal.
Provided that the owner, applicant, liquor license status, nor plans have
changed from the previous year, a sidewalk cafe license may be renewed
annually without refiling of the documents set forth in § 332-6, upon
satisfactory review of the complaint and inspection history, if any, which
shall be provided by the Code Office, Police Department, Fire Department
and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture Bureau of
Food Safety, as well as renewed filing of current proof of insurance as set
forth in § 332-9A(2). Each agency shall provide to the Code Officer copies
of any inspection results, complaints filed and citations issued concerning
the sidewalk cafe under consideration. The renewal fee for a license shall
be set, from time to time, by resolution by Council.
§ 332-11. General requirements and prohibitions.
A sidewalk cafe authorized and operated pursuant to this chapter shall:
(1) A hold-harmless agreement executed by the applicant and
indemnifying the City against loss, including costs and expenses,
resulting from injury to person or property as a direct or indirect
result of the operation of the sidewalk cafe. The form of said holdharmless
agreement shall be subject to the approval of the City
Solicitor.
(2) Proof of general liability insurance in the amount of $100,000 per
individual and $300,000 per occurrence.
(3) If applicable, proof that the applicant has a state liquor license
authorizing him/her/it to serve alcoholic beverages in his/her/its
sidewalk cafe.
B. Sidewalk cafe licenses are not transferable. Changes in ownership/
operation require reapplication for a license.
A. Comply with all plans submitted to and approved by the Code Officer
under § 332-4.
B. Serve alcoholic beverages only in conformance with Pennsylvania
Liquor Control Board requirements.
C. Operate only during the same hours of business as the sponsoring
restaurant. All patrons must be vacated from the sidewalk cafe and all
utensils, containers or any other serving materials used in the operation
of the sidewalk cafe or within the area used by the sidewalk cafe shall
be removed from the sidewalk cafe area within one hour after closing;
provided, however, that any railing, flooring or other support or
enclosure used in the assembly, operation or enclosure of the sidewalk
cafe may be allowed to remain on the sidewalk area if specifically
permitted in the Code Officer's approval of the sidewalk cafe plans
under § 332-4 above.
§ 332-9 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 332-11
1:342
§ 332-12. Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages.
The area encompassed within a sidewalk cafe authorized pursuant to this
chapter, if duly licensed for sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages
by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board, shall not be subject to the open
containers prohibition of the Code of the City of Lock Haven for alcohol that
remains within the approved and licensed area.131
§ 332-13. Removal of improvements.
D. Remove all sidewalk cafe structures by November 15, and not install
prior to April 1, in any year for which a license is granted.
(1) If favorable weather conditions should prevail, a licensed sidewalk
cafe may temporarily reopen on a daily basis before April 1 or after
November 15 of any year for which a license is granted. All tables,
chairs, supports, enclosures, and other materials must be removed
from the sidewalk area every day within one hour after closing.
E. Use no food serving or food service equipment to hold, store, heat,
warm, cool, chill or otherwise keep food to be served outside of the
sponsoring restaurant for use in or by a sidewalk cafe.
F. Serve no food or beverages to a patron at a sidewalk cafe unless that
patron is seated at a table.
G. Comply with the City Code including, but not limited to, nuisance
elements as defined in Article XIX, General Regulations, of Chapter
410, Zoning, with respect to music in the sidewalk cafe, from whatever
source, and all noise.
H. Police for and remove all trash and debris an area extending 15 feet in
each direction from the outermost portion or boundary of the sidewalk
cafe at least daily.
I. Use only break-resistant dinnerware and glassware and serving
containers in the sidewalk cafe area.
J. Comply with all other provisions of the Code of the City of Lock Haven,
Clinton County, Pennsylvania.
A. The City reserves the right to remove any equipment or improvements
from a sidewalk cafe if an applicant or owner or licensee fails to
conform with the requirements of this chapter, including but not limited
to ceasing operations permitting any improvements to remain in the
sidewalk area outside, of the time period specified in § 332-11D of this
chapter, failing to renew a license, or revocation of a license.
B. If the City incurs any costs in removing any equipment or improvements
from a sidewalk cafe the actual costs, including but not limited to labor,
131. Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Alcoholic Beverages.
§ 332-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-13
1:343
§ 332-14. Written notice of violations; suspension of license.
Upon finding by the Code Officer that an applicant has violated any
provisions of this chapter, the Code Officer shall give 10 days' written notice
to the applicant and the owner to correct said operational violation. Upon
failure to correct said operational violation within 10 days, the Code Officer
may take appropriate action, as necessary, to maintain the pedestrian
walkway, including but not limited to the remedies set forth in § 332-13,
as well as revocation of the applicant's license. If the licensee requests,
in writing, a hearing prior to the expiration of the notice period, the City
Manager shall hold a hearing to determine if the license should be revoked.
The licensee may present evidence in his/her/its own behalf if so desired.
The City Manager's decision regarding revocation may be appealed to the
City Council within 10 days of its issuance. If the licensee fails to request
such a hearing, the revocation shall become effective upon the expiration
of the ten-day notice period. If a license granted under this section is
revoked, all tables, chairs and other appurtenances used as a part of the
sidewalk cafe shall be immediately removed from the sidewalk, and the
costs of removing and/or disposing of same shall be a lien upon the abutting
property. Any person whose license is revoked under this section is further
prohibited from applying for another license for one full year after a license
is revoked under this section. This provision is independent of, and shall not
be construed to limit, the City's remedies in § 332-15 of this chapter.
§ 332-15. Violations and penalties; effect on eligibility for license.
materials, equipment or any other item, service or expense incurred
by the City to correct such violation, including attorney's fees and
administrative fee, the owner and the applicant shall be jointly and
severally liable for such costs. Upon failure of an owner to pay the
amounts due the City, the City shall be entitled to collect all amounts
including attorney's fees and pursue any or all the remedies available at
law or in equity, from the owner, the applicant, or both, at its election.
A. Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding, be fined not less than $50 and not
more than $1,000 for each offense, to be collected as other fines and
costs are by law collectible including attorney's fees, or imprisoned for
not more than 90 days, or both. Each day during which a violation
occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Any person who is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall have his license revoked for one full year and shall not
be eligible for another license until the expiration of one full year.
C. If a license granted under this section is revoked, all tables, chairs and
other appurtenances used as a part of the sidewalk cafe shall be
immediately removed from the sidewalk, and the costs of removing and/
or disposing of same shall be a lien upon the abutting property.
§ 332-13 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 332-15
1:344
§ 332-16. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with the provisions of this
chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 332-17. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective 20 days after final passage unless there
is passed a resolution in accordance with Section 608(b) of the Optional
Third Class City Charter Law accelerating the effective date.132
Chapter 340
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 273.
D. This chapter and the foregoing penalties shall not be construed to limit
or deny the right of the City or any person to such equitable or other
remedies as may otherwise be available with or without process of law.
132. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 41608(b).
§ 332-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-17
1:345

ARTICLE I
Garbage and Refuse Storage and Disposal
[Adopted 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 836]
§ 340-1. Intent.
In order to control the detrimental effects created by improper storage and
removal of ashes, garbage, refuse, riffraff, rubbish and trash, the City is
hereby establishing minimum regulations for storage and removal thereof
and establishing penalties for noncompliance.
§ 340-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other
combustible materials for the purpose of heating or cooking.
BUILDING WASTE — Any and all refuse or residue resulting directly from
building construction, reconstruction, repair or demolition; from grading or
other incidental work in connection with any premises.
COMPOST PILES — A pile consisting of straw, cornstalks, hay, garden
rubbish, grass clippings, leaves, weeds, peat, sawdust and appropriate
limes and fertilizer for the purpose of improvement of soil. Compost piles
shall not be considered as being within the definition of garbage or refuse
as set forth herein.
CONTAINER — A leakproof container with a lid designed for the storage of
waste material, including ashes, garbage, municipal waste, refuse, riffraff,
rubbish and trash. Dumpsters supplied by registered haulers are also
considered containers.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer, the Zoning
Officer, any City police officer, or any other City employee assigned to
enforcing City ordinances.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY — The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of the owners or operators of such premises.
GARBAGE — The animal, fruit and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of foods and the residue
from fruit trees located on the premises. It shall not include more than a
minimum amount of free liquids. It shall not include food processing wastes
from industries, such as canneries or packing plants nor of condemned food
products.
HAULER — Any owner of a waste transportation vehicle licensed under
Pennsylvania Act 90.133
133. Editor's Note: See 27 Pa.C.S.A. § 6201 et seq.
§ 340-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-2
1:347
HAZARDOUS REFUSE — Any refuse, the handling or disposal of which
would constitute a danger to City employees, City property or any handler
of such refuse, and shall include but not be limited to: acids, explosives,
highly combustible material and the like.
IMPORTED REFUSE — The bringing of refuse from a location where such
refuse is generated or accumulated, which location is outside the corporate
limits of the City, into any location within the City for disposal of any type.
INDUSTRIAL REFUSE — Any and all residue resulting directly from
industrial or manufacturing operation. It shall not include waste originating
from commercial operations or an industrial establishment. It shall not
include waste resulting from operations in connection with the construction
of buildings, building or repairing of streets or buildings, demolition or
excavation.
LITTER — All waste material, garbage, rubbish, refuse, and other
substances including, but not limited to, cigarette butts, plastic and paper
wrappings which, if thrown, scattered, or deposited, as herein prohibited,
tends to injuriously affect public health, safety, and welfare or tends to have
a detrimental or unsightly impact on the environment.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material resulting from the operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities;
and sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste under
this article from a municipal, commercial, or institutional water supply
treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control facility.
OCCUPANT — Any person living in a dwelling or having possession of a
space within a building.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property, or recorded in the official records of
the municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control
of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and
the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take
possession of real property by a court.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, whether improved or unimproved,
including portions occupied by a street or alley and portions of land
between sidewalks and streets.
RECYCLING BINS — A container provided to the public by the City or by
a registered hauler with the specific intent to be used to store recycling
materials.
REFUSE — Garbage, ashes, rubbish, riffraff, commercial refuse, industrial
refuse, dead animals and building waste as herein defined.
§ 340-2 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 340-2
1:348
RIFFRAFF — All waste materials not included in the definition of "garbage,"
"ashes," or "rubbish" too large for collection in the ordinary garbage
containers, as set forth herein, such as furniture, tanks, appliances and the
like.
RUBBISH/TRASH — All waste materials not included in the definition of
"garbage," "ashes," and "riffraff," except building waste from building
construction or demolition, industrial refuse, dead animals, abandoned
large machinery or motor vehicles or such other waste materials as are not
commonly produced in homes, stores and institutions.
TENANT — A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the
legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a structure.
§ 340-3. Storage and proper handling of waste.
All ashes, garbage, municipal waste, refuse, rubbish and trash may be
stored in covered containers only, and in such limited quantities and for
such limited period of time as shall insure that no annoyance, nuisance
or health hazard shall be created or maintained thereby. Except for such
temporary storage as is herein specified and authorized, no person shall
keep, have, maintain, store upon or allow to exist in any manner whatsoever,
any ashes, garbage, municipal waste, refuse, riffraff, rubbish or trash upon
any premises within the limits of the City.
§ 340-4. Removal by registered haulers.
Every owner in the City of Lock Haven shall contract with an individual,
entity or firm which is a hauler registered by the City of Lock Haven, Clinton
County Solid Waste Authority and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
have all the ashes, garbage, municipal waste, refuse, riffraff, rubbish and
trash generated on the premises by any of the occupants of the premises
removed and deposited in a permitted landfill on a weekly basis or more
often.
§ 340-5. Registered haulers.
A. No person who is regularly engaged in the business of removing,
hauling or conveying ashes, garbage, municipal waste, refuse, riffraff,
rubbish and trash for disposal shall remove, haul or convey any such
ashes, garbage, municipal waste, refuse, riffraff, rubbish and trash
through or upon any of the streets or alleys of the City without first
registering with the Board of Health of the City acting by and through
the Enforcement Officer. Nothing contained herein shall apply to any
person who is regularly engaged in the business of demolishing any
improvement to realty, or the removal of the resulting debris from
demolition of improvements of realty. There shall be no registration fee.
B. Proof of a valid dumping or tipping permit from a DEP permitted
municipal waste disposal facility shall be included with the registration.
§ 340-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6
1:349
§ 340-6. Proof of contract required; proof of proper disposal
required; use of unlicensed hauler prohibited.
Whenever requested by the Enforcement Officer, the owner of any real
estate within the City of Lock Haven shall present proof adequate in the
judgment of the Enforcement Officer that the owner of said real estate
has a current contract with a registered hauler to dispose of any ashes,
garbage, municipal waste, refuse, riffraff, rubbish and trash generated on
the premises on a weekly basis or more often. The owner of the premises
shall have 48 hours to provide proof to the Enforcement Officer that he has
a current contract with a registered hauler to provide sufficient service to
satisfy the terms and conditions of this article. No person shall permit any
unregistered hauler to take or remove any ashes, garbage, municipal waste,
refuse, riffraff and rubbish from the premises.
§ 340-7. Duties of haulers.
Any hauler picking up ashes, garbage, municipal waste, refuse, riffraff,
rubbish and trash in the City of Lock Haven shall be required to advise
the City of Lock Haven in writing within 48 hours after request from the
City of Lock Haven as to whether an owner has a current contract for
municipal waste disposal from his premises within the City of Lock Haven.
Furthermore, all haulers shall cooperate with the Enforcement Officer in
providing information in the event that an action is instituted to enforce the
terms and conditions of this article.
§ 340-8. Regulation of hauling.
Any person hauling or conveying any ashes, garbage, municipal waste,
refuse, riffraff, rubbish and trash through or upon any of the streets or
alleys of the City shall cover such ashes, garbage, municipal waste, refuse,
riffraff, rubbish and trash with a tarpaulin or other similar or like cover so
as to prevent said ashes, garbage, municipal waste, refuse, riffraff, rubbish
and trash from falling or blowing into or upon the streets and alleys of the
City.
§ 340-9. Registration revocation.
Registration for collecting, transporting and hauling ashes, garbage,
municipal waste, refuse, riffraff, rubbish and trash in the City may be
revoked at any time by the City in accordance with the following:
A. Failure of the hauler to furnish and provide collection and disposal of
City ashes, garbage, municipal waste, refuse, riffraff, rubbish and trash
in accordance with the terms of this article and the conditions under
which the registration was issued.
B. A written notice to the hauler shall be delivered at least 90 days prior to
the date that such registration is proposed to be revoked and a hearing
shall be held by the City within 30 days after such notice to determine
§ 340-6 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 340-9
1:350
§ 340-10. Responsibility of occupant and owner.
The occupant and/or owner shall be responsible for complying with the
following provisions:
§ 340-11. Burning prohibited.
No occupant, owner, person or tenant shall at any time burn outdoors any
ashes, garbage, leaves, municipal waste, refuse, riffraff, rubbish or trash
within the limits of the City.
§ 340-12. Compost piles.
Notwithstanding the terms of this article, compost piles kept by occupants
or tenants of a structure shall not violate the terms and conditions of this
article, provided that the materials in the compost pile do not generate any
whether such revocation is necessary and in the best interest of the
City.
A. Accumulation of ashes, garbage, municipal waste, refuse, riffraff,
rubbish and trash. All exterior property and premises shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. The occupant and/or
owner shall keep that part of the exterior property which he/she
occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition.
B. Disposal of ashes, garbage, municipal waste, refuse, riffraff, rubbish
and trash. Every occupant and/or owner of a structure shall dispose of
all ashes, garbage, municipal waste, refuse, riffraff, rubbish and trash in
a clean and sanitary manner by placing such ashes, garbage, municipal
waste, refuse, riffraff, rubbish and trash in approved leakproof
containers with a lid.
C. Containers. The owner of every occupied premises shall supply a
sufficient number of containers with a lid for ashes, garbage, municipal
waste, refuse, riffraff, rubbish and trash, and the owner of the premises
shall be responsible for the removal of the ashes, garbage, municipal
waste, refuse, riffraff, rubbish and trash. No container shall be filled
that the lid will not fit tightly. It shall be the responsibility of the owner
of the premises to keep all containers in a sanitary condition. All
containers shall be maintained in good condition.
D. Storage location. All ashes, garbage, municipal waste, refuse, riffraff,
rubbish and trash containers and recycling bins shall be located in the
side or rear yard if present; but, for corner properties, containers shall
not be located in a side yard facing a street or alley. Containers may be
placed in front yards for removal but not more than 24 hours prior to
pickup. The empty containers shall be returned to the designated
storage areas within 24 hours of the time the ashes, garbage, municipal
waste, refuse, riffraff, rubbish and trash or recycling have been
removed.
§ 340-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-12
1:351
offensive odors, and provided further that said compost piles are secure so
that animals do not spread the materials from the compost piles around the
premises.
§ 340-13. Violation fines.
§ 340-14. City may do work upon default of occupant and/or owner.
Upon failure of any occupant and/or owner to comply with the provisions
of this article by not doing and performing any work required by the notice
provided for in § 340-13 of this article, the City Manager may cause the
same to be done and collect the costs of doing so from the occupant/owner,
plus a penalty of 10%, in the manner provided by law. If the occupant/owner
fails to pay the aforementioned sum, the City shall file a municipal lien
against the subject premises.
§ 340-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, who fails to pay the amount set forth in § 340-13 within 10 days
of the date of the notice of violation, shall be cited within 30 days of the
violation and, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $300, nor more than $1,000, plus costs. Each day's violation
shall constitute a separate offense, and notice to the offender shall not
be necessary in order to constitute a separate offense, nor shall notice to
the offender be necessary in order to constitute an offense. In default of
payment of the fine stated herein, such offender may be subject to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
A. It shall be the duty of the Enforcement Officer to report:
(1) The address of the premises and a description of the violation.
(2) The date and hour of the violation.
(3) Any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
B. The Enforcement Officer making the report shall also place on or attach
to the premises a notice to the occupant, owner, person or tenant that
they are in violation of this article, and instructing the occupant, owner,
person or tenant that he/she must report to the office of the City
Treasurer within 10 days and pay, for the use of the City, the sum of $25
in the enclosed envelope at City Hall between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday (except holidays) or place a stamp on the
reverse side and mail using address indicated.
§ 340-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 340-15
1:352
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 331B (Ch. 20, Part 2, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 340-16. Title.
This article shall be known as the "City of Lock Haven Municipal Solid Waste
Recycling Ordinance."
§ 340-17. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them
in this section:
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
BIMETAL CONTAINERS — Empty beverage or food containers consisting of
ferrous sides and bottom and an aluminum top.
BUYBACK OPERATION — Any public or private agency, organization,
company or individual which accepts recyclables and pays cash or other
forms of remuneration for such recyclables to the bearer.
CITY — City of Lock Haven.
COLLECTOR — For purposes of collecting and transporting recyclables,
means the City or its authorized agents.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes.
CORRUGATED — That material consisting of two or more pieces of Kraft
liner separated by corrugated (fluted) liner board. Excluded are materials
without a corrugated interliner and those materials with a corrugated liner
made from rice or other non-wood-based materials.
CURBSIDE RECYCLING COLLECTION — The scheduled collection and
transport of recyclable materials placed at the curbline or other designated
area.
DROPOFF SITES — Those specified locations, staffed or unstaffed, where
recyclable materials may be taken at specified times.
FERROUS CONTAINERS — Empty steel or tin food or beverage containers.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass. Expressly excluded are noncontainer glass, plate glass, blue glass,
lead crystal and porcelain and ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Paper collected from commercial,
institutional and municipal establishments which was discarded from
xerographic copiers, nonthermal computed printers, general office use
forms, memos and correspondence, print shops and other commercial
printing processes. Expressly excluded are papers with self carbons, carbon
§ 340-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-17
1:353
paper, envelopes and all other grades of papers not meeting specifications
in the regulations.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities which house or serve
groups of people, e.g., hospitals, schools and nursing homes.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues and similar material, but does not
include grass clippings.
MAGAZINES and PERIODICALS — Printed matter containing
miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals.
Expressly excluded are other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any residential dwelling having in excess
three or more individual dwelling units.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and opinions
and containing advertisements and matters of public interest. Expressly
excluded are newspapers which have been soiled.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials to be recycled as specified by
this article and regulations promulgated thereunder.
RESIDENTIAL — Any occupied single- or multifamily dwelling.
RECYCLABLES — Any used material having an economic value in the
secondary materials market and includes: aluminum cans, bimetal cans,
corrugated cardboard, magazines, newspaper, office paper, paper products
not chemically coated, plastic containers, steel cans, and other materials
designated by this article and the regulations promulgated thereunder as
having value.[Amended 12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 952]
SOLID WASTE — Solid waste as defined in P.L. 380, No. 97, known as the
"Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act."134
YARD WASTE — Prunings, grass clippings, leaves and garden wastes.
The Council, recognizing that the reclaiming of recyclable materials
has become an important method for addressing the growing solid
waste disposal problem by conserving landfill space, and that recycling
conserves natural resources, reduces energy consumption and
promotes the general interest, does hereby authorize the collection,
processing, storage, transportation and disposition of recyclable
materials in accordance with the provisions of this article.
A.
Those recyclables separated for purposes of materials recovery rather
than disposal shall not be considered solid waste as defined under the
ordinance of the county or its municipalities and shall not be subject to
provisions of those ordinances which require disposal of such wastes at
designated facilities.
B.
Establishment of the program. Council, by the provisions of this article,
hereby establishes a program for the mandatory separation of
C.
134. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 340-17 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 340-17
1:354
§ 340-18. Establishment of regulations.
The Council of the City of Lock Haven will develop appropriate regulations
concerning the recyclable materials to be included in the City's recycling
program. The Council shall promulgate regulations with respect to the
manner, days and times of collections of recyclable materials and for the
bundling, handling, location and time of placement of such materials for
collection. Regulations shall be promulgated for each type of program
undertaken including, but not limited to, residential, office, multifamily
and commercial sources of recyclable materials. City may change, modify,
repeal or amend any portion of said regulations at any time.
§ 340-19. Separation of recyclables and placement for disposition.
Recyclable materials shall be placed at the curb or other designated area,
separate from solid waste, for collection, or taken to dropoff sites at such
times, dates, manner and places as may be established by regulation.
Separated recyclables shall be placed in special household storage
containers specified by and/or provided by the City or its agent.
§ 340-20. Collection by unauthorized person(s).
It shall be a violation for any person(s) unauthorized by City to collect or
pick up, or cause to be collected or picked up, any such recyclable materials
as specified in the regulations promulgated under this article. Each such
collection in violation hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 340-21. Theft or destruction of household recyclables storage
containers.
It shall be a violation for any person(s) to steal, mutilate, destroy or render
useless the household recyclables storage containers specified and/or
provided by the City or its agent.
§ 340-22. Franchise or license.
City shall license any and all public or private agencies, organizations,
companies and individuals providing services or conducting operations
involving the recycling of municipal solid waste materials generated within
the City. The terms and conditions of such licenses shall be developed by the
City and will, at a minimum, include a requirement for reporting weights
and types of recyclables, as well as other vital data, to the City on a regular
basis.
recyclable materials, as specified by the recycling regulations resulting
from this article, from solid waste by persons residing in single-family
dwellings, multifamily dwellings and by commercial establishments.
§ 340-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-23
1:355
§ 340-23. Alternative disposition of recyclable materials.
Any person may donate or sell recyclable materials to licensed individuals
or organizations. Any such materials must be delivered to the licensed
individual's or organization's site by the donor or seller. Documentation of
the quantities donated by weight shall be provided to the City annually.
§ 340-24. Yard waste.
Whenever specifications for the disposition of yard waste are included in the
recycling regulations resulting from this article, it shall be prohibited and
will be deemed a violation hereof for any owner, lessee or occupant of any
residential, multifamily or commercial property in the City to put or cause
to be put yard waste into the City's solid waste stream.
§ 340-25. Remedies; violations and penalties.
Any action by any person, firm, corporation or other entity which violates
or does not comply with any provision of this article or any regulation(s)
resulting therefrom shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000
and costs and, in default of the payment of such fines and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each violation shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense and shall be subject to the penalty imposed by
this section for each and every day such violation shall continue.
§ 340-23 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 340-25
1:356
Chapter 346
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 273.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 307.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
352.
§ 340-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-25
1:357

ARTICLE I
Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 6-3-1969 by Ord. No. 711A; amended in its entirety
2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670 (Ch. 21, Part 1, of the 2003 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 346-1. Permit for excavation of streets.
Any person, firm, association, or corporation desiring to dig up or excavate
any street or alley or other highway or walk for any purposes whatsoever
shall, before doing so, obtain a permit from the City Code Enforcement
Officer, who shall keep a complete record of all such permits issued and
shall make a monthly report thereof to the Council, together with fees
collected. The fee for such permit shall be in an amount as established from
time to time by resolution of City Council.
§ 346-2. Excavation backfilling and resurfacing.
A. Whenever any permit shall have been granted for digging up or
excavating streets, alleys or any other highways or walks, the work of
excavating, backfilling, resurfacing and repairing shall be done by and
at the expense of the permittee under the supervision of the Street
Foreman or Superintendent.
B. All excavations shall be preceded by cutting of pavements, in straight
lines, at a width to be designated on the excavation permit.
C. All excavated material shall be placed, stored and handled in a manner
approved by the Street Foreman or Superintendent to be the least
inconvenient to traffic.
D. Permittee shall provide all barricades, safety lights, etc., necessary for
the protection of the public during any excavation. If streets, alleys,
walks or highways are to be closed, the permittee shall notify the
County Communication Center and the Police and Fire Departments in
advance, giving the length of time it will be closed.
E. All backfilling shall be compacted in six-inch layers as follows:
(1) The bottom backfill material shall be either excavated material or
clean dirt, all free of large stones, roots, frozen ground, etc.,
backfilled within 18 inches of the base of the resurfacing material.
(2) The 18 inches between the above initial backfill and the base of the
resurfacing material shall be modified stone (2RC or 2A stone of
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation).
(3) Resurfacing shall be done in the following manner:
(a) Macadam streets, etc. The resurfacing material shall consist of
four inches of bituminous concrete base course and two inches
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-2
1:359
§ 346-3. Repairs to resurfacing.
All areas resurfaced under a permit issued for an excavation shall be
maintained by the permittee for one year after the completion of the
resurfacing. Upon failure of the permittee to make proper repairs to any
street, alley or highway after two days' notice to do so by the City Clerk,
the City of Lock Haven shall make the necessary repairs to said street, alley
or highway and shall assess cost thereof according to a schedule of fees as
established from time to time by resolution of City Council.
§ 346-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
of bituminous concrete surface course compacted by a method
approved by the Foreman or Superintendent of Streets.135
(b) Concrete or brick streets, etc. The resurfacing material shall
consist of eight inches of reinforced concrete extending 12
inches on all four sides of the excavation, plus two inches of
amiesite where the brick or concrete streets are covered with
amiesite.
(c) Earthen streets, etc. The 18 inches required under Subsection
E(2), above, shall extend to the original surface of the street,
alley or highway.
135. Note: Bituminous concrete material shall come from a source approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
§ 346-2 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 346-4
1:360
ARTICLE II
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 8-5-1969 by Ord. No. 718A (Ch. 21, Part 2B, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 346-5. Removal required within 24 hours. [Amended 3-7-1977 by
Ord. No. 12B; 1-4-1982 by Ord. No. 150B]
No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any property within
the City shall permit any snow or ice fallen or formed upon any sidewalk
or footpath of said property, except as herein provided, to remain for more
than 24 hours if the accumulation of said snow or ice is one inch or more.
Provided, when the accumulation of said snow or ice is less than one
inch, all possible steps, including the use of salt, cinders or anti-skid, shall
be taken to make said sidewalk or footpath safe for public passage. The
following sidewalks shall not be required to have snow and ice removed
from said sidewalk; provided, that said sidewalk is signed, indicating the
lack of maintenance during the winter months:
§ 346-6. Removal from vacant property.
The owner, agent or occupant of any property, whether vacant or occupied
by the owner or tenant, shall remove all snow and ice from the public
footpaths and public sidewalks as provided in § 346-5 of this article.
§ 346-7. Notice for removal. [Amended 3-7-1977 by Ord. No. 12B]
The City Clerk shall, each year, give prior notice in a newspaper of general
circulation within said City, ordering the removal of said snow and ice. This
shall be the only notice given; if the same is not adhered to by the owner
or occupant of any property, the City may do the work and collect the costs
thereof as provided herein.
§ 346-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-7-1977 by Ord. No.
12B; 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
A. That certain sidewalk on the south side of Walnut Street from Ramp P-R
(west ramp) to Ramp S (southern ramp), being five feet wide and
extending 746 feet.
B. That certain sidewalk on the easterly side of Paul Mack Boulevard from
Bald Eagle Street to East Church Street, being five feet wide and
extending 342 feet.
§ 346-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-9
1:361
§ 346-9. Action by City upon default of property owner.
Upon the failure of any property owner to comply with the provisions of this
article and it becomes necessary for the City to do the work, the charges
to be made shall be for labor and machine rental with 10% penalty added
thereto.
§ 346-9 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 346-9
1:362
ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Construction, Repair and Use
[Adopted 12-4-1969 by Ord. No. 732A (Ch. 21, Part 2A, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 346-10. Responsibility for construction.
The owner or owners of any lot or lots within the limits of the City of Lock
Haven, Pennsylvania, fronting or extending along a street shall, whenever
required by City Council, construct or put down at the grade established
by the City, a good and substantial walk constructed of concrete, and of
such dimensions, plans and specifications as shall be approved by the City
Engineer.
§ 346-11. Notice to construct; action by City upon default of owner.
The City Clerk shall be authorized by Council to serve notices on the
owner or owners of any lot or lots, fronting or extending along any street,
either personally or by posting on the premises, to construct a pavement
in accordance with § 346-10 of this article, and if the owner or owners
shall fail to comply with the requirements of said notice for a period of 30
days, unless the time be extended by the City may construct the same and
the expense thereof and costs, and a penalty of 10%, shall be levied and
collected from such owner or owners, in a manner provided by the Act of
Assembly.
§ 346-12. Responsibility for repair; action by City upon default of
owner.
It shall be the duty of the owner or owners of any lot or lots within the
limits of the City, in front or along which pavement or foot walks have been
constructed or laid down, to keep the same in good repair; and if the owner
or owners thereof shall neglect or refuse for a period of five days after
notice from the City Clerk, which notice may be served personally or by
posting on the premises, to have the same properly repaired, it shall be the
duty of the City to have the same repaired and the expense thereof and
costs, and a penalty of 10%, shall be levied and collected from such owner
or owners in a manner provided by the Act of Assembly.
§ 346-13. Responsibility for construction and repair of curbing
action by City upon default of owner.
All curbing for pavements or foot walks within the limits of the City shall
be set under the direction of the City Engineer, and it shall be the duty
of the owner or owners of all lots within the limits of the City to have
set and kept in proper repair, curbing, in accordance with the plans and
specifications of the City Engineer, and upon neglect of an owner or owners
of any lot or lots, as aforesaid, to construct and keep in good repair, curbing
in front of their said lot or lots, the City Clerk shall be authorized by City
Council to serve a notice on the said owner or owners, either personally or
§ 346-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-13
1:363
by posting on the premises, to construct or repair their said curbing and if
the owner or owners shall fail to comply with the requirements of the said
notice for a period of 30 days, the City may construct or repair the same
and the expense thereof and costs, and a penalty of 10%, shall be levied and
collected from such owner or owners in a manner provided by the Act of
Assembly.
§ 346-14. Permit for driveway construction.
No public or private driveway shall be constructed by any person or persons
over or across any of the sidewalks of the City without first obtaining
a permit from the City Council. No such driveway shall be more than
35 feet wide, unless separated by an open space or island of 12 feet in
length. All driveways constructed across sidewalks shall be constructed
with reinforced concrete having a minimum thickness of six inches.
§ 346-15. Regulation of signs, awnings and posts.
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any awning, post or posts or
any other contrivance for the purpose of placing wings, curtains or signs
thereon, or to place or maintain any cellar doors which shall be set above
the level of the foot ways. Nothing in this article, however, shall prevent
property owners or tenants from fastening to the front of their property a
movable awning which can be raised or lowered, but such awning shall not
extend more than seven feet beyond the building line, the lower edge of
which shall not be less than seven feet above the sidewalk, and such awning
shall not have any wings or curtains.
§ 346-16. Obstruction unlawful. [Amended 3-7-1977 by Ord. No.
13B]
It shall be unlawful to place any goods, wares or merchandise, whether for
sale or otherwise, on any portion of any footway or sidewalk within the City,
except as may be determined by Council from time to time.
§ 346-17. Littering unlawful.
It shall be unlawful to cast, throw or deposit on the sidewalks or public foot
ways any fruit, or peelings thereof, paper, wrappers or other debris.
§ 346-18. Use of certain vehicles unlawful.
It shall be unlawful to use any bicycle, tricycle or vehicle of any character,
kind or description upon the sidewalks of the City; provided this section
shall not apply to baby carriages, baby carts, or invalid chairs.
§ 346-19. Deposit of rubbish unlawful.
It shall be unlawful to place any sweepings or any dirt or rubbish from any
store or building upon the sidewalks of the City.
§ 346-13 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 346-20
1:364
§ 346-20. Certain disorderly acts unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to unnecessarily obstruct
the pavements or footwalks, or lounge thereon, or beg or use indecent,
blasphemous or insulting language on any of the sidewalks within the limits
of the City.
§ 346-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-7-1977 by Ord. No.
13B; 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 346-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-21
1:365
Chapter 352
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 212.
Real estate registry — See Ch. 316.
Zoning — See Ch. 410.
§ 346-21 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 346-21
1:366
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 352-1. Authority and title.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code136 and may be cited as the "Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance of the City of Lock Haven."
§ 352-2. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, for the purpose of ensuring
sites for building purposes and human habitation and to provide for the
harmonious development of the City of Lock Haven, for adequate open
spaces, for traffic, recreation, light and air, and for the proper distribution
of population thereby creating conditions favorable to the health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the citizens of the City.
§ 352-3. Jurisdiction.
A. No subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land or any land
development as defined in § 352-4 shall be effected in the City of Lock
Haven; no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other
facilities in connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened
or dedicated for public use of travel, or for the common use of
occupants of buildings thereon unless and until a final subdivision plan
has been approved by the Planning Commission in the manner
prescribed herein and recorded; nor otherwise used except in strict
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. No lot in a subdivision may be sold; no permit to erect, alter or repair
any building upon land in a subdivision may be issued; and no building
may be erected in a subdivision, unless and until a final subdivision plat
has been approved by the Planning Commission and properly recorded
with the Clinton County, Pennsylvania Recorder of Deeds, and until
constructed of the improvements required in connection therewith has
been guaranteed in the manner prescribed herein.
136. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 352-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-3
1:367

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 352-4. Word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purposes of these regulations, have the meanings indicated.
§ 352-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved before start
of construction or development including, but not limited to, an application
for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or plan, or for
the approval of a development plan.
BLOCK — A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets
and public land, rail rights-of-way, waterways or any other barrier to the
continuity to development.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal,
process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind or nature.
A. Words in the singular include the plural and those in the plural include
the singular.
B. Words in the present tense include the future tense.
C. The words "person," "developer," "subdivider" and "owner" include a
corporation, unincorporated association, a partnership or other legal
entity, as well as an individual.
D. The word "building" includes structure and shall be construed as if
followed by the phrase "or part thereof."
E. The words "should" and "may" are permissive; the words "shall" and
"will" are mandatory and directive.
F. The word "City" means City of Lock Haven, Clinton County,
Pennsylvania.
G. The term "City Council" means the City Council of the City of Lock
Haven.
H. The term "Planning Commission" means the Planning Commission of
the City of Lock Haven.
§ 352-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-5
1:369
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A subordinate structure on the same lot as the
principal or main building or use occupied or devoted to a use incidental to
the principal use.
BUILDING, LINE — A line parallel to the street line at a distance therefrom
equal to the depth of the front yard required for the zoning district in which
the lot is located.
CARTWAY — That area of a street within which vehicles are permitted,
including travel lanes and parking areas, but not including shoulders, curbs,
sidewalks or swales.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land
established at street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed,
planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight
distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
CODES ADMINISTRATOR — Zoning Officer.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water, within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking area and areas set aside for public
facilities.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic
proposals adopted by the City Council in agreement with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code and designated as a Comprehensive Plan for
the continuing development of the City.
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Clinton
County, Pennsylvania.
DESIGNATED CITY OFFICIAL — The City official charged by the City
Manager with the responsibility of administering the subdivision application
submission procedure.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the
development plan" when used in this chapter shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DRAINAGE RIGHTS-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage ditches required along a natural stream or
watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water
therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
DWELLING — A building designed or used as the living quarters for one
or more families. The terms "dwelling," "one-family dwelling," "two-family
§ 352-5 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 352-5
1:370
dwelling," "multifamily dwelling" or "dwelling group" shall not include
automobile court, boarding house, hotel/motel or bed-and-breakfast.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of
private land for a public or quasi-public purpose and within which the owner
of the property shall not erect any permanent structures, but shall have the
right to make any other use of the land which is not inconsistent with the
rights of the grantee.
IMPROVEMENTS — Any man-made, immovable item which becomes part
of, placed upon, or is affixed to real estate.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure.
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with § 503(1.1) of Act 170, Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as follows:137
Provisions for the exclusion of certain land development from the
definition of land development only when such land development
involves:
The addition of an accessory building, including farm
buildings, on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal
building.
(a)
The addition or conversion of building or rides within the
confines of an enterprise which would be considered an
amusement park. For purposes of this subsection, an
"amusement park" is defined as a tract or area used principally
as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides.
This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an
amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area have
been approved by property authorities.
(b)
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling
or single family semidetached dwelling into not more than
(c)
(1)
C.
137. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 352-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-5
1:371
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LANDSCAPE BUFFER FOR NONRESIDENTIAL PARKING AREAS/LOTS —
A strip of land, together with a specified type and amount of natural or
planted vegetation required for all off-street parking areas/lots containing
more than five parking spaces and all loading spaces.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat,
subdivision or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or
built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the lot lines of a lot, excluding
space within all streets and within a permanent drainage easements, but
including the areas of all other easements.
LOT, CORNER — A lot or parcel abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle
of less than 135°.
LOT, DEPTH — The distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot
line.
LOT COVERAGE — That portion of the lot that is covered by buildings and
structures.
LOT FRONTAGE — The length of the front lot line measured at the street
right-of-way.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from
another lot or from a public or private street or any other public street.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the front
lot line; or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a
line 10 feet in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum
distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A through lot which is not accessible from
one of the parallel or nonintersecting streets upon which it fronts.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot which fronts upon two parallel streets other than
an alley, or which fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the
boundaries of the lot.
three residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium.
§ 352-5 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 352-5
1:372
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the sidelines of a lot
measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the
front lot line at the minimum required building setback line.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted by
the City Council to assure that necessary improvements will be kept in
good condition and will function as required for a period of one year
after completion of construction and installation, including corporate bonds,
escrow agreements and other similar collateral or surety agreements.
MEDIATION — A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a dispute
mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and
settling their differences, culminating in a written agreement which the
parties themselves create and consider acceptable.
MONUMENT — A stone or concrete monument with a flat top at least four
inches in diameter or square with bottom sides or radius at least two inches
greater than the top. The monument shall contain a steel dowel and be at
least 30 inches in length.
OFFICIAL MAP — The City Map adopted by ordinance that conclusively
shows the locations of, and width of, existing and proposed streets, public
facilities and public areas, and drainage rights-of-way.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security that may be accepted by
the City Council as a guarantee that improvements required as part of an
application for development are satisfactorily completed.
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development.
PLAT, FINAL — The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision or land
development prepared for official recording as required by this chapter,
presented for final approval.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — A preliminary map indicating the proposed layout
of the subdivision or land development which is submitted for consideration
and preliminary approval.
PLAT, RECORD — The copy of the final plan that contains the original and/
or segments of the County Planning Commission and the City Planning
Commission and which is intended to be submitted with the County
Recorder of Deeds.
PLAT, SKETCH — An informal sketch map of a proposed subdivision or land
development indicating existing features of a tract and its surroundings and
the proposed subdivision or land development to be used for the purpose of
discussion and classification.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Such notice shall
state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the
matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
§ 352-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-5
1:373
RESUBDIVISION — The replatting or resubdivision of lots or the relocation
of lot lines of any lot or lots on approved final or recorded plats, as specified
in this chapter. Other replattings shall be considered as constituting a new
subdivision of land.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as a
street, sidewalk or for other public or semipublic purposes.
RUNOFF — That portion of rainfall, melted snow or irrigation water that
flows across ground surface and is eventually returned to streams.
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, ON-LOT — Any structure designed to treat
sanitary sewage within the boundaries of the lot.
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, PUBLIC — A sanitary sewage collection
system in which sewage is carried from individual lots by a system of pipes
to a central treatment and disposal plant, generally serving a portion of
a municipality or municipalities and operated by a governmental agency,
governmental authority or public utility company.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The required length of roadway visible to the driver
of a motor vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic. Sight distance measurements shall assume the
height of the driver's eye to be 3.75 feet above the roadway and the height
of the object to be 0.5 feet.
SLOPE — The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually
expressed in percent or degrees.
STREET — Any vehicular way, including the entire right-of-way, which is
intended for use as a means of circulation to provide access to one or more
lots. The word "street" includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
freeway, parkway, alley and any other ways used or intended to be used by
vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private or improved or
unimproved.
STREET, PRIVATE — Any street not belonging to or accepted by the City
which is the responsibility of the adjacent landowner to maintain and
improve.
STREET, PUBLIC — Any street belonging to or accepted by the City for
which the City is responsible for maintenance and improvements.
STREET LINE — The limit of a right-of-way.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for use,
occupancy or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of land or water.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, petition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however,
that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels
§ 352-5 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 352-5
1:374
of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access
or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision which is not classified a minor
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR —
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the City
Engineer, at least 90% of those improvements required as a condition for
final approval have been completed in accordance with the approved plan,
so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its
intended use.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent stream, intermittent stream, river, brook,
creek, channel or ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.
YARD — An open space that lies between the principal or accessory building
or buildings and the nearest lot line. Such yard is unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as may be specifically
provided in Chapter 410, Zoning.
Any subdivision containing not more than three lots running on an
existing street, not involving any new street or road and not adversely
affecting the development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining
property and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the
Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, Chapter 410, Zoning, or this
chapter.
A.
The combination or recombination or previously platted lots on an
existing street where the total number of lots is not increased and the
resultant lots comply with Chapter 410, Zoning.
B.
The division of any tract of land in an undivided ownership into two
parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership, where the area
conveyed is less than 6,000 square feet and where both resultant
combination of lots comply with Chapter 410, Zoning.
C.
§ 352-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-5
1:375

ARTICLE III
Sketch Plat Submission, Review and Requirements
§ 352-6. Purpose.
For the purpose of expediting application and reducing subdivision and land
development costs, the developer may submit a sketch plat for the purposes
of discussion between the City Planning Commission and the developer. The
applicant shall not be bound by the determination of the sketch plat review,
nor shall the City Planning Commission be bound by any such review.
§ 352-7. Sketch plan submission; review. [Amended 2-24-2003 by
Ord. No. 670]
§ 352-8. Sketch plat requirements.
A. Applicants seeking a sketch plat review shall submit three or more
copies of the sketch plat, completed in agreement with § .352-8 of this
article, to the designated City official.
B. Within 60 days of submission of the sketch plat to the designated City
official, the City official shall make any recommendations to the
developer which it deems necessary or advisable in the public interest
in order to provide an acceptable plan for the site.
C. Prior to any review process commencing, the applicant must provide
sufficient documentation to indicate compliance with Act 537, the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.138
A. The sketch plat shall be based on accurate information at a scale of not
more than one inch equals 100 feet to enable the entire tract to be
shown on one street.
B. The location of that portion of the tract which is to be subdivided or
developed in relation to the entire tract.
C. The location of existing houses, buildings and other structures, with
accurate dimensions from all existing and proposed property lines,
wooded areas and any other significant natural features within the
portion to be subdivided or developed and within 200 feet thereof.
D. The name of the owner, all adjoining property owners and those across
existing or proposed streets as disclosed by the most recent City tax
records.
E. The Tax Map sheet, date of revision, block and lot numbers and zone
districts of the tract proposed to be subdivided or developed.
138. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 352-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-8
1:377
F. The location of existing or proposed streets, roads, easements, public
rights-of-way in and within 500 feet of the subdivision or land
development.
G. The original and proposed lot layout, lot dimensions, all required
setback lines and lot area for each lot in square feet and acreage.
§ 352-8 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 352-8
1:378
ARTICLE IV
Preliminary Plat Submission, Review and Requirements
§ 352-9. Objectives of submission.
§ 352-10. Submission procedure. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
Official submission of a preliminary plat to the City Planner shall comprise
submitting the following information no less than 10 days prior to a
regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting:
A. To transfer the general and approximate ideas of the sketch plat more
exactly to a precise base to verify their feasibility and merit before
proceeding with detailed construction and engineering documents.
B. Preliminary plats and all required supplementary data for all proposed
subdivisions and land developments shall be submitted to the
designated City official.
C. If the preliminary plan submission complies with § 352-12 of this
article, the designated City Official shall acknowledge such compliance.
The designated City official can forego preliminary approval and
consider this for final approval, if it also complies with all requirements
of Article V.
A. Submission of at least 14 copies of a completed subdivision or land
development application and the appropriate application fee.
B. Submission of at least 14 legibly drawn or reproduced paper prints of
the preliminary plat which shall fully comply with provisions of this
chapter as set forth in § 352-12 of this article.
C. Submission of at least 14 copies of all required supplemental
information as set forth in § 352-12 of this article.
D. The designated City official shall refer one plat print and one copy of
the supplemental information to the County Planning Commission; plat
prints and copies of the supplemental information shall be provided to
the City Planning Commission members for recommendations as to
changes, alterations and modifications.
E. Additional prints of the preliminary plat shall be submitted to the
respective agencies in each of the following circumstances:
(1) Whenever the property being subdivided or developed abuts a state
legislative route, one print of the preliminary plat shall be
submitted to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
(2) Whenever a proposed subdivision or land development is located in
more than one municipality or located adjacent to another
municipality, one print of the preliminary plat shall be submitted for
each municipality.
§ 352-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-10
1:379
§ 352-11. Preliminary plat review.
(3) Whenever required, one print shall be submitted to the utility
companies, Natural Resources Conservation District and
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
F. Prior to any review process commencing, the applicant must provide
sufficient documentation to indicate compliance with Act 537, the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.139
A. Review of the preliminary plat by the County Planning Commission
shall proceed as follows:
(1) Within 30 days of the date of official submission, the County
Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plat to
determine its conformance with County plans and priorities, and
shall recommend such written changes and modifications as it may
deem necessary or advisable in the public interest to the City
Planner, City Planning Commission and the applicant's engineer,
planner, landscape architect or surveyor.
(2) Review of the preliminary subdivision or land development plat by
the County Planning Commission shall constitute County planning
review as set forth in § 502 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.140
B. Review of the preliminary plat by the City Planning Commission shall
proceed as follows:
(1) When a preliminary plat has been officially submitted to the
designated City official, such plat shall be placed on the agenda of
the Planning Commission for review at its next regular monthly
meeting; provided, that such official submission has occurred no
less than 10 calendar days prior to such regular meeting. The
Planning Commission may hold a public hearing on the preliminary
plat at this time.
(2) The City Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plat to
determine its conformance with the standards contained in this
chapter and other applicable City ordinances and shall require or
recommend such changes and modifications as it deems necessary.
(3) No decision shall be made by the City Planning Commission with
respect to a preliminary plat until the City Planning Commission
has received and considered the written report of the County
Planning Commission, unless the County Planning Commission fails
to report thereon within 30 days after receipt of a preliminary plat.
In all cases, however, the City Planning Commission shall render its
decision and communicate it to the applicant not later than 90 days
139. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
140. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10502.
§ 352-10 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 352-11
1:380
§ 352-12. Preliminary plat requirements.
The preliminary plat of a subdivision or land development, notwithstanding
any other requirement stipulated by this chapter, shall be clearly and legibly
drawn or reproduced at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet,
shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of Article VII and shall
contain or be accompanied by the following information, except that the
City Planning Commission may waive any requirement or request additional
information where it is clearly appropriate to the application:
following the date of the regular meeting of the City Planning
Commission next following the date the application is filed;
provided, that should the next regular meeting occur more than
30 days following the filing of the application, said ninety-day
period shall be measured from the 30th day following the day the
application has been filed.
(4) During review of the preliminary plat, the Planning Commission
shall also consider the report of the City Engineer when making its
decision.
(5) The decision of the City Planning Commission shall be in writing
and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to
him at his last known address not later than 15 days following the
decision.
(6) When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite
the provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon.
C. The approval of the City Planning Commission shall be an expression of
the tentative approval of the layout submitted in the preliminary
application and the preliminary plat shall be stamped and signed as
follows:
NOTICE OF PRELIMINARY APPROVAL
Notice is hereby given that the general plan of the applicant shown
in this plat has received preliminary approval of the Lock Haven
City Planning Commission and that said Commission is now ready to
receive the final application for consideration.
Lock Haven City Planning
Commission
Date
Chairman
§ 352-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-12
1:381
A. A key map at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 1,000 feet,
showing the relation of the portion to be subdivided or developed to the
entire tract and the relation of the entire tract to the neighborhood for
at least 1,000 feet beyond the boundary.
B. The tract name, Tax Map sheet, block and lot number, date, graphic
scale and the following names and addresses:
(1) Name and address of record owner or owners.
(2) Name and address of the subdivider or developer.
(3) Name, address and professional seal of the person who prepared
the plat.
(4) Names of adjacent and facing owners.
C. Acreage of the tract to be subdivided or developed to the nearest tenth
of an acre.
D. Contours at vertical intervals of two feet for slopes averaging less than
10% and at vertical intervals of five feet for slopes averaging 10% or
greater. Contours shall be in the United States Coast and Geodetic
Control Survey Datum.
E. The location of existing and required setback lines, streets within 200
feet of the subdivision or land development, the location of existing and
proposed buildings, railroads, bridges, culverts, drain pipes and all
natural features, such as wooded areas, alluvial soils, flood areas and
rock formations.
F. A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the
land.
G. A full plan of development showing the location of all proposed streets,
roads, alleys, utility easements, parks, playgrounds and other public
areas; suggested street names, proposed building setback lines for
each road; proposed lot lines dimensioned in feet and tenths and
approximate areas of lots in square feet; lot numbers in consecutive
order; and all streets, public use or proposed to be dedicated or
reserved for future public use, together with the conditions of such
dedications or reservations.
H. When required by the City Engineer, the preliminary plat shall be
accompanied by profiles showing existing ground surface and proposed
street grades, including extensions for a reasonable distance beyond
the limits of the proposed subdivision; typical cross-sections of the
proposed grading, roadway and sidewalk; and preliminary plans of
proposed water lines, sanitary and stormwater sewers, with grades and
sizes indicated.
§ 352-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 352-13
1:382
§ 352-13. Waiver of preliminary plan requirements.
The Planning Commission may waive the preliminary plan submission in
the case of a subdivision plan fronting on an existing street and where
proposed streets or other improvements are not involved. The subdivider, in
that instance, must follow the subdivision final plan procedures.
§ 352-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-13
1:383

ARTICLE V
Final Plat Submission Review, Requirements and Recording
§ 352-14. Final plat submission.
A. Within 12 months after approval of the preliminary plan, a final
subdivision or land development plat and all required supplemental
data shall be submitted to the designated City official. An extension of
time may be granted by the City Planning Commission upon written
request, otherwise the plat submitted shall be considered as a new
preliminary plat.
B. The final plat shall conform in all significant respects to the preliminary
plat as previously reviewed by the City Planning Commission, but shall
incorporate all modifications required by the City Planning Commission
in its review of the preliminary plat. The City Planning Commission may,
however, accept a final plat modified so as to reflect any substantial
changes which have occurred on the site of the proposed subdivision or
land development, or in its surroundings, since the time of the
preliminary plat review.
C. Copies of the final subdivision or land development plat shall be
submitted to the County Planning Commission and any appropriate
County and state agencies.
D. The final plat may be submitted in sections or stages, each covering a
reasonable portion of the entire subdivision or land development as
shown on the reviewed preliminary plat, in accordance with regulations
as set forth in § 352-20 of this article. In the case of a final subdivision
or land development plat which is to be submitted in sections or stages
over a period of years, the between submission of applications for final
approval of each stage or section shall be no greater than 24 months.
E. If the final plan submission complies with § 352-20 of this article, the
designated City official shall acknowledge such compliance by
immediate issuance, to the developer, of a final plat receipt.
F. Official submission of a final plat to the designated City official shall
comprise submitting the following information no less than 10 days
prior to a regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting.
(1) Submission of at least 12 copies of a completed final subdivision or
land development plat application and the appropriate submission
fee.
(2) Submission of at least 12 copies of all required supplemental
information.
(3) Submission of 12 copies of all offers of dedication and covenants
governing the reservation and maintenance of undedicated open
space, which shall bear the certificate of approval of the City
Solicitor as to their legal sufficiency.
§ 352-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-14
1:385
§ 352-15. Official submission.
§ 352-16. Final plat review.
(4) The designated City official shall, within five days of receipt of a
completed final plat and application, refer one copy of a complete
final subdivision or land development plat application, one print of
the final plat and one copy of all required supplemental information
to the City Council. The designated City official shall refer seven
copies of a complete final subdivision or land development plat
application, seven prints of the final plat and seven copies of all
supplemental information, offers of dedication and covenants
governing undedicated open space to the City Planning
Commission.
A. Official submission of a final plat by the City Planning Commission to
the County Planning Commission shall comprise the following:
(1) The submission of one copy of a completed final subdivision or land
development plat application.
(2) Submission of two paper prints of the final plat.
(3) Submission of one copy of a required supplemental information.
B. Additional prints of the final plat shall be submitted to the respective
agencies in each of the following circumstances:
(1) Whenever the property being subdivided or developed abuts a state
legislative route, one print of the final plat shall be submitted to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
(2) Whenever a proposed subdivision or land development is located in
more than one municipality or located adjacent to another
municipality, one print of the final plan shall be submitted for each
municipality.
A. Review of the final plat by the County Planning Commission shall
proceed as follows:
(1) Within 30 days of the date of official submission, the County
Planning Commission shall review the final plat to determine its
conformance with county plans and priorities and shall recommend
such written changes and modifications as it may deem necessary
or advisable in the public interest to the designated City official,
City Planning Commission and the applicant or his designated
agent.
B. Review of the final plat by the City Planning Commission shall proceed
as follows:
(1) When a final plat has been officially submitted to the designated
City official, such plat shall be placed on the agenda of the Planning
§ 352-14 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 352-16
1:386
Commission for review at its next regular monthly meeting;
provided, that such official submission has occurred no less than
10 calendar days prior to such regular meeting. The Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing at this time if the final plat
departs substantially from the preliminary plat.
(2) The City Planning Commission shall review the final plat to
determine its conformance with the standards contained in this
chapter and with such changes and modifications which the
Planning Commission required in connection with approval of the
preliminary plat. During review of the final plat, the Planning
Commission shall also consider the written report of the City
Engineer and, if required, of the County Planning Commission.
(3) When a final plat has been reviewed by the County Planning
Commission, no recommendations shall be made by the City
Planning Commission with respect to a final plat until the City
Planning Commission has received and considered the written
report of the County Planning Commission, unless the County
Planning Commission fails to report thereon within 30 days after
receipt of a final plat. In all cases, however, the City Planning
Commission shall render its decision and communicate it to the
applicant not later than 90 days following the date of the regular
meeting of the City Planning Commission next following the date
the application is filed; provided, that should the next regular
meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing of the
application, said ninety-day period shall be measured from the 30th
day following the day the application has been filed.
(4) During review of the final plat, the Planning Commission shall also
consider the report of the City staff including, but not limited to,
the City Engineer, when making its decision.
(5) The decision of the City Planning Commission shall be in writing
and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to
him at his last known address not later than 15 days following the
decision.
(6) When the final plat is not approved as filed, the decision shall
specify the defects found in the final plat and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite
to the provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon.
(7) Approval.
(a) Upon a determination by the Planning Commission and the
City Engineer that the final application and plat are in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and with the
approved preliminary plat, the following official stamp shall be
placed upon the final plat, signed by the Chairman of the
Commission and attested by its Secretary.
§ 352-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-16
1:387
§ 352-17. Completion of improvements or guarantee thereof
prerequisite to final plat approval.
"Approved by the Lock Haven City Planning Commission, this
______ day of _____________, 20_____."
Signed Chairman
Signed Secretary
(b) This approval shall not be deemed to constitute or effect the
City's acceptance of the dedication of any street or other
proposed public way, space or area shown on said plat.
(8) Recording plats and deeds. Upon the approval of a final plat, the
applicant shall, within 90 days of such final approval, record such
plat in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of the County. The county
shall not accept any plat for recording, unless such plat officially
notes the approval of the City Planning Commission and review by
the County Planning Agency.
(9) Referral to City Council. The Planning Commission shall transmit
four prints of the approved final plat, along with the certificate of
title, to the City Council for acceptance of any proposed dedication.
The City Council, upon their acceptance of such dedication, shall
return three approved prints to the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission shall thereupon return two of these prints to
the subdivider.
A. No plat shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such plat
have been improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, or improved as may be required by this chapter and any
walkways, curbs, gutters, streetlights, fire hydrants, shade trees, water
mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and other improvements as may
be required by this chapter have been installed in accordance with such
chapter. In lieu of the completion of any improvements required as a
condition for the final approval of a plat, including improvements or
fees required by the City, this chapter shall provide for the deposit with
the City of financial security in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of
such improvements or common amenities including, but not limited to,
roads, stormwater detention and/or retention basins and other related
drainage facilities, recreational facilities, open space improvements or
buffer or screen plantings which may be required.
B. When requested by the applicant, in order to facilitate financing, the
City Planning Commission, if designated, shall furnish the developer
with a signed copy of a resolution indicating approval of the final plat
contingent upon the developer obtaining a satisfactory financial
security. The final plat or record plan shall not be signed nor recorded
until the financial improvements agreement is executed. The resolution
or letter of contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be
revoked if the financial security agreement is not executed within 90
§ 352-16 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 352-17
1:388
days, unless a written extension is granted by the governing body; such
extension shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in
writing at the request of the developer.
C. Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the City
may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld,
federal- or commonwealth-chartered lending institution irrevocable
letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such lending
institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security for the
purposes of this section.
D. Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or
federal- or commonwealth-chartered lending institution chosen by the
party posting the financial security, provided said bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within the
commonwealth.
E. Such bond or other security shall provide for and secure to the public
the completion of any improvements which may be required on or
before the date fixed in the formal action of approval or accompanying
agreement for completion of the improvements.
F. The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the
required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion
estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for completion by
the developer. Annually, the City may adjust the amount of the financial
security by comparing the actual cost of the improvements which have
been completed and the estimated cost for the completion of the
remaining improvements as of the expiration of the 90th day after
either the original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date
of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the City may require the
developer to post additional security in order to assure that the
financial security equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be
posted by the developer in accordance with this subsection.
G. The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by an applicant or developer and prepared by a professional
engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and certified by such
engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The City,
upon the recommendation of the City Engineer, may refuse to accept
such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant or developer and
the City are unable to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall
be recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer
licensed as such in this commonwealth and chosen mutually by the City
and the applicant or developer. The estimate certified by the third
engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the final
estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the
services of said engineer shall be paid equally by the City and the
applicant or developer.
§ 352-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-17
1:389
H. If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year
from the date of posting of the financial security to complete the
required improvements, the amount of financial security may be
increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond the
first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount
not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above bidding procedure.
I. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the
City Council or the planning agency may authorize submission of final
plats by section or stages of development subject to such requirements
or guarantees as to improvements in future sections or stages of
development as it finds essential for the protection of any finally
approved section of the development.
J. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the City Council to
release or authorize the release, from time to time, such portions of the
financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or
contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall be in writing
addressed to the City Council, and the City Council shall have 45 days
from receipt of such request within which to allow the City Engineer to
certify, in writing, to the City Council that such portion of the work upon
the improvements has been completed in accordance with the approved
plat. Upon such certification, the City Council shall authorize release by
the bonding company or lending institution of an amount as estimated
by the City Engineer fairly representing the value of the improvements
completed or, if the City Council fails to act within said forty-five-day
period, the City Council shall be deemed to have approved the release
of funds as requested. The City Council may, prior to final release at the
time of completion and certification by its engineer, require retention of
10% of the estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements.
K. Where the City Council accepts dedication of all or some of the required
improvements following completion, the City Council may require the
posting of financial security to secure structural integrity of said
improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements in
accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final
plat for a term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of
dedication. Said financial security shall be of the same type as
otherwise required in this section with regard to installation of such
improvements and the amount of the financial security shall not exceed
15% of the actual cost of installation of said improvements.
L. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or
facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction and
pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal
authority separate and distinct from the City, financial security to
assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in
accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or
§ 352-17 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 352-17
1:390
§ 352-18. Release from improvement bond.
municipal authority and shall not be included within the financial
security as otherwise required by this section.
M. If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plat as
set forth in this section, the City shall not condition the issuance of
building, grading or other permits relating to the erection or placement
of improvements, including buildings, upon the lots or land as depicted
upon the final plat upon actual completion of the improvements
depicted upon the approved final plat. Moreover, if said financial
security has been provided, occupancy permits for any building or
buildings to be erected shall not be withheld following the improvement
of the streets providing access to and from existing public roads to such
building or buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, as well as the completion of all other improvements as
depicted upon the approved plat, either upon the lot or lots or beyond
the lot or lots in question if such improvements are necessary for the
reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or buildings. Any
ordinance or statute inconsistent herewith is hereby expressly
repealed.
A. When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate
improvements, the developer shall notify the City Council, in writing, by
certified or registered mail, of the completion of the aforesaid
improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the City Engineer to
inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The City Engineer shall,
thereupon, file a report, in writing, with the City Council and shall
promptly mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or
registered mail. The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days
after receipt by the City Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from
the City Council; said report shall be detailed and shall indicate
approval or rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part,
and if said improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not be approved
or shall be rejected by the City Engineer, said report shall contain a
statement of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
B. The City Council shall notify the developer, within 15 days of receipt of
the engineer's report, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the
action of said City Council with relation thereto.
C. If the City Council or the City Engineer fails to comply with the time
limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements will be
deemed to have been approved and the developer shall be released
from all liability, pursuant to its performance guaranty bond or other
security agreement.
D. If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall
be rejected by the City Council, the developer shall proceed to complete
§ 352-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-18
1:391
the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification, as
outlined herein, shall be followed.
E. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
developer's right to contest or question by legal proceedings or
otherwise, any determination of the City Council or the City Engineer.
F. The City may prescribe that the applicant shall reimburse the City for
the reasonable and necessary expense incurred for the inspection of
improvements. Such reimbursement shall be based upon a schedule
established by ordinance or resolution. Such expense shall be
reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary fees
charged by the City Engineer or consultant for work performed for
similar services in the community, but in no event shall the fees exceed
the rate or cost charged by the engineer or consultant to the City when
fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
(1) In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such expense
in connection with the inspection of improvements, the applicant
shall, within 10 working days of the date of billing, notify the City
that such expenses are disputed as unreasonable or unnecessary, in
which case the City shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or
land development application or any approval or permit related to
development due to the applicant's request over disputed engineer
expenses.
(2) If, within 20 days from the date of billing, the City and the applicant
cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are reasonable and
necessary, then the applicant and City of Lock Haven shall jointly,
by mutual agreement, appoint another professional engineer
licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to review
the said expenses and make a determination as to the amount
thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
(3) The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence
and review such documentation as the professional engineer in his
or her sole opinion deems necessary and render a decision within
50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay
the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
(4) In the event that the City and applicant cannot agree upon the
professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days of the billing
date, then, upon application of either party, the President Judge of
the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial district in which the City
is located (or if at the time there be no President Judge, then the
senior active judge then sitting) shall appoint such engineer, who,
in that case, shall be neither the City Engineer nor any professional
engineer who has been retained by, or performed services for, the
City or the applicant within the preceding five years.
(5) The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if
§ 352-18 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 352-18
1:392
§ 352-19. Final plat requirements.
The final plat, notwithstanding any other requirements stipulated by this
chapter or other City ordinance, shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth,
Mylar or equal at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, except where
otherwise permitted by the Planning Commission. The final plat shall be
accompanied by the following:
the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or
greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in
the decision is less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the City
shall pay the fee of the professional engineer, but otherwise, the
City and the applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the fee of the appointed
professional engineer.
A. Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner and graphic
scale.
B. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land reserved or dedicated to public
use, all lot lines and other site lines; with accurate dimensions, bearings
or deflection angles and radii, arcs and central angles of all curves.
C. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to public
use shall be designated and the proposed use of sites other than
residential shall be noted.
D. Each block and lot shall be numbered in accordance with the system of
numbers which will ultimately be the numbers shown on the City Tax
Map.
E. Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites.
F. Location of all monuments.
G. Certification by a land surveyor licensed in the State of Pennsylvania as
to accuracy of details of plat.
H. Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of the land or that the
owner has given consent under an option agreement.
I. When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of such City,
county or state, approval shall be certified on the plat.
J. Final construction plans and profiles showing proposed utility layouts
(sanitary sewers, storm drains, water, gas, electric, etc.) showing
connections to existing or proposed utility systems. Cross-sections of
streets may be required by the City Engineer.
K. A certificate by the City Engineer certifying that the application has
complied with one of the following alternatives:
§ 352-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-19
1:393
§ 352-20. Recording of final plat. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
(1) All improvements have been properly installed in accord with the
requirements of these regulations and the action of the Planning
Commission giving approval to the preliminary plat.
(2) A bond with sufficient surety or certified check has been posted,
which is available to the City and in sufficient amount to assure
completion of all required improvements.
L. Protective covenants in form for recording.
M. Evidence showing that all general taxes on the subdivision have been
paid in full to date or discharged in full or that the court under which
said assessments were made has entered an order redistributing the
assessments against the land platted.
A. Before the Planning Commission approves any final plats, and is a
prerequisite for approval, the applicant shall deliver to the Planning
Commission a performance guarantee and assurances of escrowed
amounts for inspections in accordance with § 352-19K.
B. Upon written application signed by the obligor and surety of
performance guarantee in a form approved by the City Solicitor, the
Planning Commission may, at its discretion, extend the period for
installation of guaranteed improvements by not more than three
additional years or, when the improvements have been partially
completed, may reduce proportionally the amount of the performance
guarantee by formal resolution. In the event of the default under a
performance guarantee, the proceeds of the performance guarantee
received by the City shall be used to construct and install the
improvements.
C. The City Engineer shall notify the Planning Commission upon the
completion of procedures as set forth in this article.
D. After completion of procedures as set forth in this article, and after the
final plat is approved by the Planning Commission, the record plat, and
as many other copies of the final plat as may be desired, shall be
endorsed by the City Planning Commission and the County Planning
Commission. No subdivision or land development plan may be recorded
unless it bears City Council, County Planning Commission and City
Planning Commission endorsements and the corporate seal of the City.
E. The record plat shall be a clear and legible print of a type and materials
required by the Clinton County Recorder of Deeds.
F. After endorsement by the City Council, City Planning Commission and
the County Planning Commission, the applicant shall file the record plat
with the County Recorder of Deeds within 90 days of the date of final
approval by the City Planning Commission. If the applicant fails to
§ 352-19 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 352-20
1:394
record the final plat within such period, the action of the City Planning
Commission shall be null and void, unless an extension of time is
granted upon written request of the applicant. A receipt of recording
shall be provided to the City Engineer.
G. At the time the record plat is endorsed by the City Planning
Commission, the City shall receive one reproducible print of the final
plat as approved for its permanent files.
H. The applicant shall submit reproducible plans of as built public
improvements after construction.
§ 352-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-20
1:395

ARTICLE VI
Minor Subdivision/Land Development Plan Submission Procedures
and Requirements
§ 352-21. Applicability.
In the event that the proposed subdivision or land development shall involve
the subdivision of more than four lots or involve the construction of or a
change in the location of streets, sanitary or storm sewers, water mains,
culverts and other municipal improvements, then the provisions of this
article on minor subdivision/land development shall not be applicable and
the applicant shall be required to comply with the requirements and
procedures of this chapter dealing with major land developments. It is also
the purpose of this article to provide a simplified procedure by which minor
land development, including residential conversions, may be submitted and
approved.
§ 352-22. Procedure. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
A. Applicant submits 15 copies of the minor subdivision/land development
plan and application to the designated City official.
B. The designated City official checks the submission for completeness,
and:
(1) If submission is incomplete, immediately returns the submission to
the applicant and indicates the deficiencies; or
(2) If the submission is complete, accepts the plan, application and
fees.
C. Upon submission of the complete minor subdivision/land development
plan, the applicant shall include a filing fee in accordance with the City
fee schedule and a review fee in accordance with the County Planning
Commission fee schedule. The designated City official shall render a
proper receipt to the applicant for said fees. Copies of the minor
subdivision/land development application shall be distributed
immediately to the City Planning Commission, the City Engineer and
Zoning Officer.
D. The City Planning Commission shall:
(1) Review all applicable reports;
(2) Review the applicant's submission;
(3) Determine whether the plan meets the objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan and the requirements of this chapter and
other applicable ordinances; and
(4) Approve or disapprove the minor subdivision/land development
application.
§ 352-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-22
1:397
§ 352-23. Required information. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
E. The City Planning Commission shall render its decision within 90 days
of the date the review period began. The City Planning Commission
shall not act, however, until the report of the County Planning
Commission has been received, or until a period of 30 days following
the forwarding of the complete submission to the county has expired.
F. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be in writing and shall
be communicated to the applicant (or his agent) personally, or mailed
by way of registered or certified letter to him at his last known address,
not later than five days following the decision.
G. If the minor subdivision/land development is approved, two exact
copies of the approved plan on linen and one exact paper print copy
with the signatures required in this chapter shall be submitted to the
City Planning Commission.
H. When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the
provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon.
I. Prior to any review process commencing, the applicant must provide
sufficient documentation to indicate compliance with Act 537, the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.141
A. Drafting standards.
(1) The site information and plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch
equals 50 feet or larger.
(2) Dimensions shall be in feet and decimal parts thereof and bearings
in degrees, minutes and seconds.
(3) Where any revision is made, or when the plan is a revision of a
previously approved plan, dotted lines shall be used to show
features or locations to be abandoned and solid lines shall show the
currently proposed features. All revisions shall be noted in a
revision block with the revision date, a note of explanation and
reference to the page on which the revision is to be found.
(4) Plans shall be on sheets either 18 inches by 22 inches or 36 inches
by 44 inches. All lettering shall be drawn as to be legible if the plan
should be reduced to half size.
B. General information to be shown.
(1) Name of the minor subdivision or land development.
141. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 352-22 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 352-23
1:398
(2) Tax parcel number.
(3) Name and address of the owner/applicant/developer.
(4) Name and address of the registered engineer, surveyor, landscape
architect or architect responsible for the plan.
(5) Type of water and sewage disposal facilities existing and proposed.
(6) Zoning requirements, including applicable district requirements
and proof of any variances, conditional uses or special exceptions
which may have been granted.
(7) A location map for the purpose of locating the site.
(8) Total acreage of the tract.
(9) Date, true North point and graphic scale.
(10) Signature blocks.
C. Existing site features.
(1) Complete outline survey of the property to be developed shall be
provided, showing all courses, distances and areas.
(2) Location of all existing and proposed monuments.
(3) Location, size and ownership of all underground utilities, existing
and proposed rights-of-way and easements within the property.
(4) Contours at vertical intervals of two feet for land with an average
natural slope of 4% or less, vertical intervals of five feet for more
steeply sloping land. Data shall refer to known established
elevations.
D. Proposed site plan.
(1) The location of existing buildings, proposed buildings and
extensions to existing buildings.
(2) The location of all existing and proposed improvements including,
but not limited to:
(a) Driveways and interior automobile parking arrangements.
(b) Sidewalks.
(c) Street trees.
(d) Off-street parking spaces and on-street parking spaces.
(e) Impervious surfaces.
(f) Recreation areas.
§ 352-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-23
1:399
§ 352-24. Landscaping for nonresidential parking areas/lots.
A landscape plan shall be required for all nonresidential parking areas/
lots (including all loading areas) that exceed five spaces. The landscape
plan shall include a combination of shrubs, deciduous and coniferous trees,
all selected to provide shade and view a restrictive screen for parking
areas. Trees and/or shrubs shall be an integral part of this perimeter
planting. Walls, earth mounds and fences, or any combination thereof, may
be included with the living plant material at a minimum height of four
feet and a maximum height of six feet. Headlights of parked vehicles must
be obscured from the public way. At a minimum, the landscape plan shall
include:
(g) Refuse storage and other screened storage areas.
(h) Buffering, screening, fencing and landscaping of any portion of
the lot.
(i) Required front, side and rear yards, as well as required
setbacks and lot widths.
(j) Areas for loading and unloading.
(k) Any proposed display of signs.
(l) Any required utility easements.
(m) Must be reviewed and approved by City Engineer or
designated City official.
E. Proposed interior plan land development plans.
(1) A floor plan showing existing rooms, room uses, room sizes,
stairways, doorways, hallways and windows.
(2) A floor plan showing proposed rooms, room uses, room sizes,
stairways, doorways, hallways and windows. If dwelling units are
included therein, the number of dwelling units shall be indicated
and the dwelling unit entrances.
A. Required setbacks. Five-foot perimeter landscaped buffer along the
front, side and rear property lines, excluding access driveways.
B. Planting specifications. Plant materials shall be sufficiently large and
planted in such a fashion that a screen at least six feet in height shall be
produced within three growing seasons. All plantings shall be installed
according to accepted horticultural standards.
C. Maintenance. All landscaping shall be properly maintained and dead or
dying plants shall be replaced by the property owner during the next
planting season. No buildings, structures, storage of material or
parking shall be permitted within the buffer area; buffer areas shall be
maintained and kept free of all debris, rubbish, weeds and tall grass.
§ 352-23 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 352-24
1:400
D. Walls and/or fences. In addition to the required landscaping, walls and/
or fences may be erected for privacy, screening, separation, security or
to serve other necessary functions and shall be erected in conformance
with the following:
(1) Design and materials shall be functional, they shall complement the
character of the size and type of building, and they shall be suited
to the nature of the project.
(2) No fence or wall shall be constructed or installed so as to constitute
a hazard to traffic or safety.
§ 352-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-24
1:401

ARTICLE VII
Design Standards
§ 352-25. Streets.
A. Relation to traffic plan.
(1) The street and alley layout shall conform to the traffic plan and to
any plans adopted by the Planning Commission for the
development of the neighborhood in which the proposed
subdivision is located and shall provide access to all lots and
parcels of land within the subdivision. Where streets cross other
streets, offsets shall not be created.
(2) The arrangements of streets shall make provision for the direct
continuation of the principal existing streets in adjoining
subdivisions (or their proper projection when adjoining property is
not subdivided) insofar as they may be necessary for public
requirements. In general, such streets shall be of a width at least as
great as the existing streets and in no case less than the minimum
requirements specified herein.
(3) When the plat submitted for subdivision covers only a part of the
subdivider's tract, a sketch of the prospective future street system
of the part submitted shall be considered in the light of adjustments
and connections with the street system of part not subdivided.
(4) When the tract is subdivided into lots of an acre or more, the
Planning Commission shall require an arrangement of streets such
as to permit a later subdivision in conformity with the street
requirements specified in these regulations.
(5) In general, streets shall not be laid out on the boundaries of the
tract, except where such streets are desirable for further expansion
or conformance to existing streets or where a previously dedicated
half-street adjoins the tract, in which case, sufficient additional
width of street shall be dedicated to make the street width conform
to the minimum requirements specified herein.
(6) Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the contour of the land so as
to produce usable lots and streets of reasonable gradient.
B. Intersections. In general, minor streets should intersect main highways
or arterial streets at right angles. As far as is practicable, acute angles
between streets at their intersections are to be avoided, and where a
deflection angle of more than 10° in the street line occurs at any point
between two intersecting streets, a curve of reasonably long radius
shall be introduced. Intersections of more than two streets at one point
shall be avoided.
C. Access.
§ 352-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-25
1:403
(1) There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to streets except
where the control of such strips is definitely placed in the control of
the City under conditions approved by the Planning Commission.
The subdividing of land shall be such as to provide each lot, by
means of a public street, with satisfactory access to an existing
public highway onto a thoroughfare as shown on the official plan.
(2) All new subdivisions along marked state highways shall be
arranged to provide access to such highways at intervals of not less
than 1,320 feet, except where impractical or impossible due to
existing property divisions or topography. All roads and streets
within such subdivision shall be arranged to permit access to
adjacent future subdivisions without encroachment upon this
regulation.
D. Street widths.
(1) Right-of-way widths.
(a) Minimum street right-of-way widths, measured from the lot
lines, shall be as shown on the traffic plan adopted by the City
Planning Commission or, if not shown thereon, shall meet the
following standards:
[1] Major traffic street: eighty-foot right-of-way.
[2] Collector street: sixty-six-foot right-of-way.
[3] Minor street: fifty-foot right-of-way.
[4] Marginal access street: forty-foot right-of-way.
[5] Alley: sixteen-foot right-of-way.
(b) The widths shall be measured from lot line to lot line, and in
cases where topography or other physical conditions make a
street of a required minimum width impracticable, the
Planning Commission may modify the above requirements.
(c) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
major traffic street or a railroad, the Commission may require
marginal access streets, rear service alleys, reverse-frontage
lots or such other treatment as will provide protection for
abutting properties, reduction in the number of intersections
with the major street and separations with the major street and
separation of local and through traffic.
(d) In all cases where a proposed subdivision borders on or
includes a marked state highway, a right-of-way having a
minimum width of 50 feet on each side of the center line shall
be dedicated.
§ 352-25 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 352-25
1:404
§ 352-26. Blocks.
§ 352-27. Lots.
(2) Pavement widths. Minimum pavement widths, measured from curb
to curb, shall be as shown on the traffic plan or, if not shown
thereon, shall meet the following standards:
(a) Major traffic street: fifty-foot pavement width.
(b) Collector street: forty-foot pavement width.
(c) Minor street: thirty-two-foot pavement width.
(d) Marginal access street: twenty-four-foot pavement width.
(e) Alley: twelve-foot pavement width.
E. Street alignment. Streets shall be so laid out that there will be
unobstructed sight distances along the center lines thereof, measured
from a point five feet above the proposed grade line, to permit
horizontal visibility as follows:
(1) Major traffic streets: 600 feet.
(2) Collector streets: 300 feet.
(3) Minor streets: 150 feet.
F. Alleys. Alleys will not be approved in residential districts, but may be
required in business districts.
G. Dead-end streets. Streets designated to have one end permanently
closed shall provide a closed cul-de-sac, having a minimum radius of 50
feet from the outside curb, or other suitable turnaround facilities.
A. Length. Residential blocks shall ordinarily not exceed 1,200 feet in
length and commercial blocks, 600 feet, except for unit shopping
centers.
B. Width. Blocks shall be of sufficient width to permit two tiers of lots of
appropriate depth, except where an interior street parallels a limitedaccess
highway or major traffic street, or except where it backs up to a
railroad, creek or other natural barrier or unsubdivided area.
A. Frontage. Each lot shall front on a street dedicated for public use,
unless a private street is approved by City Council.
B. Arrangement. On all quadrangular lots, and so far as practicable on all
other lots, the side lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines
or radial to curved street lines, unless a variation to this rule will give a
better street and lot plan.
C. Setback lines.
§ 352-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-27
1:405
(1) Building setback line shall be established in all lots. Corner lots
shall be laid out wide enough to permit building space back of the
building line on each street.
(2) Building setback lines shall be shown on the plat for lots intended
for residential use of any character and on commercial or industrial
lots immediately adjoining residential areas.
(3) The subdivider shall establish building lines in accordance with the
needs of each subdivision, but in no case shall such building lines
be less than 25 feet from the right-of-way of the street or highway
upon which the lot fronts and where business or industrial property
faces residential property, such business or industrial structures
shall be set back at least 25 feet from the established right-of-way
of the street or highway.
D. Lot width and area.
(1) Residential lots shall have a minimum area of 6,000 square feet and
a minimum width, measured in the shortest distance at the building
line, of 50 feet, except as noted below.
(2) Lots which are not served by public sewers and/or public water
shall conform to the following requirements designed to prevent
unsanitary conditions and hazards to the public health:
(a) Where both water supply and sanitary sewage disposal are
provided by individual on-lot facilities, residential lots shall
have a minimum area of 20,000 square feet per dwelling unit
and a minimum width, measured in the shortest distance at the
building line, of 100 feet.
(b) Where either water supply or sanitary sewage disposal, but not
both, are provided by individual on-lot facilities, residential lots
shall have a minimum area of 10,000 square feet per dwelling
unit and a minimum width, measured in the shortest distance
at the building line, of 75 feet.
(c) Where either or both water supply and sanitary sewage
disposal are provided by individual on-lot facilities and
evidence indicates that the requirements of Subsections
D(2)(a) and (b), above, are not adequate, the Commission may,
after consultation with the Division of Environmental Hygiene
of the State Department of Health, require tests, undertaken at
the expense of the developer, as may be prescribed by said
Department of Health, to determine the adequacy of the
proposed water and sewage facilities in relation to the
proposed lot size and existing grade and soil conditions. In all
such cases where the tests indicate a larger lot size than
allowed above to be necessary, the Commission may employ
the services of a registered and qualified independent sanitary
engineer for advice as to the minimum lot size and/or facilities
§ 352-27 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 352-27
1:406
§ 352-28. Other considerations.
necessary to prevent unsanitary conditions and hazards to the
public health. In such cases, the cost of retaining the services
of a qualified engineer shall be borne by the developer.
(d) Where commercial or multiple dwelling subdivisions are
proposed to be served by either or both on-lot sanitary sewage
disposal and water supply facilities, the lot area and
dimensions required to prevent health hazards shall be subject
to individual review and determination by the Commission.
(e) The depth-to-width ratio at the usable area of a lot shall
ordinarily not be greater than three to one.
A. Easements. Where alleys are not provided, easements of not less than
10 feet in width shall be provided on each side of all rear lot lines where
necessary for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas,
water, and heat mains or other utilities. Easements of greater width
may be required along lines or across lots where necessary for the
extension of main sewers and similar utilities. Easements shall also be
provided for all storm sewers, drainage ditches and watercourses.
B. Preservation of natural features. The subdivider shall plan the layout to
preserve the natural features of the site.
C. Tree planting. Street trees shall be planted in the parkway midway
between the curb and the sidewalk. They shall be planted in a manner
assuring healthy growth and shall be of a species and size approved by
the Planning Commission.
D. Public open spaces. Where deemed necessary or desirable by the
subdivider, with approval by the Planning Commission, upon
considerations of the particular type of development proposed in the
subdivision, and especially in large subdivisions, the subdivider may
dedicate or reserve areas or sites of a character, extent and locations
suitable to the needs created by such development for schools, parks
and other neighborhood purposes.
E. Character of development. The Planning Commission shall confer with
the subdivider regarding the type and character of development that
will be permitted in the subdivision and may agree with the subdivider
as to certain minimum restrictions to be placed upon the property to
prevent the construction of substandard buildings and control the type
of structures or the use of the lots which, unless so controlled, would
clearly depreciate the character and value of the proposed subdivision
and of adjoining property. Deed restrictions or covenants should be
included to provide for the creation of a property owners' association or
board of trustees for the proper protection and maintenance of the
development in the future; provided, however, that such deed
restrictions or covenants shall not contain reversionary clauses wherein
§ 352-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-28
1:407
§ 352-29. Hardship.
In any particular case where the subdivider or his engineer can show by
plan and written statement that, by reason of exceptional topographic or
other physical conditions, strict compliance with any requirement of this
chapter would cause practical difficulty or exceptional and undue hardship,
the Planning Commission may relax such requirements to the extent
deemed just and proper, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship;
provided, such relief may be granted without detriment to the public good
and without impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter or the
desirable general development of the neighborhood and the community
in accordance with any adopted long range plan. Any modification thus
granted shall be entered in the minutes of the Planning Commission setting
forth the reasons which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, justified
the modification.
any shall return to the subdivider because of a violation thereon of the
terms of the restrictions or covenants.
F. Restrictions. The plat shall show a statement of all restrictions to be
imposed upon any part of said subdivision.
§ 352-28 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 352-29
1:408
ARTICLE VIII
Minimum Public Improvement
§ 352-30. Preamble.
§ 352-31. Monuments and markers.
§ 352-32. Street improvements.
A. The subdivider shall, at his own expense, provide the following public
improvements which shall meet minimum design and specification
requirements of the City of Lock Haven, Pennsylvania.
B. The final plat of the subdivision shall conform to the following standards
of improvements.
A. Type. Monuments shall be of concrete or stone with a minimum size of
four inches by four inches by 36 inches and shall be marked on top with
a one-half-inch round brass pin or a drilled hole. Markers shall consist
of iron pipes or iron or steel bars at least 24 inches long and not less
than 3/4 inch in diameter.
B. Placement.
(1) Monuments and markers shall be placed so that the scored or
marked point shall coincide exactly with the intersection of lines to
be marked and shall be set so that the top of the monument or
marker is level with the surface of the surrounding ground.
(2) Monuments shall be set at the intersection of all lines forming
angles in the boundary of the subdivision.
(3) Markers shall be set:
(a) At the beginning and ending of all curves along street property
lines.
(b) At all points where lot lines intersect curves, either front or
rear.
(c) At all angles in property lines of lots.
(d) At all other lot corners.
C. Replacement. Any monuments or markers that are removed shall be
replaced by a competent engineer at the expense of the person
removing them.
A. Minimum paving requirements. Streets (and alleys, where provided)
shall be graded, surfaced and improved to the grades and dimensions
shown on plans, profiles and cross-sections submitted by the subdivider
and approved by the Planning Commission. As a minimum, the street
pavement shall be in accordance with Table I below:
§ 352-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-32
1:409
Table I
Required Pavement Construction
Type of Street Surface Type Type
Required Pavement
Construction Base
Course Thickness
(inches)
Major traffic A D 12 + subbase if required
Collector B D 8
Minor C D 8
Marginal access C D 6
Alleys B D 8
(1) Three-inch ID-2 surface course in accordance with most recent
edition of publication 408 of Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(2) Two-and-one-half inch ID-2 surface course in accordance with most
recent edition of Publication 408 of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(3) Two-inch CP-2 surface course in accordance with most recent
edition of Publication 408 of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(4) Stone base course in accordance with most recent edition of
Publication 408 of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
B. Other improvements. The Planning Commission may require a higher
type of pavement than specified in Table I, or improvements in addition
to those set forth in the table, where it deems such to be necessary
because of prospective traffic safety of pedestrians in connection with
sidewalks, or in order to conform to conditions prevailing in the
neighborhood, in which latter case the neighborhood standard shall
generally apply. Crosswalks may be required when deemed necessary
by the Planning Commission.
(1) Subsurface drainage. Prior to placing the street surface, adequate
subsurface drainage for the streets and all subsurface utilities as
acceptable to the Commission shall be provided or installed by the
subdivider. The size of storm drainage structures shall be
computed by using Talbot's Formula for runoff.
(2) Slopes. Slopes of banks measured perpendicular to the center line
of the street shall not exceed three to one for fills and two to one for
cuts.
§ 352-32 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 352-32
1:410
§ 352-33. Approval maintenance and security.
C. In all respects in which standards for required improvements are not
set forth herein or specified by the Planning Commission hereunder, the
applicable standard requirements of the Pennsylvania State
Department of Transportation shall govern, and all work shall be
performed in the manner prescribed in the standard specifications for
road construction of said Department for type of construction under
consideration.
A. The work of constructing streets or roads, including the construction
methods and materials incident thereto, shall be subject to the approval
of the City Engineer. Final acceptance of the completed streets or roads
shall rest with the City. The subdivider shall enter into a contract with
the City which provides that in consideration of the acceptance of the
roads or streets for inclusion in the City highway system, the subdivider
agrees to construct the roads or streets in the subdivision to the
standards prescribed herein at his own expense with no cost to the City.
B. In the event that the owner or subdivider desires to complete the
construction of the streets after the plat is placed on record, he shall be
required to submit a cost estimate prepared by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor, setting forth all items of work to be
performed and the estimated costs. Said estimate shall be subject to the
approval of the City Engineer. A certified check or contract
performance bond issued by a surety company, subject to the approval
of the City, in an amount equal to the approved estimate to insure the
completion of the work, shall be filed with the City Council. All
construction items shall be completed within one year after the plat is
placed on record, except where bituminous paving construction is
required.
C. When bituminous construction is required, it shall be completed within
two years after the plat is placed on record.
D. The certified check shall be made payable to the City. In the event the
work is satisfactorily completed within the time specified, the certified
check or surety bond shall be returned.
E. The owner or subdivider shall be required to maintain all culverts,
ditches, back-slopes and shoulders on all streets for a period of two
years after their completion. All exposed surfaces on which a turf or sod
has not been developed shall be reseeded or sodded. An estimate of
cost shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer or
surveyor, setting forth all items of work to be performed and the
estimated cost. Said estimate shall be subject to the approval of the City
Engineer. The owner or subdivider shall deposit with the City a certified
check or performance bond issued by a surety company, in an amount
not less than the cost of maintaining said streets for a period of two
years.
§ 352-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-34
1:411
§ 352-34. Sewers.
Where there is a public sanitary sewer system within 500 feet of the
proposed subdivision, sanitary sewers shall be installed to adequately serve
all lots with connections to the public system. Where lots cannot be served
by the extension of an existing public sanitary sewer, the subdivider shall
obtain approval of lot sizes as provided in § 352-27D hereof. In addition,
individual septic tanks and disposal fields and/or neighborhood disposal
systems shall be approved by the State Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 352-35. Water.
§ 352-36. Storm drainage.
An adequate storm sewer system consisting of inlets and other underground
drainage structures with approved outlets shall be constructed where the
runoff of stormwater and the prevention of erosion cannot be accomplished
satisfactorily by surface drainage facilities. Outlets shall be approved by the
owners of the properties affected and by the Planning Commission.
§ 352-37. Curb and gutter.
The curb and gutter shall be one of the following types:
§ 352-38. Sidewalks.
Sidewalks shall be installed and shall have a minimum width of four feet,
except that sidewalks serving apartment houses or proposed commercial
A. The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete water
main supply system which shall be connected to a municipal water
supply or with a community water supply approved by the City
Engineer and the State Department of Environmental Protection with
satisfactory provision for the maintenance thereof; except that when
such municipal or community water supply is not available or when it is
more than 1,000 feet from the area proposed to be subdivided, the
subdivider shall provide an individual water supply on each lot in the
subdivision in accordance with minimum standards approved by the
Pennsylvania State Department of Health.
B. The plans for the installation of the mains of a water supply system shall
be prepared by the subdivider with the cooperation of the applicable
water utility company and approved by the City Engineer. Upon the
completion of the water supply installation, one copy each of the plans
for such system as built shall be filed with the Planning Commission.
A. Plain cement concrete in accordance with the most recent edition of
Publication 408 and applicable RC standards of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
§ 352-34 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 352-38
1:412
areas shall be wider if deemed necessary by the Planning Commission.
Sidewalks may be of the following types:
§ 352-39. Streetlights and fire hydrants.
Streetlights may be required when considered reasonable by the Planning
Commission. Fire hydrants installed in accordance with underwriters'
specifications shall be required under coverage by a water supply system
and shall be spaced to provide coverage within 500 feet of any property line.
§ 352-40. Filing plans and profiles.
Upon the completion of the improvements in a subdivision, plans and
profiles of the same as constructed shall be filed with the Planning
Commission.
§ 352-41. Installation of improvements.
Required improvements shall be installed by the subdivider under the
supervision of the City Engineer.
A. Concrete in accordance with the most recent edition of Publication
408,676.
§ 352-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-41
1:413

ARTICLE IX
Conflict With Other Regulations
§ 352-42. Conflicts.
Wherever there is a difference between minimum standards or dimensions
specified herein and those contained in Chapter 410, Zoning, or other
official regulation, the highest standard shall apply.
§ 352-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-42
1:415

ARTICLE X
Penalty and Legal Action
§ 352-43. Violations and penalties; enforcement remedies.
[Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the City of Lock Haven,
pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the City as a result thereof. No
judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District
Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the City may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge, determining
that there has been a violation, further determines that there was a
good-faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this
chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge, and thereafter each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the City the right to commence
any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings
brought under this section.
§ 352-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-43
1:417

ARTICLE XI
Revision and Amendment
§ 352-44. Amendments.
This chapter may, from time to time, be revised, modified or amended as
prescribed by local and state laws.
§ 352-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-44
1:419

ARTICLE XII
Commission Records
§ 352-45. Records.
The Planning Commission shall keep a record of its findings, decisions and
recommendations relative to all subdivision plans filed with it for review.
§ 352-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-45
1:421
Chapter 358
TATTOO AND BODY-PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 30, Art. V.
§ 358-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BODY PIERCING — The process of perforating the skin or mucous
membrane for the purpose of insertion of any object including, but not
limited to, jewelry for cosmetic purposes. The piercing of ears shall be
excluded from the purview of this chapter.
BRANDING — The process whereby heat is applied to the skin or mucous
membrane of a person for the intent of the formation of a permanent
scar. The use of any heated material as well as chemical applications are
included.
DEPARTMENT — The City of Lock Haven Department of Health.
HEALTH OFFICER — The City of Lock Haven Health Officer or
representative.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, company, corporation or
group that owns or operates a tattoo and/or body piercing facility and any
individual who performs tattooing and/or body piercing upon others.
TATTOO — Any method of placing designs, letters, figures, or any other
marks indelibly upon or into the skin or mucous membrane of a human
with ink, dye or pigment, resulting in permanent coloration by the aid of
needles or other penetrating instrument. This definition shall not apply to
the professional duties of licensed medical doctors or doctors of veterinary
medicine.
§ 358-2. License.
A. Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a tattoo and/or
body piercing facility without first obtaining a license to engage in such
business, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and unless
abiding by the provisions of this chapter.
B. Application. Applicants for a license shall submit to the Department a
written application containing such information as required by the Lock
Haven Department of Health.
§ 352-45 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 358-2
1:422
C. Fee; expiration. Each applicant shall pay an initial fee of $50 prior to
the issuance of a license. Each license shall expire on December 31 and
there shall be an annual renewal fee of $50.
D. Display. The license shall be prominently displayed at the facility where
tattooing is performed.
E. Transfer of license. If the operator of a tattooing and/or body piercing
facility moves to another location within the City of Lock Haven, the
license may be transferred from place to place if the new facility meets
all of the requirements set forth in Subsection G, as confirmed by an
inspection pursuant to Subsection F. A license is not transferable to any
other operator.
F. Inspections. The Health Officer may conduct inspections of any
tattooing and/or body piercing establishment for the purpose of
ascertaining compliance with all applicable health and safety provisions
contained within this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person or
operator to deny entrance of the Health Officer to the tattooing and/or
body piercing facility after proper identification is presented to the
operator.
G. Health, sanitary and safety requirements. Every person who operates a
tattooing and/or body piercing facility shall comply with the following:
(1) The room in which tattooing is performed shall have an area of at
least 100 square feet. The walls, floors and ceilings shall be of an
impervious, smooth, washable surface and shall be painted or
finished in a light color. Lighting, sufficient (as defined by the
Health Officer) to fully allow for visualization of pigment
abnormalities or physical abnormalities of the skin, is required.
Carpeting is prohibited in the facility.
(2) A lavatory basin shall be located within any room used for the
defined procedures as addressed by this chapter. The lavatory
basin shall be supplied with both hot and cold water supplies, soap
dispensers, single-use towel dispenser and waste receptacles. The
lavatory basin plumbing must be installed according to the
plumbing codes of the City of Lock Haven.
(3) All equipment, including tables, shall be constructed of easily
cleanable material and shall be painted or finished in a light color
with a smooth, washable finish. The equipment shall be separate
from the waiting customers or observers by a panel at least four
feet high.
(4) The premises and equipment shall be maintained in a clean,
sanitary condition and in good repair.
(5) The operator shall scrub his/her hands thoroughly with soap and
water before performing any tattoo and/or body piercing. The
hands shall be dried with single-use towels. Sterile surgical gloves
§ 358-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-2
1:423
shall be worn by the operator when tattooing and or body piercing.
Gloves shall be used only once and disposed of in a manner dictated
by the Department.
(6) Safety razors with a new, single-use blade for each customer, or a
straight-edge razor, may be used and shall be sterilized, as required
by the Health Officer, before use on each customer.
(7) The area to be tattooed and/or body pierced shall be thoroughly
scrubbed with an antiseptic soap for a minimum of two minutes. An
approved antiseptic preparation must be used. Waste materials
shall be deposited in a covered, easily cleanable waste container,
provided in the tattooing area.
(8) Only petroleum jelly in collapsible metal or plastic tubes, as
approved by the Health Officer, shall be used on the area to be
tattooed and/or body pierced, and it shall be applied with sterile
gauze.
(9) The use of styptic pencils, alum blocks or other solid styptics to
prevent hemorrhage is prohibited.
(10) Operators of tattoo and/or body piercing facilities shall complete a
course, approved by the Lock Haven Department of Health, on the
control and prevention of blood-borne diseases prior to obtaining a
license.
(11) Single-use containers of dye or ink shall be used for each patron,
and the container shall be immediately discarded after use on the
patron. Any dye in which the needles were dipped shall be
immediately discarded and shall not be used on another person.
Excess dye or ink shall be removed from the skin with an individual,
sterile sponge or disposable paper tissue, which shall be used only
once and immediately discarded. After performing tattooing and/or
body piercing on any person, the involved area shall be washed
with sterile gauze, saturated with an antiseptic soap solution
approved by the Health Officer, or a 70% alcohol solution.
(12) It shall be unlawful to attempt removal of any tattoo by any
individual in a tattoo and/or body piercing facility.
(13)No operator shall tattoo any person under the age of 18 years
without first obtaining verifiable written parental authorization,
which shall remain on file and available for inspection for a period
of seven years. Proof of age is required of all patrons.
(14) Animals shall not be permitted in the tattooing and/or body
piercing facility, except where permitted by Pennsylvania state law.
(15) All clean and ready-to-use needles and instruments shall be
contained in a closed glass or metal case while not in use. Such
container shall be maintained in a sanitary manner at all times.
§ 358-2 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 358-2
1:424
§ 358-3. Suspension and revocation of tattoo establishment license.
(16) A steam sterilizer (autoclave) shall be utilized for sterilizing
reusable needles and instruments before use on any patron.
Sterilization of equipment shall be accomplished by exposure to
live steam for a duration consistent with the manufacturer's
recommendation for the intended use. Such manufacturer's
recommendation shall be available for visual inspection by the
Health Officer. The autoclave shall be equipped with a
thermometer reading +/- 2° of accuracy, and an accurate steam
pressure gauge. Heat sensor tape shall be used with each needle or
instrument to demonstrate compliance.
(17) The needles and instruments required to be sterilized shall be
handled during tattooing and/or body piercing so that they not be
contaminated.
(18) Upon discovery of any infection resulting from the act of tattooing
and/or body piercing, the operator shall immediately notify the
Health Officer.
(19) Only sterile pigments, dyes, colors, etc. may be utilized in the
performance of tattooing and/or body piercing.
(20) All bandages and dressings used in connection with tattooing and/
or body piercing of a person shall be single use, self-contained, and
sterile.
(21) In order to carry out the intent of this chapter, the Lock Haven
Board of Health may declare, from time to time, additional rules
and regulations pertaining to the requirements of sanitation,
cleanliness, adequacy of facilities, equipment and operation of a
tattooing and/or body piercing establishment consistent with this
chapter.
(22) Ear-piercing guns are expressly forbidden to be used for body
piercing other than the piercing of ear lobes.
(23) Needles, sharp instruments, gloves, gauze and other materials
contaminated with blood or other bodily fluids shall be discarded as
directed by the Health Officer.
(24) Animals shall not be tattooed except by a licensed veterinarian at a
location separated from any human tattoo facility. It shall be
unlawful for any individual to body pierce an animal.
(25) Branding of humans shall be unlawful except when conducted by a
medical doctor licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. A tattoo and or body piercing establishment license may be suspended
or revoked by the Health Department upon the first occurrence of any
of the following events:
§ 358-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-3
1:425
§ 358-4. Violations and penalties.
§ 358-5. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective on July 1, 2005.
Chapter 365
TAXATION
(1) The application for such license contained inaccuracies;
(2) The operator has violated any provision of this chapter; and/or
(3) The operator is convicted, pleads guilty or nolo contendere to an
offense listed under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code relating to the
conduct of business in the tattoo facility.
B. In the event of suspension and/or revocation of the tattoo establishment
license, the Health Officer shall personally serve the owner/operator or
licensee of the tattoo and/or body piercing establishment with written
notice, specifying the reasons therefor, before said suspension or
revocation shall become effective. Personal delivery of the written
notice to the owner/operator shall be sufficient proof of service.
C. The tattoo operator shall have the right to a hearing on said suspension
or revocation, which shall be held before the Board of Health within 10
days after the service of said notice, whether or not the suspension or
revocation was effective immediately. The Board of Health shall uphold,
reverse or modify such suspension or revocation.
A. Any operator or other person who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $600 and costs of the action in addition to the revocation
and/or suspension of any license.
B. If an operator is found to be in default of such fine and costs, such
person may be sentenced and committed to the Clinton County Prison
for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation exists shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 358-3 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 358-5
1:426
ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 3-7-1977 by Ord. No. 4B; amended in its entirety
11-21-2011 by Ord. No. 893 (Ch. 24, Part 1, of the 2003 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 365-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Earned Income Tax
Ordinance of the City of Lock Haven."
§ 365-2. Authorization.
This article is hereby enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Local
Tax Enabling Act, P.L. 1257, known as Act No. 511 of 1965, effective January
1, 1966, as amended through in Act 166 of 2002 and Act No. 32 of 2008, 53
P.S. § 6924.101 et seq. (known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act," and herein
referred to as the "Act").
§ 365-3. Incorporation by reference.
Act 32 (53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 through 6924.901) and its definitions, duties,
directives, rules, regulations, powers and penalties is hereby adopted by
reference as if same had been set forth fully herein.
§ 365-4. Definitions.
A. The following words and phrases are included herein when used in this
section shall have the meanings given to them in this section unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
DOMICILE — The place where a person lives and has a permanent
home and to which the person has the intention of returning whenever
absent. Actual residence is not necessarily domicile, for "domicile" is
the fixed place of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is
permanent rather than transitory. "Domicile" is the voluntarily fixed
place of habitation of a person, not for a mere special or limited
purpose, but with the present intention of making a permanent home,
until some event occurs to induce the person to adopt some other
permanent home. In the case of a business, "domicile" is that place
considered as the center of business affairs and the place where its
functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — The compensation as required to be reported to
or as determined by the Department of Revenue under Section 303
of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the Tax Reform
Code of 1971,142 and rules and regulations promulgated under that
section. Employee business expenses as reported to or determined by
the Department of Revenue under Article III of the Tax Reform Code
142. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7303.
§ 365-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-4
1:427
§ 365-5. Imposition of tax.
of 1971 shall constitute allowable deductions in determining earned
income. The term does not include offsets for business losses. The
amount of any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy
shall not be taxable as earned income.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business, other
than a corporation, as required to be reported to or as determined by
the Department of Revenue under Section 303 of the Act of March 4,
1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the Tax Reform Code of 1971,143 and rules
and regulations promulgated under that section.
NONRESIDENT — A person or business domiciled outside the political
subdivision levying the tax.
RESIDENT — A person or business domiciled in the political
subdivision levying the tax.
TAX COLLECTION COMMITTEE (TCC) — The Clinton Tax Collection
Committee established to govern this tax collection district for the
purpose of income tax collection.
TAX COLLECTION DISTRICT (TCD) — The tax collection district is
established under Section 504 of Act 32144 and includes the school
districts and municipalities set forth in the Clinton Tax Collection
Committee Tax Collection Agreement.
TAX OFFICE/TAX COLLECTOR — The agency engaged to administer
and collect earned income taxes for this tax collection district. Unless
otherwise specifically provided, for purposes of the obligations of an
employer, the term shall mean the tax officer for the tax collection
district within which the employer is located, or, if an employer
maintains workplaces in more than one district, the tax officer for each
such district with respect to employees principally employed therein.
B. In addition to the above definitions, this section incorporates by
reference those words, phrases and definitions as listed in Act 32 (53
P.S. §§ 6924.101 through 6924.901).
A. Resident tax. A tax at the rate of 1/2% is hereby levied on all earned
income and net profits, as defined by Act 32, on residents of the City of
Lock Haven.
B. Nonresident tax. A tax at the rate of 1/2% is hereby levied on all earned
income and net profits earned by nonresidents for work done or
services performed or rendered in the City of Lock Haven.
C. All changes shall remain in effect on a calendar-year basis without
annual reenactment unless the rate of tax is subsequently changed.
143. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7303.
144. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.504.
§ 365-4 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 365-6
1:428
§ 365-6. Administration powers and duties of officer.
The collection and administration of the tax provided for in this article shall
be performed by the Tax Officer appointed by the Tax Collection Committee.
Said Tax Officer shall receive compensation for services and expenses as
determined by agreement between the TCC and the Tax Officer. The Tax
Officer shall have the power as provided for by the Local Tax Enabling
Act.145
§ 365-7. Exemptions and credits.
A. No exemptions or credits based on age or income, or any other
conditions, are granted by this article. Nothing in this article is
intended to preclude or inhibit any credit or exemption imposed by act
of law or regulation.
B. Payments of tax on income due any state other than Pennsylvania or to
any political subdivision thereof by residents thereof pursuant to any
state or local law, to the extent that such income includes salaries,
wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive payments, fees, tips and other
compensation or net profits of businesses, professions or other
activities, but in such proportions as hereinafter set forth, shall be
credited to and allowed as a deduction from the liability of such person
for the tax imposed by this article on salaries, wages, commissions,
bonuses, incentive payments, fees, tips and other compensation or net
profits of business, professions or other activities, if residents of the
City of Lock Haven receive like credits and deductions of a similar
degree from the tax on income imposed by the other state or political
subdivision thereof.
(1) Where a credit or deduction is allowable, it shall be allowed in
proportion to the concurrent periods for which taxes are imposed
by the other state or respective political subdivisions, but not in
excess of the amount paid for the concurrent period and not in
excess of the local Pennsylvania tax liability. No other exemptions
based on any other factor to include age or income level is granted
by this article. Nothing in this article is intended to preclude or
inhibit any credit or exemption imposed by act of law or regulation.
(2) No credit or deduction shall be allowed against any tax on earned
income imposed under authority of this article to the extent of the
amount of credit or deduction takes from the same period by the
taxpayer against any income tax imposed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania under Section 314 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6,
No. 2) known as the "Tax Reform Code of 1971,"146 on account of
taxes imposed on income by other states or by their political
subdivisions.
145. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
146. Editor's Note: See (72 P.S. § 7314.
§ 365-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-7
1:429
§ 365-8. Effective date.
This article shall be effective January 1, 2012, It is the intention of the
Council of the City of Lock Haven that this article shall, except for providing
an earned income tax for nonresidents, provide procedural modifications
only to the previously adopted Earned Income Tax Ordinance, and no gap as
to imposition of the tax set forth herein should be inferred.
C. Any nonresident who is otherwise subject to the earned income tax of
the City of Lock Haven is hereby exempted from the imposition,
collection, and payment of this tax, provided the domicile of the
nonresident taxpayer provides a like exemption from the imposition,
collection, and payment of an earned income tax to any resident of the
City of Lock Haven, Clinton County, Pennsylvania, who would otherwise
be subject to an earned income tax in the domicile of that nonresident.
No other exemption or credit based on any other factor to include age
or income level is granted by this article. Nothing in this article is
intended to preclude or inhibit any credit or exemption imposed by act
of law or regulation.
§ 365-7 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 365-8
1:430
ARTICLE II
Local Economic Revitalization Tax
[Adopted 7-7-1986 by Ord. No. 240B (Ch. 24, Part 4, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 365-9. Boundaries of eligible areas.
City Council finds that all areas of the City of Lock Haven zoned as Central
Business Districts, General Commercial Districts, General Commercial/
Light Industrial Districts and Industrial Districts, or which may in the
future be zoned Central Business Districts, General Commercial Districts,
General Commercial/Light Industrial Districts and Industrial Districts, shall
be determined as "deteriorated areas," as defined in Act 76 of 1977,147 and
all industrial, commercial and other business property located within such
zoning districts shall be considered "deteriorated property" and eligible for
tax exemption.
§ 365-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL/RETAIL — Engaging in a business, enterprise, activity,
service or other undertaking for profit or remuneration.[Added
12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 913]
DETERIORATED PROPERTY — Any industrial, commercial or other
business property owned by an individual, association or corporation and
located in an eligible deteriorated area, as established by this article or any
amendment thereto.
IMPROVEMENT — Repair, construction or reconstruction, including
alterations and additions, having the effect of rehabilitating a deteriorated
property so that it becomes habitable or attains higher standards of safety,
health, economic use or amenity, or brought into compliance with laws,
ordinances and regulations governing such standards. Ordinary upkeep and
maintenance shall not be deemed an improvement.
INDUSTRIAL/MANUFACTURING — The manufacturing, compounding,
assembling, processing, packaging or treatment of raw materials or other
products.[Added 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 913]
§ 365-11. Exemption schedule. [Amended 6-1-1992 by Ord. No.
408B]
A. The following schedule of exemptions, with respect to improvement of
deteriorated property, is hereby adopted with the exemption to be
granted on the increase in assessment attributable to the actual cost of
improvements:
147. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 4722 et seq.
§ 365-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-11
1:431
§ 365-12. Procedure for obtaining exemption.
Any person desiring tax exemption pursuant to this article shall apply shall
apply to the City of Lock Haven at the time a building permit is secured for
construction. The procedure for obtaining exemption shall be in accordance
with the provisions of the Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act,
December 1, 1977, P.L. 237.148
Improvement Exemption Schedule - Industrial/Manufacturing
Year
Percentage of
Deduction on
Improvements
Percentage of Tax
Collected on Increased
Assessment
1 100% 0%
2 90% 10%
3 80% 20%
4 70% 30%
5 60% 40%
6 50% 50%
7 40% 60%
8 30% 70%
9 20% 80%
10 10% 90%
11 and
thereafter
0% 100%
Improvement Exemption Schedule - Retail/Commercial
Year
Percentage of
Deduction on
Improvements
Percentage of Tax
Collected on Increased
Assessment
1 100% 0%
2 75% 25%
3 50% 50%
4 and
thereafter
0% 100%
B. The tax exemption from tax as authorized by this article shall be upon
the property exempted and shall not terminate upon the sale or
exchange of the property.
148. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 4722 et seq/
§ 365-11 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 365-12
1:432
ARTICLE III
Mercantile Tax
[Adopted 12-29-1989 by Ord. No. 189B (Ch. 24, Part 6, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 365-13. Definitions.
The following words or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this section, except when the context indicates
a different meaning:
ENGAGE IN BUSINESS — Engage in business within the City of Lock
Haven.
FISCAL YEAR — The City of Lock Haven's fiscal year, beginning the first
day of January.
GROSS OR WHOLE VOLUME OF BUSINESS — Both cash and credit
transactions occurring within the City of Lock Haven, excepting that the tax
shall not be levied on the dollar volume of business transacted by wholesale
and retail dealers derived from the resale of goods, wares and merchandise
taken by any dealer as a trade-in or as part payment for other goods, wares
and merchandise, except to the extent that the resale price exceeds the
trade-in allowance.
PERSON — Natural persons, corporations, partnerships, associations, firms
and fiduciaries. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing
a penalty, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers
thereof. The term "person" shall not include those corporations or
associations organized for religious, charitable or educational purposes, nor
agencies of the government of the United States or of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
QUARTERLY or QUARTER — One of the four periods into which the fiscal
year is divided, namely as follows:
RETAIL DEALER OR VENDOR — Any person who is a dealer in, or a
vendor of, goods, wares and merchandise, who is not a wholesale dealer or
wholesale vendor.
TAX COLLECTOR — The person, whether an individual, partnership,
association or any other entity, appointed by the City of Lock Haven to
collect the tax hereinafter imposed.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business that
is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive calendar days.
A. First quarter: January 1 to March 31.
B. Second quarter: April 1 to June 30.
C. Third quarter: July 1 to September 30.
D. Fourth quarter: October 1 to December 31.
§ 365-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-13
1:433
WHOLESALE DEALER OR VENDOR — Any person who sells to dealers
in, or vendors of, goods, wares and merchandise, and shall include any
merchandise broker, factor or commission merchant.
§ 365-14. Imposition of tax.
A tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon the privilege
of doing business within the City of Lock Haven, according to the following
schedule:
§ 365-15. Returns.
A. Wholesale vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise at the
rate of one mill on each dollar or whole or gross volume of business
transacted.
B. Retail vendors or dealers and such businesses which may not be said to
be wholesale or retail, including all theaters and moving picture
houses; morticians; tombstone and monument dealers; meat dealers;
grocers; druggists, confectioners; restaurants or other places where
food, drink or refreshments are sold; produce and merchandise
vendors; stationers; jewelers; lumber dealers, including commission
men and all persons who make a business of buying lumber for sale;
persons engaged in the development or improvement of real estate for
profit; new and used furniture dealers; merchants offering for sale
goods, wares or merchandise at public auction; and those who engage
in or conduct any of the several trades, businesses or occupations
herein enumerated with the use of vending machines; and dealers and/
or collectors of salvage, rags, junk, ashes or refuse, at the rate of 1 1/2
mills on each dollar of gross volume of business transacted.
C. Persons who are engaged in a business which is both wholesale and
retail, or in both types of business, at the rate of one mill on each dollar
of the annual gross volume of wholesale business transacted and at the
rate of 1 1/2 mills on the gross volume of retail business transacted.
D. Persons who are engaged in a business, temporary, seasonal or
itinerant by its nature, if at wholesale at the rate of one mill on each
dollar of the whole volume gross of business transacted within the
territorial limits of the City of Lock Haven and, if at retail, at the rate of
1 1/2 mills on each dollar of the whole volume gross of business
transacted by him within the territorial limits of the City of Lock Haven.
A. Every person subject to the tax herein imposed by this article shall
make a quarterly return to the Tax Collector upon a form provided by
the Tax Collector, which form shall include the computed quarterly
gross volume of business, the classification of the business, the rate of
the tax and such other pertinent information as the Tax Collector may
require. Every return shall be given under oath as to the facts
appearing thereon or may be certified to as a true and correct and
complete return given under penalty of perjury. The return for a quarter
§ 365-13 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 365-15
1:434
§ 365-16. Improper returns and failure to file a return.
§ 365-17. Payment.
§ 365-18. Issuance of receipts.
The Tax Collector shall issue a receipt upon payment of the tax imposed by
this article. If an additional sum is found due under an assessment, the Tax
as required in this section shall be filed on or before the 15th day of the
quarter next succeeding the quarter for which the return is to be filed;
that is, the return for the quarter from July 1 to September 30 shall be
filed on or before October 15, and likewise for the following quarters
on the 15th day of January, April and July, respectively. No person,
however, shall be considered to have failed to have filed a return under
this section until 15 days after the date for filing the return.
B. Those temporary, season or itinerant persons who shall engage in
business for a period of less than 60 consecutive days shall file their
return on the day they conclude their business, but the Tax Collector, in
his discretion, may extend the time of filing an additional 15 days before
the person will be considered to have failed to file a return.
A. If the Tax Collector is of the opinion that any person shall have made a
return that is not true and correct or shall have failed to file a return,
the Tax Collector shall assess the said person for such gross volume of
business and at such rate and in such classification as shall be proper.
The Tax Collector may make an assessment at any time after the
returns have been filed, or after the returns have not been filed.
B. If the Tax Collector shall make an assessment, the Tax Collector shall
give notice of the assessment to the person affected. Such notice shall
set forth the fact of the assessment, the classification of the business,
the rate of tax and the tax due according to the assessment. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Collector shall have the right to
appeal to the appropriate court as in other cases provided.
A. Payment of the tax imposed by this article for a quarter shall be made
on or before the 15th day of the quarter next succeeding the quarter for
which the tax is to be paid, but no tax imposed by this article shall be
considered overdue until 15 days after the date for paying the tax.
B. An assessment or appeal shall not affect the day payment is due, but
any amounts imposed by an assessment shall be considered due as
above, that is, retroactively from the final assessment.
C. Those persons who engage in business for a period of less than 60 days
consecutively shall pay the tax imposed by this article on the day their
return should be filed with the Tax Collector according to § 365-15,
above, and the tax will be immediately overdue if not paid by such date.
§ 365-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-18
1:435
Collector shall issue a supplemental receipt upon payment of the additional
sum.
§ 365-19. Retention of receipts.
Every person who shall have received a receipt issued in accord with
§ 365-18, above, shall retain the same and exhibit it upon request during a
period of one year after the time when the tax which is receipted shall have
become due.
§ 365-20. Conduct of business without paying tax.
No person shall conduct any business subject to the payment of the tax
imposed by this article after the payment of the tax shall have become
overdue and remain unpaid.
§ 365-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
Any person or any officer, agent, employee, employer or servant who
knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return or application
required in this article or who fails, neglects, or refuses to file a return
required by this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 365-22. Suit on collection and penalty.
The Tax Collector may sue for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under
this article. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due in each year,
interest at the rate of 6% per annum on the amount of said tax and an
additional penalty of 1% per annum on the amount of the unpaid tax for
each month or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid shall
be added and collected. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such
tax, the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of
collection and penalties herein imposed.
§ 365-18 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 365-22
1:436
ARTICLE IV
Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted 8-31-1992 by Ord. No. 415B (Ch. 24, Part 5, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 365-23. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Amended Business Privilege Tax
Ordinance."
§ 365-24. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
BUSINESS — Any activity carried on or exercised for gain or profit in the
City of Lock Haven including, but not limited to, the sale of merchandise
or other tangible personalty, the performance of services and the rental of
personalty and/or realty.
CALENDAR YEAR — The period January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
CITY — The City of Lock Haven, Clinton County, Pennsylvania.
COMMON CONTROL — Those business entities whose income is combined
for the purpose of inclusion on a single federal individual, partnership or
corporate tax return.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association,
firm or corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing
a penalty, the term "person" as applied to the association shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporation, the officers
thereof.
TAX ADMINISTRATOR — The person or agency duly appointed by the City
of Lock Haven to administer the within tax.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
TAXPAYER — A person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this
article.
WHOLESALE DEALER — "Wholesale dealer" or "wholesale vendor" shall
mean any person who sells to dealers in, or vendors of, goods, wares and
merchandise and to no other persons.
§ 365-25. Levy.
There is hereby levied for the tax year 1992 and annually thereafter a tax
for general purposes on the privilege of doing business as herein defined in
the City of Lock Haven as follows:
A. Rate and basis of tax. The rate of tax on each and every dollar of the
whole or gross volume of business transacted within the territorial
§ 365-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-25
1:437
limits of the City of Lock Haven shall be 1 1/2 mills; 1 1/2 mills shall
mean $1.50 per $1,000 of gross volume of business; except that the
rate of the tax on each and every dollar of the whole or gross volume of
business transacted by wholesale dealers or wholesale vendors within
the territorial limits of the City of Lock Haven shall be one mill. All
non-wholesale business of such wholesale dealers or wholesale vendors
shall be taxed at the general rate of 1 1/2 mills.
B. Computation of volume of business.
(1) Ongoing business. Every person subject to the payment of the tax
hereby imposed shall use as his annual estimated gross volume of
business the actual gross amount of business transacted by him
during the immediately preceding calendar year, providing that his
business was begun prior to such preceding calendar year.
(2) New business. If the business was begun during the first nine
months of the calendar year, the gross volume of business used to
calculate the tax due in the beginning year shall be the first three
months' average, times the number of months of operation during
the tax year. The annual estimated gross volume of business for the
second year of operation shall be calculated by annualizing the
beginning year's actual gross volume of business. If the business
was begun within the last three months of the calendar year, the
actual gross volume of business shall be used to calculate the
beginning year's tax liability. The annual estimated gross volume of
business for the second year of operation shall be calculated by
analyzing the gross volume of business from the first 90 days of
operation, even if some of the 90 days fall within the second year.
(3) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed,
who engages in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by
nature shall compute his estimated gross amount of business to be
transacted by him for the period said person engages in such
temporary, seasonal or itinerant business within the City by a
method to be determined by the Tax Administrator.
(4) The Tax Administrator is hereby authorized to accept payment
under protest of the amount of business privilege tax claimed by
the City in any case where the taxpayer disputes the validity or
amount of the City's claim for tax. If it is thereafter judicially
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction that the City has
been overpaid, the amount of overpayment shall be refunded to the
taxpayer. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to cases
in which the facts are similar to those in a case litigated in a court
of competent jurisdiction.
(5) Payments made under any mercantile tax for business to which this
tax is applicable shall be credited to this tax and vice versa.
C. Persons, businesses and receipts exempted.
§ 365-25 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 365-25
1:438
(1) Persons and businesses. Persons employed for a wage or salary, not
for profit corporations or associations organized for religious,
charitable or educational purposes, agencies of the government of
the United States or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the
business of any political subdivision or of any authority created or
organized under and pursuant to any act of assembly are exempt
from the provisions of this article.
(2) Every person whose total tax due under this article from all sources
under common control for any tax year is less than $20 is exempt
from filing a return and payment of tax for that tax year.
(3) No such tax shall be assessed and collected on a privilege,
transaction, subject or occupation which is subject to a state tax or
license fee, and which tax or license fee has been held to be the
basis for exemption from the imposition of a business privilege tax
by a municipality.
(4) Utilities. No such tax shall be assessed and collected on the gross
receipts from utility service of any person or company whose rates
of service are fixed and regulated by the Pennsylvania Pubic Utility
Commission or any public utility service rendered by any such
person or company, or on any privilege or transaction involving the
rendering of any such public utility service.
(5) State tax on tangible property. No such tax shall be assessed and
collected on the privilege of employing such tangible property as is
subject to a state tax, except on sales of admission to places of
amusement or on sales or other transfers of title or possession of
property.
(6) Production and manufacture. No such tax shall be assessed and
collected on goods, articles and products or on by-products of
manufacture, or on minerals, timber, natural resources and farm
products, manufactured, produced or grown in the City of Lock
Haven or on the preparation or processing thereof for use or
market, or on any privilege, act or transaction relating to the
business of manufacturing, the production, preparation or
processing of minerals, timber and natural resources or farm
products, by manufacturers, by producers and by farmers with
respect to the goods, articles and products of their own
manufacture, production or growth, or any privilege, act or
transaction relating to the business of processing by-products of
manufacture or on the transportation, loading, unloading or
dumping or storage of such goods, articles, products or byproducts.
D. Determination of gross or whole volume business. Gross or whole
volume of business upon which the tax hereunder is computed shall
include the gross consideration credited or received for or on account
§ 365-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-25
1:439
of sales made, rentals and/or services rendered, subject only to the
following allowable deductions and exemptions:
(1) The dollar volume of business transacted by wholesale and retail
dealers from the resale of goods, wares and merchandise taken by
any dealer as trade-in or as part payment for other goods, wares
and merchandise, except to the extent that the resale price exceeds
the trade-in allowance.
(2) Refunds, credits or allowances given by a taxpayer to a purchaser
on account of defects in goods, wares or merchandise sold or on
account of goods, wares or merchandise returned.
(3) Any commission paid by a broker to another broker on account of a
purchase or sales contract initiated, executed or cleared with such
other broker.
(4) Bad debts, where the deduction is also taken in the same year for
federal income taxation purposes.
(5) Taxes collected as agent for the United States of America,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the City of Lock Haven.
E. Partial exemptions. Where gross or whole volume of business in its
entirety cannot be subjected to the tax imposed by this article by reason
of the provisions of the Constitution of the United States or any other
provision of law, the Tax Administrator, with the approval of the Council
of the City of Lock Haven, shall establish rules and regulations and
methods of allocation and evaluation so that only that part of the gross
or whole volume of business which is properly attributable and
allowable to doing business in the City shall be taxed hereunder.
F. Rate when same tax is imposed by two taxing bodies. If any person is
liable for the same tax on the same subject imposed under the Local Tax
Enabling Act149 and its amendments, to the City and one or more
political subdivisions of the state, then, and in that event, the tax shall
be apportioned by such percentage as may be agreed upon by such
political subdivisions, but in no event shall the combined taxes of both
subdivisions exceed a maximum rate of tax as fixed by said Enabling Act
permitting the imposition of such taxes, and if no maximum rate of tax
is fixed by said Enabling Act, the tax due hereunder shall be reduced by
the amount of tax on the same subject collected by one or more other
political subdivision(s); provided, however, that said reduction shall be
limited to an amount not to exceed 50% of the amount otherwise due
hereunder.
G. Records. The taxpayer, to obtain the foregoing enumerated exclusions
and deductions, shall keep books and records of his business so as to
show clearly, accurately and separately the amount of such sales and
services as are excluded from the tax and the amounts of such sales and
149. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 365-25 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 365-25
1:440
§ 365-26. Returns.
services which he is entitled to deduct from the gross volume of
business as hereinbefore provided.
A. Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the Tax
Administrator. Every person making a return shall certify the
correctness thereof by affidavit.
B. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commenced
his business on or before January 1 of the full calendar year previous to
the beginning of any tax year shall on or before the June 15 of the tax
year file with the Tax Administrator a return setting forth his name, his
business address and other such information as may be necessary in
arriving at the actual gross amount of business transacted by him
during the preceding calendar year and the amount of the tax due.
C. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business before the beginning of the tax year but after
January 1 of the full calendar year previous to the beginning of the tax
year shall on or before June 15 of the tax year file with the Tax
Administrator a return setting forth his name, his business, business
address and such other information as may be necessary in arriving at
the estimated gross amount of business transacted by him as calculated
under § 365-258B(2) hereof and the amount of tax due, provided 100
days have elapsed from the commencement of the business to June 15
of the tax year. If a taxpayer has not been in business for 100 days as of
June 15 of the tax year, whether or not he commenced business within
the tax year, his return shall be filed within 100 days of the
commencement of his business.
D. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this article
who engages in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its
nature shall at the commencement of business for the tax year file a
return with the Tax Administrator setting forth his name, his business,
his business address and such information as may be necessary in
arriving at the estimated gross amount of business to be transacted by
him as calculated in accordance with § 365-25B(1).
E. Any person going out of or ceasing to do business shall, within seven
days from the date of ceasing to do business, file a return showing the
actual gross volume of business conducted and done by such person
during the tax year in which said person ceased doing business and pay
the tax due as computed thereon at the rate herein provided for at the
time of filing said return. If such tax has been previously paid based
upon estimated gross receipts, the taxpayer shall be entitled to a
refund, without interest, of any excess tax paid for the tax year in which
business was terminated.
F. Payment of tax and penalties for late payment. The business privilege
tax levied pursuant to this article shall be due and payable on the date
§ 365-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-26
1:441
§ 365-27. Registration. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670]
After the effective date of this article, any person desiring to commence
or recommence any business, as herein defined, within the City of Lock
Haven shall register with the Tax Administrator and shall pay a one-time
registration fee in an amount as established from time to time by resolution
of City Council. Registration shall be permanent, but will expire when the
business is inactive for one complete tax year.
§ 365-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No.
670]
Any person who conducts, transacts or engages in any of the businesses
subject to the tax imposed by this article, without having first registered
with the Tax Administrator, or who fails to file a tax return as required by
the provisions of this article, or who willfully files a false return, or who fails
to maintain such records and books of account as shall enable him to make
a true and correct return in accordance with the provisions of this article
or any person or persons subject to, or supposed to be subject to, the tax
imposed by this article who refuses to allow the Tax Administrator or his
deputies to examine the books, papers and records of any such person or
persons or who fails to comply with any other provision of this article shall,
upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600, plus costs and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
§ 365-29. Continuing offense.
Each day on which such person violated this article may be considered as
a separate offense and punishable as such as aforeprovided, without the
necessity of filing a separate complaint.
§ 365-30. Duties of Tax Administrator.
on which the taxpayer is required to file a return as set forth above. All
taxpayers who shall fail to pay said tax by the due date shall be charged
a penalty of 10%, plus an additional 1% per month or fractional part of
a month, commencing with the penalty period, until said tax is paid.
G. Receipt. The Tax Administrator shall, when requested, upon payment to
him of the business privilege tax, give the person paying the same a
receipt therefor.
A. The Tax Administrator is charged with the duties of collecting and
receiving the taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall
be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received from each
person paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. The Tax Administrator and his duly appointed deputies are hereby
empowered, with the approval of the Council of the City of Lock Haven,
to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations relating to
§ 365-26 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 365-30
1:442
§ 365-31. Confidential nature of returns.
Any information gained by the Tax Administrator or any other official,
agent or employee of the City of Lock Haven as a result of any returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this
article shall be confidential, except in accordance with proper judicial order
or as otherwise provided by law.
§ 365-32. Suit on collection of penalty.
any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this
article, including provisions for the examination and correction of
returns and payments alleged or found to be incorrect, or as to which
an overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred, and charged with
enforcing the provisions of this article and any rules and/or regulations
promulgated pursuant hereto.
C. In the event the person to be assessed neglects or refuses to make a
return, then in such case, the Tax Administrator or his duly appointed
deputies shall assess said person or persons on such an amount of
whole or gross volume of business as said Tax Administrator or his
deputies deem reasonable and appropriate. In all cases of assessment,
the Tax Administrator or his duly appointed deputies shall give the
parties assessed a notice in which shall be stated the trade, business,
occupation or class, and the amount of the business privilege tax
imposed or levied.
D. The taxpayer shall maintain such records and books of account as will
enable him to make a true and accurate return in accordance with the
provisions of this article. Such accounts and records must disclose in
detail the gross receipts and other data pertaining to the taxpayer's
gross volume of business and must be sufficiently complete to enable
the Tax Administrator or his deputies to verify all transactions. The Tax
Administrator or his deputies are hereby authorized to examine the
books, papers and records of any person or persons subject to or
supposed to be subject to the tax imposed by this article, in order to
verify the accuracy of the return made, or if no return was made,
ascertain the tax due.
E. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator shall
have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas, as in other
cases.
A. The Tax Administrator or his duly appointed deputies shall have the
power, in the name of the City of Lock Haven, to institute proceedings
against any and all persons who violate the provisions of this article.
B. If for any reasons the tax is not paid when due and suit is brought for
the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in
addition, be liable for the costs of collection and interest and penalties
herein imposed.
§ 365-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-32
1:443

ARTICLE V
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 670 (Ch. 24, Part 3, of the 2003
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 365-33. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance" of the
City of Lock Haven.
§ 365-34. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the City
of Lock Haven, regardless of where the documents making the transfer
are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements on such
transfer took place, as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101 et seq.
§ 365-35. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CITY — The City of Lock Haven, Clinton County, Pennsylvania.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title of
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 365-40.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
§ 365-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-35
1:445
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person" as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this City including,
without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees
and other improvements, immovables or interests which by custom,
usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently
attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate.
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
§ 365-35 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 365-35
1:446
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold.
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years, but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consist of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more, or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in
real estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against real estate;
provided, that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale.
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations.
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest.
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
D.
§ 365-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-35
1:447
§ 365-36. Imposition of tax; interest.
§ 365-37. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 365-38. Excluded transactions.
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document, or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds
whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the
signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257,150 so that if any other political subdivision shall impose or
hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or transfer, then the
tax levied by the City Council under the authority of that Act shall,
during the time such duplication of the tax exists, except as hereinafter
otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and such 1/2 shall become
effective without any action on the part of the City Council; provided,
however, that the City and any other political subdivision which impose
such tax on the same person or transfer may agree that, instead of
limiting their respective rates to 1/2 of the rate herein provided, they
will impose respectively different rates, the total of which shall not
exceed the maximum rate permitted under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 365-36 shall not be imposed upon:
150. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 365-35 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 365-38
1:448
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed or confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments, provided said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the City is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
co-tenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and
child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and between a grandparent and
grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a
subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject
to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
§ 365-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-38
1:449
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit
of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
§ 365-38 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 365-38
1:450
§ 365-39. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided in § 365-38, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this section,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders and shareholders.
§ 365-40. Acquired company.
is not being or has not been used by such transferrer for
commercial purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 [68A
Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)], and which has as its primary purpose
preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural
or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
§ 365-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-40
1:451
§ 365-41. Credits against tax.
§ 365-42. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 365-43. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as a consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of the tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
§ 365-40 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 365-43
1:452
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff or other
officer conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 365-44. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 365-45. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording, shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983, (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to City based on
a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax, without
compensation from the City.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of the taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the recorder shall pay over to the
City all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent commission shall be
paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the recorder shall rerecord the deed or
record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the state
and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
§ 365-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-46
1:453
§ 365-46. Civil penalties.
§ 365-47. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the City, which lands, tenements,
hereditaments or interest therein, are described in or conveyed by or
transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed, assessed
and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the tax under
this article is due and payable and continue until discharged by payment or
in accordance with the law, and the solicitor is authorized to file a municipal
or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Clinton County, in accordance
with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S.
§ 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 365-48. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 365-49. Regulations.
The Recorder of Deeds of Clinton County is charged with enforcement and
collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable
regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which
have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under
72 P.S § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this article.
A. If any part of any underpayment of taxes imposed by this article is due
to fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 365-46 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 365-49
1:454
ARTICLE VI
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 808]
§ 365-50. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — As defined in 53 P.S. § 6924.501.151
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — As defined in 53 P.S. § 6924.501.152
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received; whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the City
of Lock Haven.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 365-51 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year, a
calendar year.
§ 365-51. Levy of tax.
A. For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing January 1, 2008; upon the privilege of engaging
in an occupation with a primary place of employment within the City of
Lock Haven during the tax year. Each natural person who exercises
such privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall pay the
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 365-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-51
1:455
§ 365-52. Exemption and refunds.
tax for that year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata basis,
in accordance with the provisions of this article. This tax may be used
solely for the following purposes as the same may be allocated by the
City from time to time:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(3) Reduction of property taxes; or
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa. C.S. Ch. 85, Subch.
F (relating to homestead property exclusion).
B. The political subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived
from the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other
taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the political
subdivision. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each
calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions
within which a person may be employed.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
§ 365-51 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 365-52
1:456
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy
of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the
tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in than
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may
pursue collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
§ 365-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-52
1:457
§ 365-53. Duty of employers to collect.
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The City of Lock Haven, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal
law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.
Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the
last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. The City of Lock Haven or the Collector shall determine
eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest $0.01.
Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll-period basis for each
payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation, except
as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this
subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of
the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer, and the employee will notify other
§ 365-52 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 365-53
1:458
§ 365-54. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of
the tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. Each
employer, in filing this return and making payment of the tax withheld from
his employees, shall be entitled to retain a commission calculated at the rate
of 2% of the gross tax due and payable; provided, that such tax is collected
and paid over by the employer in accordance with § 365-53G. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 365-55. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 365-56. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 365-52B of
this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 365-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-57
1:459
§ 365-57. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day
the person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is, concurrent
employment, or an occupation which requires the person working in more
than one political subdivision during a payroll period, the priority of claim
to collect the local services tax shall be in the following order:
§ 365-58. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 365-59. Administration of tax.
A. First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or her
principal office or is principally employed;
B. Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and works
if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
C. Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and which
imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home. In case of
dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar year
declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes prima
facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer of self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to proscribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
§ 365-57 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 365-59
1:460
§ 365-60. Suits for collection.
§ 365-61. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 365-62. Interpretation.
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights under Act 50 of
1998153 (municipalities may detail their appeal processes).
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
153. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ 365-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-62
1:461
§ 365-63. Effective date.
The tax imposed by this article shall be effective on January 1, 2008, and all
calendar years thereafter unless repealed or modified by ordinance of the
City of Lock Haven.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 365-62 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 365-63
1:462
Chapter 371
TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANTS
§ 371-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 371-2. License required; fee; conditions thereof.
A. As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meaning ascribed to them herein:
LEGAL HOLIDAY — New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, corporation
or other legal entity.
SALESPERSON —
Engaging in peddling, soliciting, purchasing, or taking orders,
either by sample or otherwise, for any goods, wares, merchandise
or services upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground, or
from house to house, within the City.
(1)
Selling, soliciting, purchasing or taking orders for any goods,
wares, services, or merchandise from a fixed location within the
City, on a temporary basis, which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, such activities conducted at the time of special occasions
or celebrations, for seasonal purposes or for in advance of specific
yearly holidays. Provided, "transient retail business" shall not
include any permanent business conducted from a fixed location in
the City.
(2)
B. The singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the
singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. No person shall engage in any transient retail business within the City
of Lock Haven without first having obtained from the Chief of Police a
license, for which a fee, in an amount as established from time to time
by resolution of Council, which shall be for the use of the City, shall be
charged. Provided, no license fee shall be charged under this section:
(1) To farmers selling their own produce.
(2) For the sale of goods, wares, and merchandise, donated by the
owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any
charitable or philanthropic purpose.
(3) To any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products, or milk and milk products.
(4) To children under the age of 18 years who take orders for and
deliver newspapers, greeting cards, candy, bakery products and the
§ 365-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 371-2
1:463
§ 371-3. Application for license.
Every person desiring a license under this chapter shall first make
application to the Chief of Police for such license. If such person shall also
be required to obtain a license from any state or county officer, he shall,
when making such application, exhibit a valid license from such state or
county officer. The applicant shall state:
like, or who represent the Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts or similar
organizations.
(5) To the seeking or taking of orders by insurance agents or brokers
licensed under the insurance laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(6) To a person who has complied with the provisions of the Solicitation
of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act, 10 P.S. § 162.1 et seq., as
hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the
General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
(7) For taking orders for merchandise, by sample, from dealers or
merchants for individuals or companies who pay a license or
business privilege tax at their chief place of business.
B. But all persons exempted hereby from the payment of the license fee
shall be required to register with the Chief of Police and obtain a license
without fee. Provided, further, any person dealing in one or more of the
above-mentioned exempted categories and dealing with other goods,
wares or merchandise not so exempted, shall be subject to the payment
of the license fee fixed by this section for his activities in connection
with the sale of goods, wares and merchandise not in such exempted
categories. Provided, further, the Chief of Police may similarly exempt
from payment of the license fee, but not from registering with him,
persons working without compensation and selling goods, wares or
merchandise for the sole benefit of any nonprofit corporation. Provided,
further, every license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
be issued on an individual basis to persons engaging in such business;
every individual shall obtain a separate license, issued to him in his
name and the license fee hereby imposed shall by applicable to every
such individual license, except that a representative of a charitable
organization may obtain the licenses for the applicants therein.
A. His criminal record, if any.
B. The name and address of the person by whom he is employed.
C. The type of goods, wares, merchandise or services he wishes to deal
with in such transient retail business.
D. The length of time for which the license is to be issued.
E. The type and license number of the vehicle to be used, if any.
§ 371-2 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 371-4
1:464
§ 371-4. Issuance of license, custody, display, or exhibit.
Upon receipt of such application and the prescribed fee, the Chief of Police,
if he shall find such application in order, shall issue the license required
under this chapter. Such license shall contain the information required to
be given on the application therefor. A license shall be required for every
four sales persons who engage in any of the activities hereunder within
the City. Every license holder shall carry such license upon his person if
engaged in transient retail business from house to house or upon any of the
streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds or shall display such license at
the location where he shall engage in such business if doing so at a fixed
location. He shall exhibit such license, upon request, to all police officers,
City officials and citizens or residents of the City.
§ 371-5. Prohibited acts.
No person in any transient retail business shall:
§ 371-6. Supervision; records and reports.
The Chief of Police shall supervise the activities of all persons holding
licenses under this chapter; he shall keep a record of all licenses issued
hereunder and shall make a report thereof each month to the City Council.
§ 371-7. Suspension and revocation of license; appeal.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke any license
issued under this chapter when he deems such suspension or revocation
A. Sell any product or type of product not mentioned in his license.
B. Hawk or cry his wares upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or
public grounds in the City, expecting municipal parking lots provided
that all fees are paid.
C. When operating from a vehicle, stop or park such vehicle upon any of
the streets or alleys in the City for longer than necessary in order to sell
therefrom to persons residing in the immediate vicinity.
D. Park any vehicle upon any of the streets or alleys in the City for the
purpose of sorting, rearranging or cleaning any of his goods, wares or
merchandise or of disposing of any carton, wrapping material or of any
stock or wares or foodstuffs which have become unsalable through
handling, age or otherwise.
E. Engage in any business activity prohibited in the City by general or
special law applicable thereto.
F. Engage in any house-to-house activity, except by prior appointment, at
any time on a Sunday or legal holiday or at any time before 9:00 a.m. or
after 8:00 p.m. on any day of the week other than a Sunday or legal
holiday.
§ 371-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 371-7
1:465
to be beneficial to the public health, safety or morals, for violation of any
provision of this chapter or for giving false information upon any application
for a license hereunder. Appeals from any suspension or revocation may be
made to the City Council at any time within 10 days after such suspension or
revocation. No part of a license fee shall be refunded to any person whose
license shall have been suspended or revoked.
§ 371-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $50 and not more than $500 plus costs and, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each
day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
Chapter 380
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 371-7 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 371-8
1:466
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 380-1. Definitions and interpretations.
§ 380-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action.
§ 380-3. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations, and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
§ 380-4. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
parts to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq., except that in this chapter, the word "street" may be used
interchangeably with the word "highway," and shall have the same
meaning as the word "highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays" as used in this chapter shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
D. Although the streets in the City run generally in a northeast-southwest
and a northwest-southeast direction, for the purpose of this chapter, Jay
Street and the streets running parallel or generally parallel to Jay
Street shall be deemed to run in a north-south direction, and East Main
Street and the streets parallel or generally parallel to East Main Street
shall be deemed to run in an east-west direction.]
E. For the purposes of Articles IV, V, VI and VII of this chapter, the word
"vehicle" shall include trucks, tractor trucks, automobiles, motorcycles,
pedalcycles, campers, motor homes, trailers, fifth-wheel units, and any
other device included in the definition of vehicles in the Vehicle Code,
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq. [Added 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 733]
§ 380-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-4
1:467
§ 380-5. Experimental regulations.
The City Council may, from time to time by resolution, designate places
upon and along the highways in the City where, for a period of not more
than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate such locations
by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be effective as if they had been specified in this chapter.
No person shall operate and no person shall move, remove, destroy or
deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of this
section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature and, in case of a
violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere
in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25 together with costs of
prosecution; provided, the purpose of this section is to allow for test and
experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent
changes in the ordinances of the City relative to traffic and parking.
§ 380-6. Traffic on streets closed or restricted for construction,
maintenance or special events.
A. The Chief of Police shall have the following powers to regulate traffic
and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any
such regulation, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$25, together with costs of prosecution.
A. The City Council shall have authority to close any street or specific part
of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police
officers at each end of the closed portion while construction or
maintenance work is underway or a special event is being conducted on
the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle
upon any such closed portion.
§ 380-4 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-6
1:468
§ 380-7. Use of streets by processions and assemblages.
B. The City Council shall have authority to establish a restricted traffic
area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is
underway and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such
restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign
directing that vehicle to stop, or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. For the purpose of this section, the words "assemblage" and
"procession" shall have the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles, which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street.
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral caravan or
military convoy.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit from the Chief of Police, which shall be issued
without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least one week
in advance of the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held,
but in any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to be
used, application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall state the place where and the date
when the assemblage is to be held, the hour when the assemblage may
convene and the hour by which it shall have been completely dispersed.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any
assemblage unless the permit has been granted, or at any time or place
other than that authorized by the permit.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit from the Chief of Police, which shall be issued
without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least two weeks
in advance of the day when the procession is proposed to be held, but in
any case where the state-designated highway is proposed to be used,
application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall specify the date on which the
procession is to be held, the route to be followed by the procession, the
hour when and place where participants may commence to assemble
and form before the procession is underway, the time when the
procession may commence to move along its route, and the time by
which the end of the procession shall have been disbanded. It shall be
§ 380-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-7
1:469
§ 380-8. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the City of Lock Haven are hereby authorized to
direct traffic on the highways of the City and at intersections thereof and to
otherwise enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 380-9. Authorization for use of speed-timing devices.
unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any procession
unless the permit shall have been granted, or under any conditions as
to time or route or otherwise than those stated in the permit.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The Police Department is hereby authorized to use all speed-timing
devices for the determination of speed of a motor vehicle as are
approved or will be approved by the Department of Transportation of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance with 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 3368.
B. This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways within
the City be they City, county or state highways, and does also hereby
elect to exercise all powers granted to "local authorities" under the
Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 6101 et seq., as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 380-7 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-9
1:470
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 380-10. Speed limits.
A. Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets,
as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on
any part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Between
Barton Street 15 Bellefonte Avenue and West
Fourth Street
Bellefonte Avenue 25 East Main Street and Spring
Street
Bellefonte Avenue 35 Spring Street and City line
Bennage Avenue
[Added 6-4-2018 by
Ord. No. 990]
25 Maple Street and Woods Avenue
Cree Drive 15 Irwin Street and City line
East and West Main
Street
25 Henderson Street and West
Water Street
East and West Water
Street
25 East City line and Susquehanna
Avenue
East Bald Eagle
Street
25 Corning Street east to end of
East Bald Eagle Street
East Church Street 25 Bellefonte Avenue and Race
Street
East Main Street 35 East City line and Henderson
Street
East Park Street 25 West Walnut Street and Mount
Vernon Street
East Park Street 25 West Walnut Street to railroad
East Walnut Street 35 South Liberty Street and South
Hanna Street
Frederick Street 25 Bellefonte Avenue to City line
Glenn Road 25 1,115 feet from North Fairview
Street to Irwin Street
Glenn Road 15 North Fairview Street west a
distance of 1,115 feet
Hanna Park 15 East and west exits
§ 380-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-10
1:471
Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Between
Hanna Street
[Amended 6-4-2018
by Ord. No. 990]
25 East Water Street to Castanea
Township
Hemlock Drive 35 Sylvan Drive to north City line
Highland Street 25 Bellefonte Avenue and Shamrock
Street
Hill Street
[Amended 2-6-2017
by Ord. No. 967]
35 Susquehanna Avenue and west
City line
Hill Street [Added
2-6-2017 by Ord.
No. 967]
20
For trucks
over 21,000
pounds
Susquehanna Avenue and west
City line
Irwin Street 25 Bellefonte Avenue and Glenn
Road
Maple Street [Added
6-4-2018 by Ord.
No. 990]
25 Second Avenue and Youngs
Avenue
North Fairview
Street
25 Bellefonte Avenue and
Susquehanna Avenue
North Jay Street 25 East Church Street and East
Water Street
Paul Mack Boulevard
[Amended 4-2-2012
by Ord. No. 903]
40 City line to 850 feet south of
East Church Street
Paul Mack Boulevard
[Amended 4-2-2012
by Ord. No. 903]
25 East Church Street to 850 feet
south
Peach Street 25 Pearl Street and South Jones
Street
Second Avenue
[Added 6-4-2018 by
Ord. No. 990]
25 Bellefonte Avenue and Woods
Avenue
South Fairview
Street
25 Bellefonte Avenue and Shamrock
Street
South Jones Street 25 Bellefonte Avenue and Peach
Street
Susquehanna Avenue 25 West Water Street and north
City line
§ 380-10 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-10
1:472
§ 380-11. Speed limits in parks.
Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Between
Sylvan Drive 25 Hill Street and Hemlock Drive
Third Avenue
[Added 6-4-2018 by
Ord. No. 990]
25 Bellefonte Avenue and Linden
Street
West Bald Eagle
Street
15
(flashing
school zone)
South Highland Street and
Commerce Street
West Church Street 25 Bellefonte Avenue and Water
Street
West Fourth Street 25 North Fairview Street and Irwin
Street
West Fourth Street
[Repealed
2-23-2015 by Ord.
No. 942]
West Water Street
[Amended
11-6-2006 by Ord.
No. 782]
15
(flashing
school zone)
Second Street and Fourth Street
Woods Avenue
[Amended
4-18-2005 by Ord.
No. 733; 6-4-2018
by Ord. No. 990]
25 Young's Avenue and Pearl Street
Young's Avenue 15 North of Maple Street
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35 and costs. Any person
exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour
shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five
miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. A speed limit of 15 miles per hour is established on all streets and
roadways in the public parks maintained and operated by the City,
except in the following locations, where the lower maximums, as
specified, shall apply:
§ 380-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-11
1:473
§ 380-12. Traffic control signals.
§ 380-13. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
Park Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35 and costs. Any person
exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour
shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five
miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those
locations shall be directed by those signals:
Intersection Type of Signal
Barton Street, Second Avenue and Bellefonte
Avenue
Commerce Street and Bellefonte Avenue
East and West Church Street, Corning Street
and Bellefonte Avenue
East Church Street and North Henderson
Street
East Church Street and North Jay Street
East Church Street and North Vesper Street
East Main Street and North Grove Street
East Main Street and North Hanna Street
East Main Street and North Jay Street
East Main Street and North Vesper Street
East Water Street and North Grove Street
Susquehanna Avenue, North Fairview Street
and West Water Street
West Bald Eagle Street and South Jones Street Flashing
West Main Street and First Street Flashing
B. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 380-11 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-13
1:474
A. The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another
one-way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection Vehicles Traveling On Facing
Bellefonte Avenue at
Commerce Street
Bellefonte Avenue East
Bellefonte Avenue/West
Church Street/Corning
Street
Bellefonte Avenue North
Bellefonte Avenue/West
Church Street/Corning
Street
Bellefonte Avenue South
Bellefonte Avenue/West
Church Street/Corning
Street
Corning Street North
Bellefonte Avenue/West
Church Street/Corning
Street
West Church Street East
East Church Street at
Henderson Street
East Church Street East and west
East Church Street at
Henderson Street
East Church Street (left
turn)
East
Main Street/Grove Street
(9:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m.
only)
Grove Street South
Main Street/Grove Street
(9:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m.
only)
Main Street West
Main Street/Jay Street
(9:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m.
only)
Jay Street South
Main Street/Jay Street
(9:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m.
only)
Main Street West
Main Street/Vesper
Street (9:00 a.m. - 5:00
p.m. only)
Main Street West
Main Street/Vesper
Street (9:00 a.m. - 5:00
p.m. only)
Vesper Street South
§ 380-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-13
1:475
§ 380-14. One-way streets.
Intersection Vehicles Traveling On Facing
North Fairview Street/
Susquehanna Avenue;
West Water Street/
Campus Drive
Campus Drive East
North Fairview Street/
Susquehanna Avenue;
West Water Street/
Campus Drive
North Fairview Street North
North Fairview Street/
Susquehanna Avenue;
West Water Street/
Campus Drive
Susquehanna Avenue South
North Fairview Street/
Susquehanna Avenue;
West Water Street/
Campus Drive
West Water Street West
B. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as one-way roadways, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other
than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Street
Direction of
Travel From To
Bellefonte
Avenue
South East Main
Street
West Church Street
Brick Alley North Mary's Alley West Church Street
Burke Alley
[Added
7-31-2006 by
Ord. No. 772]
South James Alley West Bald Eagle
Street
Commerce
Street
South West Bald Eagle
Street
West Clinton Street
East Church
Street
East Bellefonte
Avenue
North Henderson
Street
East Clinton
Street
East North
Henderson
Street
North Washington
Street
§ 380-13 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-14
1:476
Street
Direction of
Travel From To
East Main
Street
West North
Henderson
Street
Bellefonte Avenue
East Park Street South Bellefonte
Avenue
West Bald Eagle
Street
Fallon Alley North East Water
Street
Unnamed alley
Fallon Alley South Willard's Alley East Church Street
Flack's Alley South East Church
Street
Mary's Alley
Kite Alley
[Added
10-7-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-05]
South West Bald Eagle
Street
West Clinton Street
Leather Alley North Bellefonte
Avenue
Stone Alley
Linden Street East South Highland
Street
South Jones Street
Locust Alley South Water Street Jordan Alley
Marys Alley West Grant Street Jannes Alley
Mill Street South East Main
Street
East Church Street
Mill Street North East Main
Street
East Water Street
Mount Vernon
Street
East South Jones
Street
East Park Street
Nesbit Lane North East Main
Street
West Water Street
North Hanna
Street
South East Water
Street
East Main Street
North
Henderson
Street
North East Church
Street
East Main Street
North Highland
Street
North Bellefonte
Avenue
West Third Street
North Jones
Street
North Bellefonte
Avenue
West Fourth Street
§ 380-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-14
1:477
§ 380-15. Prohibited turns at intersections.
Street
Direction of
Travel From To
Pearl Street South Bellefonte
Avenue
West Bald Eagle
Street
Railroad Street
[Added
4-2-2012 by
Ord. No. 903]
South East Water
Street
Fourth Street
Silk Alley North North Fairview
Street
Vacated Locust
Street
South Fairview
Street
South Bellefonte
Avenue
Peach Street
South Jones
Street
North Peach Street Bellefonte Avenue
Unnamed alley North West Bald Eagle
Street
West Clinton Street
West Park Street South Bellefonte
Avenue
West Bald Eagle
Street
Willards Alley
[Added
7-31-2006 by
Ord. No. 772]
East West Church
Street
Fourth Street
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle of the type indicated
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following
intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to
make a left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as
indicated, at any time when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Into Hours
Applicable
Vehicles
Bellefonte
Avenue
East Left Barton
Street
Anytime All
Bellefonte
Avenue
West Left East
Church
Street
Anytime All
§ 380-14 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-15
1:478
§ 380-16. No-passing zones.
§ 380-17. Through highways.
Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Into Hours
Applicable
Vehicles
Burke Alley
[Added
7-31-2006
by Ord. No.
772]
South Left West Bald
Eagle
Street
Anytime All
East Main
Street
West Right North
Grove
Street
9:00
a.m. to
5:00
p.m.
All
East Main
Street
West Right North
Vesper
Street
9:00
a.m. to
5:00
p.m.
All
Grove
Street
South Right East Main
Street
9:00
a.m. to
5:00
p.m.
All
Vesper
Street
South Right East Main
Street
9:00
a.m. to
5:00
p.m.
All
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as no-passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another
vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no-passing
zone:
Street Direction of Travel Between
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching
every intersection with the through highway, except for those
intersections with traffic signals, or with exceptions or modifications as
indicated below. Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield
§ 380-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-17
1:479
§ 380-18. Stop intersections.
sign authorized by this section shall stop the vehicle or yield rightof-
way as required by §§ 3323(b) or 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A., as the case may be, and shall not proceed into or across the
through highway until he has followed all applicable requirements of
that section of the law:
Highway Between
Bellefonte Avenue Entire length
East Main Street Entire length
Susquehanna Avenue Entire length
Water Street Sarah's Alley and westerly terminus of
Water Street
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 380-21) are established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the intersecting or through street) on the firstnamed
street (the stop street) in the direction or directions indicated
for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the
intersection on the first-named or stop street, in the direction indicated
in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(b) of the
Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b), and shall not proceed into or
across the second-named or intersecting or through street until he has
followed all applicable requirements of that section of the law.
Stop Street
Direction of
Travel
Intersecting or
Through Street
Akeley Lane East North Fairview Street
Armenta Drive West and south Hanna Park/
Susquehanna Avenue
Barton Street North West Fourth Street
Bennage Avenue North Maple Street
Bennage Avenue South Woods Avenue
Campus View West Sylvan Drive
Center Street East and west Barton Street
Center Street West Irwin Street
Center Street East North Fairview Street
Center Street 4-way North Summit Street
§ 380-17 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-18
1:480
Stop Street
Direction of
Travel
Intersecting or
Through Street
City Parking Lot #2 East Mill Street
Clarks Barn Lane North East Water Street
Cleveland Street East and west Hood Street
Cleveland Street West Irwin Street
Commerce Street South West Bald Eagle Street
Corning Street [Added
4-2-2012 by Ord. No.
903]
South West Bald Eagle Street
Cree Drive East Irwin Street
East Bald Eagle Street 4-way Grove Street and Vesper
Street
East Bald Eagle Street
[Amended 9-10-2007
by Ord. No. 797]
4-way North Hanna Street
East Church Street East and west North Hanna Street
East Church Street East Race Street
East Clinton Street East North Washington Street
East Clinton Street East South Vesper Street
East Park Street North and south West Bald Eagle Street
East Walnut Street 4-way East Park Street
East Walnut Street 4-way Liberty Street
East Walnut Street East South Hanna Street
Fallon Alley South East Church Street
Fifth Street North and south West Church Street
Fifth Street North and south West Main Street
First Avenue South Linden Street
First Avenue North West Walnut Street
First Street South Bellefonte Avenue
First Street/White Alley North West Water Street
Fourth Street North East Water Street
Fourth Street 4-way West Church Street
Fourth Street 4 way West Main Street
Frederick Street North Belle Avenue
Glenn Road East North Fairview Street
Glenn Road East and west Private drive into college
§ 380-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-18
1:481
Stop Street
Direction of
Travel
Intersecting or
Through Street
Grant Street South East Bald Eagle Street
Grant Street North and south East Church Street
Grant Street North and south East Main Street
Grant Street North East Water Street
Green Street East Pearl Street
Green Street West Second Avenue
Hickory Alley North East Bald Eagle Street
Hill Crest Drive South Hemlock Drive
Hill Street East Susquehanna Avenue
Hood Street South West Fourth Street
Irwin Street South Bellefonte Avenue
Jessamine Street West East Park Street
Jordan Alley West Locust Alley
Jordan Alley East and west Nesbit Lane
Linden Street East and west Bennage Avenue
Linden Street East and west Pearl Street
Linden Street East and west Second Avenue
Linden Street East South Fairview Street
Linden Street West Young's Avenue
Linden Street
[Amended 9-10-2007
by Ord. No. 797]
3-way (east,
north, south)
South Highland Street
Linden Street
[Amended 9-10-2007
by Ord. No. 797]
3-way (east, west,
north)
South Jones Street
Lock Haven University
private drive
South Glenn Road
Locust Alley North Church Street
Locust Alley North and south East Main Street
Locust Alley South Jordan Alley
Locust Alley South and east Mary's Alley
Locust Alley North and south Willards Alley
Logan Street South Myrtle Street
Logan Street North and south Prospect Street
Logan Street North West Clinton Street
§ 380-18 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-18
1:482
Stop Street
Direction of
Travel
Intersecting or
Through Street
Maple Street East and west Pearl Street
Maple Street East Second Avenue
Maple Street East South Fairview Street
Maple Street West South Hampton Street
Maple Street East and west South Highland Street
Maple Street East South Jones Street
Maple Street East and west South Summit Street
Mary's Alley East and west Flacks Alley
Mary's Alley East and west Fourth Street
Mary's Alley East and west Second Street
Mary's Alley East and west Third Street
Melody Lane South Hill Street
Mill Street South East Church Street
Mill Street North and south East Water Street
Morningside Road West Sylvan Drive
Mount Vernon Street East East Park Street
Myrtle Street East and west East Park Street
Myrtle Street [Added
12-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 963]
East SEDA-COG Joint Rail
Authority railroad tracks
Myrtle Street West South Jones Street
Nesbit Lane North East Water Street
North Fairview Street South Bellefonte Avenue
North Grove Street 4-way East Bald Eagle Street
North Grove Street North and south East Church Street
North Hampton Street South Bellefonte Avenue
North Hampton Street North and south Center Street
North Hampton Street North West Fourth Street
North Henderson Street 3-way (east, west,
north)
East Bald Eagle Street
North Henderson Street North and south East Main Street
North Henderson Street North East Water Street
North Highland Street North and south Center Street
North Jay Street 4-way East Water Street
§ 380-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-18
1:483
Stop Street
Direction of
Travel
Intersecting or
Through Street
North Jones Street North West Fourth Street
North Liberty North East Church Street
North Liberty
[Amended 9-10-2007
by Ord. No. 797]
4-way East Bald Eagle Street
North Pine Street North East Bald Eagle Street
North Summit Street South Bellefonte Avenue
North Summit Street 4-way Center Street
North Summit Street North West Fourth Street
North Summit Street North and south West Third Street
North Vesper Street 4-way East Bald Eagle Street
North Vesper Street North and south East Water Street
North Washington
Street
North and south East Bald Eagle Street
North Washington
Street
North and south East Church Street
North Washington
Street
North and south East Main Street
North Washington
Street
North East Water Street
Oak Lane East Hill Street
Paul Mack Boulevard
ramp "R" and "S"
North East Walnut Street
Peach Street East South Jones Street
Pearl Street South West Bald Eagle Street
Pearl Street [Amended
4-18-2005 by Ord. No.
733; 4-2-2012 by Ord.
No. 903]
North and south Peach Street
Pinetree Road West Sylvan Drive
Prospect Street East East Park Street
Prospect Street West South Jones Street
Race Street North and south East Main Street
Race Street North East Water Street
Railroad Street East Fourth Street
§ 380-18 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-18
1:484
Stop Street
Direction of
Travel
Intersecting or
Through Street
Sarah's Alley (Orsam's
Alley)
North Jordan Alley
Second Avenue South Woods Avenue
Second Street North and south West Church Street
Second Street North and south West Main Street
Second Street North West Water Street
Second Street and
Jordan Alley
3-way (east, west,
south)
Sewage plant entrance West South Hanna Street
Shamrock Street East South Jones Street
Sherman Street North East Bald Eagle Street
Sherman Street North East Church Street
Sherman Street North East Water Street
Sixth Street South West Church Street
Sixth Street North and south West Main Street
Sixth Street North West Water Street
South Fairview Street North and south Peach Street
South Fairview Street North and south Shamrock Street
South Fairview Street South West Bald Eagle Street
South Fairview Street South West Bald Eagle Street
South Grove Street South East Walnut Street
South Hampton Street South Linden Street
South Hampton Street North West Bald Eagle Street
South Hampton Street North and south West Walnut Street
South Henderson Street North and south East Walnut Street
South Highland Street North Bellefonte Avenue
South Highland Street North and south Peach Street
South Highland Street North and south West Bald Eagle Street
South Jones Street North Bellefonte Avenue
South Jones Street North West Bald Eagle Street
South Jones Street
[Added 4-2-2012 by
Ord. No. 903]
South East Park Street
South Pine Street North East Walnut Street
§ 380-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-18
1:485
Stop Street
Direction of
Travel
Intersecting or
Through Street
South Summit Street North Bellefonte Avenue
South Summit Street 4-way Linden Street
South Summit Street South Peach Street
South Summit Street North and south West Bald Eagle Street
South Vesper Street North and south East Walnut Street
South Washington
Street
North East Walnut Street
Spring Street South Bellefonte Avenue
Spring Street 3-way (north,
south, west)
West Fourth Street
Stone Alley East Commerce Street
Stone Alley West Spring Street
Sylvan Drive South Hill Street
Temporary haul road
adjacent to east side of
SEDA-COG Joint Rail
Authority railroad
tracks [Added
12-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 963]
North East Walnut Street
Terrace Drive East Sylvan Drive
Third Avenue North Bellefonte Avenue
Third Avenue South Linden Street
Third Avenue North and south Maple Street
Third Street North and south West Church Street
Third Street North West Water Street
Wert Lane South West Fourth Street
West Bald Eagle Street 4-way Pearl Street
West Church Street 4-way First Street
West Church Street North West Water Street
West Clinton Street East and west East Park Street
West Clinton Street East and west Liberty Street
West Clinton Street West South Jones Street
West Fourth Street East and west Irwin Street
West Fourth Street East and west North Fairview Street
§ 380-18 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-18
1:486
§ 380-19. Yield intersections.
Stop Street
Direction of
Travel
Intersecting or
Through Street
West Fourth Street 3-way (east, west
north)
Spring Street
West Main Street South Bellefonte Avenue
West Main Street 4-way First Street
West Main Street 4-way Fourth Street
West Main Street North West Water Street
West Park Street South Myrtle Street
West Park Street North Prospect Street
West Park Street North and south West Bald Eagle Street
West Park Street North and south West Clinton Street
West Third Street East and west Barton Street
West Third Street East and west Irwin Street
West Third Street East and west North Hampton Street
West Walnut Street 4-way Pearl Street
West Walnut Street West Second Avenue
West Walnut Street East and west South Highland Street
West Walnut Street East South Jones Street
West Walnut Street 4-way South Summit Street
West Walnut Street
[Amended 9-10-2007
by Ord. No. 797]
3-way (east, west,
south)
South Fairview Street
Willard's Alley West First Street
Willard's Alley [Added
4-2-2012 by Ord. No.
903]
4-way Locust Alley
Woodland Lane East Hill Street
Young's Avenue North and south Maple Street
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 380-21) are established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the through street) on the first-named street (the
§ 380-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-19
1:487
§ 380-20. Operation of motor vehicles restricted on public lands.
§ 380-21. Play highways.
yield street) in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on
the first-named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(c) of the
Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(c), and then yield the right-of-way as
required by that subsection of the Vehicle Code.
Yield Street
Direction of
Travel Through Street
Corning Street
[Repealed 4-2-2012 by
Ord. No. 903]
East Park Street North and south East Walnut Street
Maple Street West South Fairview Street
North Henderson Street East East Main Street
South Jones Street
[Repealed 4-2-2012 by
Ord. No. 903]
West Bald Eagle Street East Rose Street
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. No motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, pedalcycle or minibike shall
be operated on any property owned by the City or any other public
agency or instrumentality within the City without the permission of the
property owner and a permit from the Chief of Police of the City of Lock
Haven.
B. Any person who violates an provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following areas upon the streets in the City are established as play
highways:
Street Between Days Hours
(Reserved)
B. The Chief of Police is authorized to designate as play highways,
whenever he deems that action advisable and for whatever period of
time directed by him, any part of any street in the City where sledding
and coasting shall be permitted. That play highway shall be set apart
for the purpose under the direction of the Chief of Police.
§ 380-19 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-21
1:488
§ 380-22. Snowmobile roads designated.
C. No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon any play highway at any
time when that street shall be designated as a play highway, except in
case of emergency, with special permission of the Chief of Police or of
the police officer in charge, who shall first clear that play highway of all
persons using it for the purpose for which it was set aside. Any person
who violates any provision of this subsection shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
D. No person or persons shall coast or ride upon any sled, skateboard,
roller skates, bicycles or similar device upon the sidewalks on Lock
Haven University property or on any of the following business and
residential areas:
(1) Business areas.
(a) East and West Main Street, from Jay Street to Bellefonte
Avenue.
(b) East and West Water Street, from Jay Street to First Street.
(c) East and West Church Street, from Jay Street to First Street.
(d) Bellefonte Avenue, from West Church Street to City line.
(e) All streets and alleys within the above streets, as listed.
(2) Residential areas; housing for the elderly.
(a) Bellefonte Avenue, from South Jones Street to West Bald Eagle
Street.
(b) Bellefonte Avenue, from North Jones Street to West Fourth
Street and all intersecting alleyways.
(c) Bellefonte Avenue, from North Fairview Street to West Fourth
Street.
(d) Barton Street, from Center Street to West Fourth Street.
(e) Center Street, from Barton Street to Hampton Street.
(f) East park Street, from Myrtle Street to Jessamine Street.
(g) Jessamine Street to Walnut Street.
(h) Lock Haven University. All sidewalks adjoining to Lock Haven
University property and all sidewalks within Lock Haven
University.
A. The following roads and streets within the City are designated as
special snowmobile roads:
§ 380-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-22
1:489
§ 380-23. Do-not-enter zone established.
The following area is hereby established as a do-not-enter zone, except
school buses, during the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
3:00 p.m., or hours established by the Chief of Police, and official signs shall
be erected (or hereby ratified if heretobefore erected) in such manner as
to face traffic approaching the second-named street from the first-named
street, in the direction or directions indicated:
Street Direction Between
East Church Street Both North Henderson Street and
Washington Street
Street or Road Between
Used by
Snowmobiles
Only When
Closed to
Vehicular
Traffic?
Shared With
Vehicular
Traffic?
(Reserved)
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile on any
highway, street or road in the City other than as provided above.
Provided, nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from
operating a snowmobile on any other street in the City:
(1) As authorized by § 7721 of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7721,
for emergency and bridge crossings and for direct crossing of
streets or two-lane highways.
(2) For special snowmobile events where authorized in advance and
the street is blocked off as provided in § 7723 of the Vehicle Code,
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7723. Any person who violates any provision of this
section shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in § 7752(a) of
the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7752(a).
§ 380-22 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-23
1:490
ARTICLE III
Restrictions on Size, Weight and Type of Vehicle and Load
§ 380-24. Vehicle weight limits.
§ 380-25. Restrictions on size of vehicles.
§ 380-26. Restrictions on weight and size of vehicles.
A. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a), it shall
be unlawful for any person or persons to drive any vehicle or
combination having a gross weight in excess of the maximum
prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street, as the case
may be:
Street or Bridge
Maximum Gross
Weight Between
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under § 4902(a) and (g)(1) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 4902(a) and (g)(1), and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of $150, plus $150 for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess
of 3,000 pounds over the maximum allowable weight, and costs.
A. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a), it shall
be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in
violation of the size restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or
street or part of street:
Street or Bridge Between Restrictions
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under § 4902(a) and (g)(1) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 4902(a) and (g)(1), and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of $75 and costs.
A. By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by
authority granted by § 4902(b) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 4902(b), it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or
combination in violation of the restriction prescribed below for that
bridge or street or part of street:
Street or Bridge Between Restrictions
(Reserved)
§ 380-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-26
1:491
§ 380-27. Truck traffic restricted.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under § 4902(b) and (g)(1) of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 4902(b) and (g)(1), and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $25 and not more than $100, and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a
passenger car on any of the following streets or parts of streets:
Street Between
East Park Street [Added 8-22-2016
by Ord. No. 959]
Bellefonte Avenue and West
Bald Eagle Street
Liberty Street [Added 8-22-2016 by
Ord. No. 959]
East Church Street and East
Walnut Street
Pearl Street [Added 8-22-2016 by
Ord. No. 959]
Bellefonte Avenue and West
Bald Eagle Street
Pearl Street [Added 9-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 797]
Woods Avenue and Linden
Street
South Fairview Street [Added
8-22-2016 by Ord. No. 959]
Bellefonte Avenue and Peace
Street
South Fairview Street Peach Street to end
South Highland Street [Added
8-22-2016 by Ord. No. 959]
Bellefonte Avenue and Peach
Street
South Highland Street [Added
4-2-2012 by Ord. No. 903]
Peach Street to end
South Summit Street [Added
8-22-2016 by Ord. No. 959]
Bellefonte Avenue and West
Bald Eagle Street
Third Avenue [Added 10-7-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-05]
Bellefonte Avenue and Maple
Street
West Park Street [Added 8-22-2016
by Ord. No. 959]
Bellefonte Avenue and West
Bald Eagle Street
B. Provided, nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from driving
an emergency vehicle on any of those streets or parts of streets, or from
driving on any of those streets or parts of streets a truck or other
commercial vehicle making local deliveries to or pickups from premises
located along that street or part of a street.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 380-26 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-27
1:492
ARTICLE IV
General Parking Regulations
§ 380-28. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 380-29. Parking prohibited at all times.
A. Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
Akeley Lane [Added
4-18-2005 by Ord.
No. 733; amended
7-31-2006 by Ord.
No. 772]
Both North Fairview Street and
Highland Cemetery
Armenta Drive
(Hanna Park)
East Alongside tennis courts
Armenta Drive
(Hanna Park)
North In front of rest room
Armenta Drive
(Hanna Park)
South East and west exits
Barton Street Both West Fourth Street to Cleveland
Street
Barton Street West Bellefonte Avenue and Prospect
Alley
Barton Street West Center Street and West Third
Street
Bellefonte Avenue Both South Jones Street and west City
line
Bellefonte Avenue
[Added 12-12-2016
by Ord. No. 963]
North Willards Alley and City line
Bellefonte Avenue
[Repealed
12-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 963]
Bellefonte Avenue
[Repealed
12-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 963]
§ 380-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-29
1:493
Street Side Between
Bellefonte Avenue
[Repealed
12-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 963]
Bellefonte Avenue South Main Street and Church Street
Bellefonte Avenue South South Jones Street and
Commerce Street
Brick Alley Both East Eater Street and Willard's
Alley
Cass Alley Both Water Street and Jordan Alley
Center Street North North Highland Street and North
Hampton Street
Center Street South North Fairview Street and Barton
Street
Center Street [Added
4-29-2013 by Ord.
No. 921]
South Barton Street and Irwin Street
Commerce Street Both Bellefonte Avenue and West Bald
Eagle Street
Commerce Street West Bellefonte Avenue and Stone
Alley
Copper Alley North North Jones Street and North
Fairview Street
Corning Street West West Church Street and Mary's
Alley
Corning Street
[Added 4-2-2012 by
Ord. No. 903]
West Beginning 151 feet north of the
Bald Eagle Street right-of-way
and extending north 39 feet to a
point 190 feet north of the Bald
Eagle Street right-of-way
Corning Street
[Added 4-2-2012 by
Ord. No. 903]
West Beginning 37 feet north of the
Bald Eagle Street right-of-way
and extending 77 feet north to a
point 114 feet north of the Bald
Eagle Street right-of-way
Cree Drive Both Irwin Street and City line
East Bald Eagle
Street
North Race Street and Hanna Street
East Bald Eagle
Street
South Railroad Street and North
Liberty Street
§ 380-29 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-29
1:494
Street Side Between
East Church Street Both North Henderson Street easterly,
as posted
East Church Street North Bellefonte Avenue and Mill Street
East Church Street North Hickory Alley and Race Street
East Church Street South Bellefonte Avenue and the
entrance of City parking lot
East Church Street South Locust Alley and North
Henderson Street; Sarah's Alley
and North Jay Street
East Church Street South Private driveway and Paul Mack
Boulevard
East Main Street Both Race Street and Constitution
Bridge
East Main Street South Front of Roxy Theater
East Park Street East Bellefonte Avenue and East
Walnut Street
East Park Street East Bellefonte Avenue and West Bald
Eagle Street; West Bald Eagle
Street and East Walnut Street
East Park Street East Jessamine Street and Myrtle
Street
East Park Street West West Bald Eagle Street and
Prospect Street
East Water Street North Intersection of Henderson Street,
east to City line
East Water Street South Parking lot no. 3, as posted
Fallon Alley Both East Water Street and Perry's
Alley
Fallon Alley West Willard's Alley and East Church
Street
Fifth Street West West Church Street and Railroad
Street
Finch Alley Both Bellefonte Avenue and West Bald
Eagle Street
First Street Both West Water Street and Jordan
Alley
Flack's Alley Both East Church Street and Mary's
Alley
§ 380-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-29
1:495
Street Side Between
Glenn Road Both North Fairview Street and Irwin
Street
Irwin Street East Bellefonte Avenue and Glenn
Road
Irwin Street West Intersection of Fourth Street, as
posted
Jessamine Street South South Vesper Street to East Park
Street
Jordan Alley Both Henderson Street and First
Street
Leather Alley East Bellefonte Avenue and Stone
Alley
Leather Alley West West Bald Eagle Street and West
Clinton Street
Linden Circle [Added
2-23-2015 by Ord.
No. 942]
Both Linden Street northward to end
Linden Street Both South Jones Street and South
Fairview Street
Linden Street North South Fairview Street and South
Highland Street
Logan Street West Williams Alley and Prospect
Street
Mary's Alley Both Liberty Street and North Vesper
Street
Mary's Alley South Fallon Alley and North Grove
Street
Mill Street West Water Street to Susquehanna
River
Morningside Drive Both Sylvan Drive, as posted
Mount Vernon Street South South Jones Street and Park
Street
Mount Vernon Street
[Added 4-2-2012 by
Ord. No. 903]
North East Park Street and extending
west 40 feet
Myrtle Street North Logan Street and South Jones
Street
Myrtle Street South East Park Street and South Jones
Street
§ 380-29 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-29
1:496
Street Side Between
Myrtle Street [Added
2-23-2015 by Ord.
No. 942]
Both East Park Street eastward to City
line
Nesbit Lane West Water Street and Main Street
North Fairview Street East Bellefonte Avenue and Stone
Alley
North Fairview Street East Silk Alley and West Water Street
North Fairview Street West Bellefonte Avenue Susquehanna
Avenue
North Fourth Street North West Church Street and Railroad
Street
North Grove Street West Water Street and Susquehanna
River
North Grove Street
[Added 4-2-2012 by
Ord. No. 903]
West Mary's Alley a distance of 25 feet
north
North Hampton
Street
East West Third Street and West
Fourth Street
North Henderson
Street
Both Church Street and Main Street
North Henderson
Street
East Jeffery's Alley and Railroad
Street
North Highland
Street
East Center Street and northern
terminus of North Highland
Street
North Highland
Street
West Bellefonte Avenue and Center
Street
North Jay Street Both Water Street and East Church
Street
North Jones Street
[Added 2-23-2015
by Ord. No. 942]
West Iron Alley and Copper Alley
North Vesper Street East Railroad Street to East Bald
Eagle Street
Oak Lane Both Hill Street, as posted
Peach Street North South Jones Street and Pearl
Street
Peach Street South South Highland Street and Jones
Street
§ 380-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-29
1:497
Street Side Between
Pearl Street East Bellefonte Avenue and West Bald
Eagle Street
Prospect Street North East Park Street and Logan
Street
Race Street Both Main Street and East Bald Eagle
Street
Railroad Street North Fourth Street and West Water
Street
Railroad Street South Fourth Street, as posted
Railroad Street
[Added 4-2-2012 by
Ord. No. 903]
South Adjacent to Norfolk Southern
Railroad right-of-way west of
Bellefonte Avenue Crossing,
beginning at west side of Second
Street and extending eastward
94 feet
Second Avenue West Bellefonte Avenue and Maple
Street
Second Street
[Added 4-2-2012 by
Ord. No. 903]
West North of Railroad Street,
beginning at south side of Mary's
Alley and extending to the south
side of Railroad Street (adjoining
Norfolk Southern Railroad rightof-
way near Bellefonte Avenue)
Shamrock Street Both South Jones Street and South
Fairview Street
Sherman Street West East Bald Eagle Street and
Railroad Street
Silk Alley [Added
9-8-2003 by Ord.
No. 687]
Both Entire length
Sixth Street
[Repealed
4-18-2005 by Ord.
No. 733]
South Highland Street
[Amended
4-29-2013 by Ord.
No. 921]
East Bellefonte Avenue and West Bald
Eagle Street
South Jones Street
[Added 10-7-2019
by Ord. No.
2019-05]
East From the intersection of West
Clinton Street continuing south
for 82 feet
§ 380-29 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-29
1:498
Street Side Between
South Jones Street East Peach Street and East Park
Street
South Vesper Street East East Walnut Street to Jessamine
Street
South Vesper Street West Beginning at south edge of
private driveway entrance, a
distance of 345 feet south from
curb of Walnut Street, along a
radius onto Jessamine Street, a
total distance of 250 feet
Spring Street North Bellefonte Avenue and Stone
Alley
Spring Street [Added
4-2-2012 by Ord.
No. 903]
East Beginning 168 feet north of north
side of Stone Alley and extending
171 feet northward
Spring Street [Added
4-2-2012 by Ord.
No. 903]
East Beginning at north side of Stone
Alley and extending 49 feet
northward
Spring Street [Added
4-29-2013 by Ord.
No. 921]
East Fourth Street and a point 225
feet south of Fourth Street
Spruce Drive cul-desac
[Added
12-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 963]
All Entire curb length of cul-de-sac
at west end of Spruce Drive
Stone Alley North Commerce Street and Spring
Street
Summit Street West Bellefonte Avenue and West Bald
Eagle Street
Susquehanna Avenue East West Water Street and Hill Street
Susquehanna Avenue West Lock Haven Day-care center, in
front of Crafts, Inc., and as
posted; West Water Street, north
660 feet
Susquehanna Avenue West West Water Street, north 500 feet
Walnut Street North South Hanna Street to Railroad
Street
Walnut Street South Liberty Street and Vesper Street
West Bald Eagle
Street
North Commerce Street and Rose
Street
§ 380-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-29
1:499
Street Side Between
West Bald Eagle
Street
South South Jones Street and South
Highland Street
West Bald Eagle
Street [Added
6-6-2005 by Ord.
No. 739]
South South Highland Street and South
Summit Street
West Church Street Both West Water Street easterly, as
posted
West Clinton Street South South Liberty Street and South
Jones Street
West Fourth Street East Railroad Street and Spring Street
West Fourth Street North North Fairview Street and North
Jones Street
West Fourth Street South Hood Street and North Fairview
Street
West Fourth Street South Irwin Street and Flemington line
West Fourth Street
[Added 2-23-2015
by Ord. No. 942]
South Spring Street and North Jones
Street
West Park Street East Bellefonte Avenue and Clinton
Street
West Third Street North Hampton Street and Barton
Street
West Third Street South Barton Street and Irwin Street
West Water Street North Nesbit Lane and Susquehanna
Avenue
West Water Street South Fourth Street and West Main
Street
West Water Street South Railroad Street to North Fairview
Street
Willard's Alley Both Henderson Street and First
Street
Woodland Lane Both Hill Street, as posted
Young's Avenue West Maple Street and northern
terminus of Young's Avenue
B. Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant.
C. Within 20 feet of a crosswalk.
§ 380-29 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-29
1:500
§ 380-30. Parking prohibited certain hours.
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days
and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
Street Side Hours Days Between
Barton Street East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. Bellefonte Avenue and
West Fourth Street
Barton Street West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. West Fourth Street to
Center Street
Barton Street West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. West Third Street and
Prospect Alley
Bellefonte
Avenue
North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. Main Street and
Willard's Alley
CROSSWALK —
That part of a roadway at an intersection including within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of
the highway, measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs,
from the edges of the traversable roadway, that part of a roadway
included within the extension of the lateral lines of the existing
sidewalk.
(1)
Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface.
(2)
D. Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
E. Within 30 feet upon the approach of any flashing signal, stop sign, yield
sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of the roadway.
F. At any place where temporary signs have been posted which were
authorized by the City Manager, Chief of Police or their designee.
G. Blocking any sidewalk.
H. No person shall park or leave unattended a vehicle on private property
without the consent of the owner or other person in control or
possession of the property.
I. Blocking a public or private driveway.
§ 380-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-30
1:501
Street Side Hours Days Between
Bellefonte
Avenue [Added
4-18-2005 by
Ord. No. 733]
North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. Spring Street and North
Jones Street
Bellefonte
Avenue
North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. West Park Street and
Commerce Street
Bellefonte
Avenue
South 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. Commerce Street and
Church Street
Center Street North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. North Fairview Street
and Irwin Street
Center Street South 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. Irwin Street and Barton
Street
Commerce
Street
Both 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Fri. West Clinton Street and
West Bald Eagle Street
East Bald Eagle
Street
North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Tues. Hanna Street and
Liberty Street
East Bald Eagle
Street
South 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Mon. North Liberty Street and
Sherman Street
East Church
Street
North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Mon. Henderson Street and
Hickory Alley
East Church
Street
North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Mon. Mill Street and Locust
Alley
East Church
Street
South 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Tues. Front of City Hall and
Sarah's Alley
East Church
Street
South 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Tues. Washington Street and
Race Street
East Church
Street
[Amended
4-18-2005 by
Ord. No. 733]
South 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Tues. Jay Street and Locust
Alley
§ 380-30 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-30
1:502
Street Side Hours Days Between
East Park
Street
East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. East Walnut Street and
Jessamine Street
East Park
Street
West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Fri. Belle Avenue to West
Bald Eagle Street
East Park
Street
West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. Prospect Street and
Myrtle Street
East Walnut
Street
North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. Vesper Street and
Liberty Street
Fifth Street East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Fri. West Church Street to
West Water Street
Fifth Street West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. West Water Street and
West Church Street
First Avenue East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Tues. Linden Street and West
Walnut Street
First Avenue West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Mon. West Walnut Street and
Linden Street
First Street East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Fri. Bellefonte Avenue to
Jordan Alley
First Street West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. Jordan Alley and
Bellefonte Avenue
Fourth Street East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. Mary's Alley and Water
Street
Fourth Street West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Fri. Water Street and Mary's
Alley
Frederick
Street
South 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. City line to Bellefonte
Avenue
Grant Street Both 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. Water Street and Bald
Eagle Street
§ 380-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-30
1:503
Street Side Hours Days Between
Green Street Both 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. Pearl Street and Second
Avenue
Grove Street East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Fri. East Walnut Street to
end of metered parking
at river
Grove Street West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. East Water Street and
East Walnut Street
Hanna Street Both 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. East Water Street and
East Main Street
Henderson
Street
East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. Jeffery's Alley and East
Bald Eagle Street
Henderson
Street
[Amended
4-18-2005 by
Ord. No. 733]
East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. East Main Street and
East Water Street
Henderson
Street
[Amended
4-18-2005 by
Ord. No. 733]
West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. East Bald Eagle Street
and Hand-In-Hand Hose
Company
Henderson
Street
[Amended
4-18-2005 by
Ord. No. 733]
West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. East Water Street and
East Main Street
Irwin Street West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. Cree Drive and
Bellefonte Avenue
Liberty Street Both 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Fri. Church Street to Walnut
Street
Linden Street North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. South Highland Street
and Youngs Avenue
Linden Street South 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. Youngs Avenue and
South Fairview Street
§ 380-30 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-30
1:504
Street Side Hours Days Between
Logan Street East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Fri. Myrtle Street to West
Clinton Street
Logan Street West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Fri. West Clinton Street to
Williams Alley
Main Street North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. Henderson Street and
First Street
Main Street North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Mon. Race Street and West
Water Street
Main Street South 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Fri. Henderson Street to
First Street
Main Street South 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Tues. West Water Street and
Race Street
Maple Street Both 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. South Highland Street
and South Hampton
Street
Melody Lane East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Tues. Hill Street to end
Mill Street East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. Main Street and Dike
levee
Mount Vernon
Street
North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. South Jones Street and
East Park Street
Myrtle Street North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. East Park Street and
Logan Street
Nesbit Lane East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. Main Street and Water
Street
North Fairview
Street
East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. Stone Alley and vacated
Locust Street
North Hampton
Street
East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Tues. Bellefonte Avenue and
West Third Street
§ 380-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-30
1:505
Street Side Hours Days Between
North Hampton
Street
West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Mon. West Fourth Street and
Bellefonte Avenue
North Highland
Street
East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. Bellefonte Avenue and
Center Street
North Jones
Street
East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Tues. Bellefonte Avenue and
West Fourth Street
North Jones
Street
West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Mon. Bellefonte Avenue and
Fourth Street
North
Washington
Street
West 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Mon.
through
Fri.
during
school
term
East Church Street and
Mary's Alley
Pearl Street East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Tues. West Walnut Street and
West Bald Eagle Street
Pearl Street West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Mon. Bellefonte Avenue and
West Walnut Street
Prospect Street North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. Logan Street to South
Jones Street
Prospect Street South 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. East Jones Street and
East Park Street
Race Street Both 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. Water Street and Main
Street
Rose Street East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Tues. West Walnut Street and
West Bald Eagle Street
Rose Street West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Mon. West Bald Eagle Street
and West Walnut Street
Second Avenue Both 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. Green Street and Woods
Avenue
§ 380-30 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-30
1:506
Street Side Hours Days Between
Second Street East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. Mary's Alley and Jordan
Alley
Second Street West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Fri. Jordan Alley to Mary's
Alley
Sixth Street East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. West Church Street to
West Main Street
Sixth Street
[Amended
4-18-2005 by
Ord. No. 733]
West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Fri. West Church Street to
Water Street
South Fairview
Street
East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Mon. Bellefonte Avenue and
canal
South Fairview
Street
[Amended
4-18-2005 by
Ord. No. 733]
West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Tues. Bellefonte Avenue to end
at canal
South Hampton
Street
East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Mon. Linden Street and West
Bald Eagle Street
South Hampton
Street
[Amended
4-18-2005 by
Ord. No. 733]
West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Tues. West Bald Eagle Street
and Linden Street
South Highland
Street
West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Mon. Bellefonte Avenue and
Shamrock Street
South Jones
Street
East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Tues. Peach Street and
Bellefonte Avenue
South Jones
Street
West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Mon. East Park Street and
Bellefonte Avenue
Spring Street East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Mon. Bellefonte Avenue and
West Fourth Street
§ 380-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-30
1:507
Street Side Hours Days Between
Spring Street West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Tues. West Fourth Street and
Bellefonte Avenue
Summit Street East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Mon. Peach Street and West
Fourth Street
Summit Street West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Tues. West Fourth Street and
Peach Street
Susquehanna
Avenue
East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Tues. Hill Street and Hanna
Park
Susquehanna
Avenue
West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Mon. Sugar Run Road and
Water Street
Third Avenue Both 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. Belle Avenue and Linden
Street
Third Street
[Added
12-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 963]
East 12:00 p.m.
to 3:00
p.m.
School
days
Jordans Alley and West
Water Street
Third Street East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Fri. Mary's Alley and Water
Street
Third Street West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. Water Street and Mary's
Alley
Vesper Street East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. Walnut Street and
Clinton Street
Vesper Street West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Fri. The river and Walnut
Street
Vesper Street West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. Walnut Street and
Jessamine Street
Vesper Street
[Amended
4-18-2005 by
Ord. No. 733]
East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. Bald Eagle Street and
Water Street
§ 380-30 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-30
1:508
Street Side Hours Days Between
Washington
Street
Both 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. Water Street and Clinton
Street
Water Street North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Tues. Henderson Street and
Nesbit Lane
Water Street South 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Mon. Fourth Street and Race
Street
West Bald Eagle
Street
North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. Corning Street and
Commerce Street
West Bald Eagle
Street
South 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. South Jones Street and
Commerce Street
West Bald Eagle
Street
[Amended
6-6-2005 by
Ord. No. 739]
South 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. Rose Street to South
Summit Street
West Church
Street
North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Mon. Bellefonte Avenue and
557 West Church Street
West Church
Street
South 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Tues. Across from 557 West
Church Street and
Bellefonte Avenue
West Clinton
Street
North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. Liberty Street and South
Jones Street
West Fourth
Street
North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Fri. North Fairview Street to
Flemington line
West Fourth
Street
North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Fri. Railroad Street to North
Jones Street
West Fourth
Street
South 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. Irwin Street and Hood
Street
West Fourth
Street
South 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. North Fairview Street
and Railroad Street
§ 380-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-30
1:509
Street Side Hours Days Between
West Fourth
Street
[Repealed
2-23-2015 by
Ord. No. 942]
West Main
Street
[Repealed
4-18-2005 by
Ord. No. 733]
West Park
Street
Both 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Fri. Prospect Street to
Myrtle Street
West Park
Street
West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Fri. Bellefonte Avenue to
Williams Alley
West Third
Street
North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. Barton Street and Irwin
Street
West Third
Street
North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. North Highland Street
and North Hampton
Street
West Third
Street
South 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Fri. Barton Street to North
Highland Street
West Walnut
Street
Both 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. South Jones Street and
Second Avenue
West Water
Street
South 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Tues. West Church Street and
West Main Street
Woods Avenue North 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Thurs. Second Avenue and
Bennage Avenue
Youngs Avenue East 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. Woods Avenue and culde-
sac
Youngs Avenue
[Amended
4-18-2005 by
Ord. No. 733]
West 12:30 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
Wed. Maple Street and Woods
Avenue
§ 380-30 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-31
1:510
§ 380-31. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer than
the time indicated, in any of the following locations, at any time on the days
and between the hours indicated:
Street Side
Parking
Time
Limit Hours Days Between
East Bald
Eagle Street
South 2 hours 8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
Mon.
through
Fri.
Sherman
Street, east
East Church
Street [Added
1-16-2017 by
Ord. No. 966]
Both 2 hours 8:00
a.m. to
5:00
p.m.
Mon.
through
Sat.
North Jay
Street and
canal park
East Water
Street [Added
1-16-2017 by
Ord. No. 966]
Both 2 hours 8:00
a.m. to
5:00
p.m.
Mon.
through
Sat.
Mill Street
and Nesbit
Lane
Linden Street South 1 hour 9:00
a.m. to
5:00
p.m.
Every day South
Highland
Street and
Finch Alley
Mill Street East 15
minute
All times East Main
Street and
Willards Alley
North Liberty
Street
East 30 minutes All times Every day East Church
Street and
Mary's Alley
West Main
Street
South 2 hour 9:00
a.m. to
5:00
p.m.
Every day Sixth Street
westerly 80
feet
§ 380-32. Special purpose parking zones.
The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked
in any such zone except as specifically provided for that zone:
§ 380-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-32
1:511
Street Side
Time
Limit
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle Location
Armenta Drive South 15 minutes Loading and
unloading
Between east and
west exits
City Parking Lot
No. 1 (Lower
Church Street)
— — Handicapped
parking
2 parking stalls, as
posted
City Parking Lot
No. 3 (East
Water Street)
— — Handicapped
parking
2 parking stalls
City Parking Lot
No. 4 (City Hall)
Handicapped 1 stall, as posted
City Parking Lot
No. 5 (Beach-
Vesper Street)
Handicapped 4 stalls, as posted
Corning Street
[Added
4-2-2012 by
Ord. No. 903]
West — Loading and
unloading;
no personal
or customer
vehicles
Beginning 114 feet
north of the Bald
Eagle Street rightof-
way and
extending north 37
feet to a point 151
feet north of the
Bald Eagle Street
right-of-way
Corning Street
[Added
9-8-2003 by
Ord. No. 687]
West — Loading and
unloading
Between Mary's
Alley and East
Church Street, in
front of
Contemporary
Concepts
East Church
Street
South 20 minutes Municipal
business
In front of City Hall,
2 parking spaces
East Church
Street Parking
Lot No. 2
— — Handicapped
parking
City Parking Lot No.
2, 1 stall, as posted
East Main
Street
North 15 minutes Loading and
unloading
At Fallon Alley, as
posted
East Main
Street
North 15 minutes Loading and
unloading
At Sam's Alley, as
posted
East Main
Street
North 15 minutes Loading and
unloading
(P.L.C.B.)
Between Grove and
Vesper Streets, 1
stall
§ 380-32 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-32
1:512
Street Side
Time
Limit
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle Location
East Main
Street154
South 4:00 p.m.
to 11:00
p.m., Mon.
through
Sun.
Loading and
unloading;
no personal
or customer
vehicles
Along the south side
of East Main Street
between a point 30
feet west of west
curb on North Jay
Street and another
point 20.6 feet west
of the first point
East Main
Street Parking
Lot No. 7
Handicapped 1 stall, as posted
East Water
Street
North — Hotel
business only
In front of Fallon
East Water
Street
North — Loading and
unloading
In front of Y.M.C.A.
Glenn Road
[Added
4-2-2012 by
Ord. No. 903]
North — Handicapped Beginning 180 feet
west from North
Fairview Street and
extending west to
the end of the
parking area, as
posted
Glenn Road
[Added
9-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 797]
North — Bus loading
and
unloading
only
North Fairview
Street westward a
distance of 180 feet
Grove Street
[Added
2-23-2015 by
Ord. No. 942]
East — Loading and
unloading
North of Jefferies
Alley, 1 stall as
posted
North Fairview
Street
[Repealed
6-6-2005 by
Ord. No. 739
and by
9-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 797]
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 380-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-32
1:513
Street Side
Time
Limit
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle Location
West Church
Street [Added
4-29-2013 by
Ord. No. 921]
North 15
minutes,
flashers
required
Loading and
unloading
Beginning 54 feet
east of the east curb
of Second Street
and extending to a
point 74 feet east of
the east curb of
Second Street, 1
stall
West Main
Street
North — Funeral
parking
Between First Street
and Second Street
West Main
Street
South — Book box
dropoff
In front of Ross
Library
West Main
Street [Added
4-29-2013 by
Ord. No. 921]
North 15
minutes,
flashers
required
Loading and
unloading
Beginning 40 feet
west of the west
curb of Fourth
Street and
extending to a point
63 feet west of the
west curb of Fourth
Street, 1 stall
West Water
Street Parking
Lot No. 6
Handicapped 1 stall, as posted
§ 380-33. Standing or parking on roadway for loading or unloading.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other
than a pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of any street, except that standing or parking for the
purpose of loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted
on the following named streets on Monday through Saturday, between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. and between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and
4:00 p.m., and for no longer than necessary for the loading or unloading.
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 380-34. Angle parking.
A. Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of
streets:
§ 380-32 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-34
1:514
§ 380-35. Residential permit parking.
Street Side Between
Armenta Drive (Hanna
Park)
North East and west exits
North Grove Street East Water Street and the river
Park Lane (Hanna Park) North East and west exits
B. On all streets where angle parking is required, every vehicle parked at
the angle shall be parked with its front nearest the curb.
A. Findings and purpose. The City of Lock Haven finds that:
(1) Certain residential areas in the City are subjected to commuter
vehicle parking, therefore depriving the residents of those areas of
spaces in which to park their own vehicles.
(2) Those residential streets are also subjected to a high degree of
commuter traffic which substantially reduces the quality of the
ambient air level.
(3) The establishment of a parking permit program for certain affected
areas should facilitate efficient movement of traffic by providing for
parking preference during certain hours of the day and days of the
week. Therefore, the City considers it to be in the interest of the
people of the City to provide for the establishment of a residential
permit parking program to insure primary access to available
parking spaces by neighborhood residents and also to provide a
cleaner ambient air level.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, words and terms listed in
this subsection, as follows, shall have the following meanings:
COMMUTER VEHICLE — A motor vehicle parked in a residential area
by a person not a resident of that residential area.
PROPRIETOR — A person who owns or leases real estate within a
residential area of which he is not a resident, but who owns or manages
a business enterprise or professional office maintained at that address.
For the purpose of this section, a proprietor shall be entitled to one
parking permit for that business or professional office address.
RESIDENT — A person who owns or leases real property within a
residential area and who maintains either a voting residence or bona
fide occupancy, or both, at that address.
RESIDENTIAL AREA — A contiguous area containing public highways
or parts of public highways primarily abutted by residential property or
residential and non-business property (such as schools, parks, places of
worship, hospitals and nursing homes).
§ 380-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-35
1:515
C. Criteria. The residential areas designated in Subsection D of this
section are those deemed impacted and hence eligible for residential
parking on the basis of the following criteria:
(1) During any period between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:30 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday, except legal holidays, the number of
vehicles parked (or standing), legally or illegally, on the streets in
the area is equal to 70% or more of the legal, on-street parking
capacity of the area. For the purpose of this criterion, a legal
parking space shall be 20 linear feet.
(2) During the same period as specified in Subsection C(1), 10% or
more of the vehicles parked (or standing) on the streets in the area
are not registered in the name of a person residing in the area. For
the purpose of this criterion, the latest available information from
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation regarding
registration of motor vehicles shall be used.
(3) Provided: in determining that a specific area identified as impacted
and eligible for residential permit parking is designated as a
residential permit parking area, the following factors are taken into
consideration:
(a) The local and metropolitan needs with respect to clean air and
environment.
(b) The possibility of a reduction in total vehicle miles driven in the
City.
(c) The likelihood of alleviating traffic congestion, illegal parking
and related health and safety hazards.
(d) The proximity of public transportation to the residential area.
(e) The desire and need of the residents for residential permit
parking and their willingness to bear the administrative costs
in connection with it.
(f) The need for parking in excess of the residential permit
parking program in proximity to establishments located in the
residential permit parking area and used by the general public
for religious, health or educational purposes.
D. Designation of residential permit parking areas.
(1) The following are designated as residential permit parking areas:
Area Bounded By And Including
(Reserved)
(2) Signs shall be erected along the streets in each residential permit
parking area, indicating the days, hours, locations and conditions
under which parking shall be by permit only.
§ 380-35 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-35
1:516
E. Application for permit. Application for a residential parking permit shall
be made to the Chief of Police by the person desiring the permit, who
shall be only the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle who resides on
or is a proprietor of property immediately adjacent to a street or other
location within a residential parking permit area. A separate
application shall be required for each motor vehicle, and each
application shall be accompanied by a permit fee, in an amount as
established by resolution of the City Council, which shall be for the use
of the City, to be applied to the cost of administering the residential
permit parking program. Each application shall contain the following
information: the name of the owner or the driver, as the case may be, of
the motor vehicle; the address of the resident or the proprietor, as the
case may be; the make, model and registration number of the motor
vehicle; and the driver number as taken from the applicant's current
driver's license. At the discretion of the Chief of Police, the applicant
shall be required, at the time of making application, to present his
driver's license and the vehicle registration card.
F. Issuance of permit. Upon receipt of the application and the permit fee,
and determination by him that the information upon the application
shows that the applicant is entitled to a residential parking permit, the
Chief of Police shall issue to the applicant a residential parking permit,
which shall be valid for the remainder of the calendar year. The permit
shall display the serial and registration numbers of the motor vehicles,
the residential parking area number and the expiration date. The
permit shall be renewable annually before the expiration date, upon
making application for renewal and payment of the permit fee. It shall
be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to display
other than the current and valid permit while standing or parking in a
residential permit parking area at any time when those permits are to
be displayed.
G. Temporary and exemption parking permits. Temporary parking permits
may be issued by the Chief of Police, upon payment of a fee in an
amount as established by resolution of the City Council, to bona fide
visitors of residents of a designated residential permit parking area,
and exemption parking permits may be issued, without payment of a
fee, to handicapped persons.
H. Responsibility of permit holder.
(1) Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the
holder of a residential parking permit shall be permitted to stand or
park a motor vehicle operated by him in any designated residential
parking area during those times when parking of motor vehicles is
permitted in that area. While a vehicle for which a residential
parking permit has been issued is so parked, that permit shall be
displayed so as to be clearly visible through the windshield of the
vehicle. A residential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve
to the holder a parking space within a designated residential
permit parking area.
§ 380-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-35
1:517
§ 380-36. Parking prohibited on portions of certain highways
during street sweeping hours.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow the same
to remain parked, at any time between [_____] and [_____] on any of the
following portions of the highways of the City on the days hereby
respectively designated for street sweeping purposes:
Street Between Day
(Reserved)
§ 380-37. Violations and penalties.
(2) A residential parking permit shall not authorize its holder to stand
or park a motor vehicle in any place where or at any time when
stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicles is prohibited or set
aside for other specified types of vehicles, nor shall the permit
exempt its holder from the observance of any traffic or parking
regulation other than residential permit parking regulation or
restriction.
(3) No person other than the permit holder whose name appears on the
permit shall use a residential parking permit or display it on a
vehicle operated; any such use or display by a person other than
the permit holder shall constitute a violation of this section by the
permit holder and by the person who so used or displayed the
parking permit.
(4) It shall constitute a violation of this section for any person falsely to
represent himself as eligible for a residential parking permit or to
furnish false information in an application to the Chief of Police in
order to obtain a residential parking permit.
I. Revocation of permits. The Chief of Police shall have authority to revoke
the residential parking permit of any permit holder found to be in
violation of any provision of this section. Upon written notification to
the permit holder of the revocation, the permit holder shall surrender
the permit to the Chief of Police. Failure to do so, when so requested,
shall constitute a violation of this section. Provided, any person
receiving such a notice may, within 10 days after the date of the notice,
appeal to the City Council for a hearing on the revocation, and the
decision of the City Council shall be final.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $30 and costs.
Provided, it shall be the duty of the police officers and of parking
enforcement personnel of the City to report to the appropriate official
all violations of any provision of this article indicating, in each case, the
section violated; the license number of the vehicle involved in the
violation; the location where the violation took place; and any other
§ 380-35 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-37
1:518
§ 380-38. Parking without lights authorized.
The boundary limits of the City of Lock Haven are hereby established as a
zone in which motor vehicles may remain standing without lights, and all
highways within such boundary limits are hereby designated as highways
where motor vehicles may remain standing without lights.
facts that might be necessary in order to secure a clear understanding
of the circumstances attending the violation. The police officer or other
person making the report shall also attach to or place upon every
such vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle was parked in violation
of this article. The notice shall contain instructions to the owner or
driver of the vehicle that he may pay the specified fine by placing
the amount in the envelope provided and depositing it in any of the
Yellow Traf-O-Teria courtesy boxes or by paying at City Hall between
8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (except holidays) or
by placing a stamp on the reverse side and mailing using address
indicated. [Amended 7-12-2004 by Ord. No. 712]
B. Maximum amounts of fines for violations of various parking
restrictions: [Added 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 708; amended
6-28-2004 by Res. No. 963]
Fine When
Issued
Fine After 5
Days
Fine After 10
Days
Off-street meter
violations
$3 $5 $6
On-street meter
violations
$5 $7 $8
Hydrant $15 $20 $25
No-parking zone $15 $20 $25
Opposing traffic $15 $20 $25
Blocking driveway $15 $20 $25
Within 20 feet of
intersection
$15 $20 $25
Double parking $15 $20 $25
More than 12 inches
from curb
$10 $15 $20
Other $15 $20 $25
C. Handicapped parking stalls. Any violation of the special purpose
parking zones designated as handicapped parking in § 380-32 shall be
subject to a fine of $50, which will increase by $10 if not paid within five
calendar days of notice of violation, and by an additional $5 if not paid
within 10 calendar days thereafter. [Added 2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
942]
§ 380-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-39
1:519
§ 380-39. Parking prohibited adjacent to certain intersections.
The City of Lock Haven has determined that there are certain intersections
where, due to a particular safety hazard, it is necessary to extend the area
of prohibited parking beyond that specified under the Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code, Title 75, Pa.C.S.A. These areas shall be clearly marked by roadway
markings and/or appropriate signs located adjacent to the following
intersections:
Intersection Corner
Armenta Drive and Susquehanna
Avenue
Southeast
Barton Street and Bellefonte Avenue Northwest
Bellefonte Avenue and Pearl Street Southwest
East Bald Eagle Street and Hanna
Street
Southwest
East Bald Eagle Street and North
Grove Street
Northwest and southwest
East Bald Eagle Street and North
Grove Street
North east and southeast
East Bald Eagle Street and North
Vesper Street
Northeast
East Bald Eagle Street and Sherman
Street
Southwest
East Bald Eagle Street and West Park
Street
Southeast and southwest
East Church Street and North Grove
Street
Northwest and southwest
East Church Street and North Jay
Street
Northwest and northeast
East Church Street and Race Street Northwest
East Clinton Street and North
Washington Street
Northwest
East Main Street and North Hanna
Street
Southwest, southeast, northwest,
northeast
East Main Street and North
Henderson Street
Northeast and southeast
East Main Street and North Jay Street Northwest
East Main Street and North Vesper
Street
Northeast
East Main Street and Race Street Southwest
§ 380-39 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-39
1:520
Intersection Corner
East Main Street and Washington
Street
Southwest
East Park Street and Myrtle Street Northwest
East Park Street and Walnut Street Southeast
East Water Street and Fallon Alley Northeast
East Water Street and North Grant
Street
Southwest and southeast
East Water Street and North Grove
Street
Northeast and northwest
East Water Street and North Hanna
Street
Southeast and southwest
East Water Street and North
Henderson Street
Southwest and southeast
East Water Street and North Jay
Street
Northwest, northeast, southwest,
southeast
East Water Street and North Vesper
Street
Northwest, northeast, southeast,
southwest
East Water Street and North
Washington Street
Southwest
East Water Street and Race Street Southwest
First Street and Jordan Alley Southwest
First Street and West Main Street Northeast and northwest
Fourth Street and North Fairview
Street
Southeast
Fourth Street and North Highland
Street
Northwest and southeast
Fourth Street and West Main Street Northeast and southwest
Hood Street and West Fourth Street Northeast
Irwin Street and Bellefonte Avenue Northwest
James Alley and West Park Street Southwest
Linden Street and South Highland
Street
Southeast
Logan Street and Prospect Street Southeast and northwest
Mary's Alley and North Grove Street Northwest
Nesbit Lane and Jordan Alley Southeast
Nesbit Lane and West Main Street Northeast
North Fairview Street and Iron Alley Southeast
§ 380-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-39
1:521
Intersection Corner
North Fairview Street and Locust
Street
Southwest
North Fairview Street and Silk Alley Southeast and northeast
North Fairview Street and Stone Alley Northeast
North Fairview Street and West
Fourth Street
Northeast and southeast
North Grove Street and Church
Street
Northeast
North Grove Street and Mary's Alley Northwest
North Hanna Street and East Main
Street
Northeast and northwest
North Henderson Street and East
Bald Eagle Street
Southwest
North Henderson Street and East
Clinton Street
Northwest
North Henderson Street and East
Water Street
Southwest
North Jay Street and East Water
Street
Northeast, northwest and
southeast
North Liberty Street and East Church
Street
Southeast
North Vesper Street and East Bald
Eagle Street
Northeast and northwest
North Vesper Street and East Bald
Eagle Street
Northeast and northwest
North Vesper Street and East Church
Street
Northeast
North Washington Street and railroad
crossing
Northeast
Peach Street and South Jones Street Northwest
Pearl Street and Bellefonte Avenue Southwest
Pearl Street and Linden Street Southwest
Race Street and Water Street Southwest
Railroad Street and West Water
Street
Southwest
South Exit and Susquehanna Avenue Northeast and southeast
South Fairview Street and Bellefonte
Avenue
Southeast and southwest
§ 380-39 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-39
1:522
Intersection Corner
South Highland Street and Bellefonte
Avenue
Southwest
South Highland Street and Canal Northwest and northeast
South Highland Street and Linden
Street
Northwest and southwest
South Jones Street and Bellefonte
Avenue
Southwest and southeast
South Jones Street and Linden Street Southwest
South Jones Street and Peach Street Northwest and southwest
South Jones Street and Shamrock
Street
Northwest and southwest
Spring Street and Stone Alley Northwest
Susquehanna Avenue and private
drive - County
Northeast and northwest
Susquehanna Avenue and private
drive - L. H. University
Northwest and northeast
Third Street and West Main Street Southwest
Walnut Street and Liberty Street Northeast
West Bald Eagle Street and
Commerce Street
Southeast
West Bald Eagle Street and East Park
Street
Northeast and northwest
West Church Street and Fifth Street Southeast, northeast and
northwest
West Church Street and First Street Southwest
West Church Street and Fourth Street Southeast and southwest
West Clinton Street and South Liberty
Street
Northwest and southwest
West Fourth Street and Hood Street Northeast
West Main Street and Fifth Street All sides
West Main Street and Fourth Street Northeast, northwest, southeast,
southwest
West Main Street and Second Street Northwest
West Park Street and James Alley Southwest and northwest
West Water Street and First Street Southeast
West Water Street and First Street Southeast and southwest
West Water Street and Mill Street Southwest and southeast
§ 380-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-39
1:523
Intersection Corner
West Water Street and Nesbit Lane Southwest and southeast
West Water Street and Second Street Southeast
Woods Avenue and Young's Avenue Northeast and northwest
Young's Avenue and Woods Avenue Northeast
§ 380-40. Wheeled vehicle immobilizer (boot). [Added 8-17-2009 by
Ord. No. 841]
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms and
words are defined as follows:
BOOT, BOOTING, or BOOTED — The terms "boot," "wheeled vehicle
immobilizer" and "immobilizing device" shall be synonymous. The act
of immobilizing a motor vehicle in such a manner as to prevent its
operation while an immobilization device is employed, wherein damage
to such vehicle will not result, unless the vehicle is moved while such
device is in place or such means are employed.
UNSETTLED CITATIONS — Citations/summons for unpaid parking
violations which have been issued by a court of competent jurisdiction
in which either no response has been made to the summons, or for
which a warrant has been issued for the operator and/or registered
owner of the vehicle, including adjudicated citations for which the fines
and costs imposed remain unpaid.
UNSETTLED PARKING VIOLATIONS — Violations of the parking,
standing or stopping regulations of the City of Lock Haven or the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, which are outstanding and unpaid for
over 30 days from the date of issuance.
B. Boot installation. A motor vehicle found to be parked within the City of
Lock Haven upon any public ground, may, by or under direction of the
Manager or his designee, be booted if there are 10 or more unsettled
parking violations or two or more unsettled citations or one or more
arrest warrants pending against the owner of the motor vehicle as the
result of parking violations previously issued and pending. [Amended
12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 963]
C. Notice of booting. Upon installation of the boot upon such motor
vehicle, the Officer shall place or cause to be placed upon the vehicle in
a conspicuous manner, notice sufficient to warn any individual that the
vehicle has been immobilized, and that any attempt to move the vehicle
may result in damage to the vehicle. The notice shall outline the
procedure for obtaining removal of the boot. As soon as practicable, the
Officer shall, upon request, provide the owner of the booted vehicle
with documentation of all prior unsettled parking violations and/or
unsettled citations for which such vehicle was booted, and shall take all
other appropriate action with respect to any outstanding warrant.
Within 24 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, the Chief of Police
§ 380-39 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-40
1:524
shall cause notice to be mailed to the registered owner of said vehicle,
notifying the owner that the vehicle has been immobilized (booted),
the reason and location of the immobilization and the procedure for
obtaining release of the vehicle.
D. Removal of boot. The owner of a vehicle that has been immobilized
(booted), or other authorized person acting on behalf of the owner, shall
be permitted to secure the release of the vehicle when the following
criteria have been met:
(1) Deposit the required collateral for his/her appearance before the
Magisterial District Judge to answer for each unsettled citation; or
pay the amount of the fine and court costs in full for each unsettled
citation. If there are any unsettled parking violations, pay the
amount of the five and costs in full for each unsettled parking
violation; and
(2) Payment of the booting fee, as prescribed in Subsection G of this
section.
E. Immobilization hearing. The owner or other authorized person of a
vehicle which has been immobilized (booted), shall have the right to a
post-immobilization hearing, limited to a determination of the validity of
the immobilization (booting). Such hearing must be requested within 10
days after the vehicle is booted and shall be conducted by a hearing
officer appointed by the City Manager. The hearing shall be held during
normal business hours within two business days of the request. The
post-immobilization hearing will not be determinative of, or adjudicate
the merits of, any citation or parking violation issued relative to the
immobilization of any vehicle and shall be limited solely to whether or
not the vehicle was properly subject to immobilization (booting) with
respect to the provisions of this section.
F. Towing and storage of vehicles. Except when the provisions of
Subsection D have been met and all fines, costs and fees have been
satisfied, the immobilization device (boot) shall remain in place for 72
hours. If such provisions have not been made to satisfy all fines, costs
and fees within the seventy-two-hour period, the vehicle shall be
subject to being towed to an approved secure facility and remain
impounded until such fines, costs and fees are paid. If the
immobilization (booting) occurs while the vehicle is parked in violation
of any provision of law or any City ordinance providing for the
immediate removal of a vehicle, or if the immobilization (boot) device
appears to have been tampered with, the vehicle shall be subject to
immediate removal by towing and impounded until all fines, costs, and
fees, together with all costs of towing and storage, have been satisfied.
All towing and storage fees as specified shall be paid directly in the
towing and storage firms prior to the release of said vehicle to the
owner or other authorized person on the owner's behalf. Any vehicle
unclaimed after 45 days of the date towed shall be deemed abandoned
§ 380-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-40
1:525
§ 380-41. Manner of parking. [Added 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 733;
amended 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 739; 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 942]
and subject to disposal in the manner authorized by Pennsylvania
statute.
G. Booting fee. The owner of the immobilized (booted) vehicle shall be
subject to a fee of $75 for such immobilization and subsequent removal.
H. Tampering with boot prohibited. Any person who shall tamper with,
remove or attempt to remove any device used to immobilize a motor
vehicle that has been booted pursuant to this section, or who shall move
or attempt to move the vehicle immobilized (booted) before release of
the vehicle has been officially secured, shall be guilty of a summary
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100
nor more than $600, together with the cost of prosecution and the cost
to replace the boot, or be imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or
both.
I. Implementation and enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Officers of
the Lock Haven City Police Department, or other designated employees
of the City, acting in accordance with the instructions of the City
Manager or his designee, to enforce the provisions of this section.
J. Right to hearing not waived. Nothing in this section shall be
constructed to deprive any person of their Constitutional right to a
hearing or trial as provided by law, relating to the violations for which
parking violation notices or citations have been issued.
A. Any vehicle parked either on or adjacent to a roadway, street, or alley
shall be parked facing in the direction of travel on the side of the center
line on which the vehicle is parked.
B. Any vehicle parked on a roadway must be parked so that the curbside
tires are within 12 inches of the curb.
§ 380-40 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-41
1:526
ARTICLE V
On-Street Metered Parking
§ 380-42. Parking meter zones. [Amended 11-21-2005 by Ord. No.
752; 5-2-2011 by Ord. No. 879; 4-29-2013 by Ord. No. 921;
12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 963; 1-16-2017 by Ord. No. 966]
Parking meter zones are established upon and along certain streets in the
City as listed below. Parking meter fees shall be at the rate(s) set from time
to time by Council by resolution.
Street Side
Maximum
Parking Time
(hours) Between
Bellefonte Avenue South 2 1/4 Corning Street and
East Park Street, 1
space
Bellefonte Avenue North 2 1/4 Corning Street and
East Park Street
Bellefonte Avenue North 2 1/4 East Main Street and
Willard's Alley
Bellefonte Avenue South 2 1/4 East Park Street and
Commerce Street,
between railroad and
West Park Street
Bellefonte Avenue North 2 1/4 South Jones Street and
Spring Street, 1 space
Bellefonte Avenue North 2 1/4 Spring Street and
North Jones Street
Bellefonte Avenue Noth 2 1/4 West Park Street and
Commerce Street
East Church Street Both 2 1/4 Fallon Alley and North
Jay Street
East Church Street Both 2 1/4 Fallon Alley and North
Jay Street
East Church Street Both 2 1/4 North Liberty Street
and North Jay Street
East Main Street Both 2 1/4 Canal park and Locust
Alley
East Main Street Both 2 1/4 North Jay Street and
Henderson Street
East Main Street Both 2 1/4 North Jay Street and
Canal Park
§ 380-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-42
1:527
Street Side
Maximum
Parking Time
(hours) Between
East Main Street Both 2 1/4 North Jay Street and
Mill Street
East Main Street South 2 1/4 North Jay Street and
North Grove Street, 1
space
East Park Street West 2 1/4 Bellefonte Avenue and
James Alley
East Water Street Both 2 1/4 North Jay Street and
North Vesper Street
East Water Street South 2 1/4 North Jay Street and
Sarah's Alley, 1 space
East Water Street North 2 1/4 North Jay Street and
Sarah's Alley, 2 spaces
East Water Street Both 2 1/4 North Vesper Street
and Mill Street
First Street Both 2 1/4 West Church Street
and Bellefonte Avenue
Mill Street East 2 1/4 West Main Street and
West Water Street
Nesbit Lane East 2 1/4 Jordan Alley and West
Water Street
Nesbit Lane East 2 1/4 West Main Street and
Jordan Alley
North Grove Street East 2 1/4 East Water Street and
Susquehanna River
North Grove Street Both 2 1/4 Jordan Alley and East
Water Street
North Grove Street West 2 1/4 Main Street and
Jordan Alley, 1 space
North Grove Street Both 2 1/4 Willard's Alley and
East Church Street
North Grove Street Both 2 1/4 Willard's Alley and
Jordan Alley
North Vesper Street Both 2 1/4 Willard's Alley and
East Church Street
Vesper Street Both 2 1/4 Willard's Alley and
East Main Street
§ 380-42 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-42
1:528
Street Side
Maximum
Parking Time
(hours) Between
Vesper Street Both 2 1/4 Willard's Alley and
Jordan Alley
West Church Street North 2 1/4 Bellefonte Avenue and
First Street, 1 space
West Church Street Both 2 1/4 Bellefonte Avenue and
First Street
West Church Street Both 2 1/4 North Liberty Street
and North Jay Street
West Main Street North 2 1/4 First Street and Nesbit
Lane, 5 spaces
West Main Street South 2 1/4 Mill Street and Nesbit
Lane, 1 space
West Main Street Both 2 1/4 Mill Street and Nesbit
Lane
West Main Street Both 2 1/4 Nesbit Lane and First
Street
West Water Street Both 2 1/4 North Vesper Street
and Nesbit Lane
§ 380-43. Days and hours parking meters in operation and parking
time limits apply.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle at an expired meter at
any time between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday; provided, the requirements of this article as to parking time limits
and as to deposit of coins in parking meters shall not apply on legal holidays
or Sundays.
§ 380-44. Placement and characteristics of parking meters.
Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones established by § 380-42
shall be placed upon the curb or sidewalk, and immediately adjacent to the
individual parking spaces described in § 380-45. Each parking meter shall
be placed or set so as to show that the parking space adjacent to that meter
is or is not legally occupied. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by
a proper legend the legal parking time established by the City and when the
adjacent space is occupied by a vehicle, the parking meter shall indicate on
and by its dial and pointer the duration of the period of legal parking and, on
the expiration of that period, shall indicate illegal parking or over-parking.
§ 380-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-45
1:529
§ 380-45. Parked vehicles to be wholly within marked spaces.
Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the curb, sidewalk
or roadway adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of delineating
the parking space for which that meter shall be used. Every vehicle parked
at any parking meter shall be parked wholly within the lines or markings so
placed and applicable to that meter. It shall be unlawful and a violation of
this article for any person to park a vehicle across any such line or marking,
or to park a vehicle in such a position that the vehicle is not wholly within
the area designated by those lines or markings.
§ 380-46. Coin deposit in meter; overtime parking prohibited.
[Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 963]
Whenever a vehicle is to be parked in any space adjacent to a parking meter,
at any time in the period of limited parking as prescribed by § 380-43, the
driver of the vehicle, upon entering the parking space, shall immediately
deposit, or cause to be deposited, in that parking meter one or more proper
coins of the United States of America as specified in the legend on the
parking meter. Upon the deposit of the coin or coins, and placing the meter
in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by the vehicle
for the time indicated on the meter. If any vehicle shall remain in any
such parking space for any length of time that the meter shall indicate by
proper signal that the lawful parking time has expired, that vehicle shall be
considered as having been parked overtime, and the parking of a vehicle
overtime shall be a violation of this article. Provided, every hour that a
vehicle remains parked at a meter showing a violation shall constitute a
separate violation of this article.
§ 380-47. Depositing substitute for coin in meter prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking meter installed
under the provisions of this article any slug or other substitute for a coin of
the United States of America.
§ 380-48. Depositing coin in meter to extend parking time
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to deposit or
cause to be deposited in any parking meter installed under the provisions of
this article any coin for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking
time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time established for that zone.
§ 380-49. Remaining parked at meter showing violation prohibited.
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this article, for any person to permit
a vehicle to remain in a parking space adjacent to a parking meter installed
under this article when that meter displays a signal indicating that the
vehicle has already been parked there beyond the period of time prescribed
for that parking space, or the time for which a coin or coins was deposited
in that meter for the parking of that vehicle.
§ 380-45 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-50
1:530
§ 380-50. Tampering with meter prohibited.
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this article, for any person to deface,
tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of
any parking meter installed under the provisions of this article. Provided,
nothing in this section shall apply to the servicing or opening of parking
meters by officers, employees or police officers of the City under the
direction of the Chief of Police or City Council.
§ 380-51. Ticketing of vehicles parked unlawfully; effect of payment
within five calendar days.
§ 380-52. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers and parking enforcement
personnel of the City, acting in accordance with the directions of the
Chief of Police, to report:
(1) The number of each parking meter that indicates that a vehicle
occupying the adjacent parking space is, or has been, parked in
violation of any provision of this article.
(2) The date and hour of the violation.
(3) The license number of the vehicle.
(4) Any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
B. The police officer or other person making the report shall also place on
or attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or driver of the vehicle
that the vehicle was parked in violation of this article, and instructing
the owner or driver that if he will report to the office of the City
Treasurer and pay, for the use of the City, the sum of $5 within five
calendar days after the time of the notice, or will place the sum of $5
enclosed within the envelope provided, in any of the special parking
fine boxes installed at various locations within the City within the time
limit, that act will save the violator from prosecution and from payment
of the fine prescribed in § 380-52A. [Amended 6-21-2004 by Ord. No.
708]
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article, with the exception
of § 380-50, and who fails to pay the fine set forth in § 380-51, shall be
cited within 30 days of the violation and, upon conviction, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs. The City Manager or his
designee shall have sole discretion to waive fines and determination
will be made on individual merit. [Amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
942]
B. Any person who violates any provision of § 380-50 shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs
§ 380-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-52
1:531
§ 380-53. Exceptions.
and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to imprisonment for not
more than 30 days.
C. Maximum amounts of fines for violations of various parking
restrictions: [Added 6-28-2004 by Res. No. 963]
Fine When
Issued
Fine After 5
Days
Fine After 10
Days
Off-street-meter
violations
$3 $5 $6
On-street meter
violations
$5 $7 $8
Hydrant $15 $20 $25
No-parking zone $15 $20 $25
Opposing traffic $15 $20 $25
Blocking driveway $15 $20 $25
Within 20 feet of
intersection
$15 $20 $25
Double parking $15 $20 $25
More than 12 inches
from curb
$10 $15 $20
Other $15 $20 $25
A. By resolution, the City Council may temporarily suspend the provisions
of this article requiring coin deposit in meters and establishing a
maximum parking time at meters.
B. The City shall have authority to establish no-parking or special-purpose
parking zones within any parking meter zone, and to remove parking
meters from those areas as previously installed there, and the
provisions of this article shall not apply in those areas where no-parking
or special-purpose parking is in effect.
§ 380-52 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-53
1:532
ARTICLE VI
Off-Street Metered Parking
§ 380-54. Metered parking lots established.
A. Each parking meter in the lots established under this section shall be in
operation and the provisions of this article regulating such operation
and establishing parking limits shall be enforced between the hours of
9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday; provided, the
requirements of this section as to parking time limits and as to deposit
of coins in parking meters shall not apply on legal holidays or Sundays.
Parking meter fees shall be at the rate(s) set from time to time by
Council by resolution. [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 963;
1-16-2017 by Ord. No. 966]
Lot Location
Hours in
Operation
Days In
Operation
Maximum
Parking
Time
(hours)
Lot No. 1 Lower Church
Street
9:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
Mon. through
Sat.
8 1/4
Lot No. 2 Upper Church
Street
9:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
Mon. through
Sat.
8 1/4
Lot No. 3 East Water
Street
9:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
Mon. through
Sat.
8 1/4
Lot No. 4 City Hall 9:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
Mon. through
Sat.
8 1/4
Lot No. 6 West Water
Street
24 hours All 8 1/4
Lot No. 7 East Main
Street
9:00 a.m.
to 11:00
p.m.
Mon. through
Sat.
8 1/4
B. Provided, the parking meters in the metered lots shall be in operation,
the parking lots shall be open for parking and the provisions of this
article regulating the operation of parking meters and establishing
parking time limits shall be in force on the days and between the hours
prescribed for the individual lots. But, on Sundays and legal holidays,
no parking time limit shall apply and the placing of coins in meters shall
not be required.
C. Free parking.
§ 380-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-54
1:533
§ 380-55. Placement and characteristics of parking meters.
Parking meters installed in the parking lots shall be placed immediately
adjacent to the individual parking spaces that shall be marked off and
maintained in the lots. Each parking meter shall indicate by a proper legend
the parking rate and the maximum parking time established by § 380-54,
and, when the parking space is occupied and the parking meter put into
operation by the insertion of one or more coins, the parking meter shall
indicate the duration of legal parking, and, upon the expiration of that
period, shall indicate illegal parking or over-parking.
§ 380-56. Reserved parking spaces for handicapped may be
provided.
The City Council, at its discretion, may provide, at convenient and suitable
locations in any one or more of the metered parking lots, reserved parking
spaces for handicapped, and shall designate those spaces by appropriate
signs. It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this article, for any person
to park in any such reserved parking space any vehicle unless that vehicle
bears or displays either a handicapped registration plate, a handicapped
parking placard, a disabled veteran registration plate or a disabled veteran
placard.
§ 380-57. Parked vehicles to be wholly within marked spaces.
Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the surface of the
metered parking lots, adjacent to each parking meter, for the purpose of
delineating the parking space for which that meter shall be used. Every
vehicle parked adjacent to any parking meter shall be parked wholly within
the lines or markings so placed and applicable to that meter. It shall be
unlawful and a violation of this article for any person:
(1) Lock Haven City Council will grant free parking in the off-street
municipal parking lots starting the day after Thanksgiving until the
day after Christmas.
(2) Exception. The municipal parking lots located on Water Street
(Lots 5 and 6) near the levee system shall be exempt.155
A. To park a vehicle across any such line or marking.
B. To park a vehicle in such a position that the vehicle shall not be within
the area so delineated by the lines or markings.
C. To park a vehicle elsewhere in any such lot other than in an individual
parking space adjacent to a parking meter.
155. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 380-54 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-58
1:534
§ 380-58. Manner of parking at meters.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any metered parking
lot:
§ 380-59. Coin deposit in meter; overtime parking prohibited.
Whenever a vehicle is to be parked in any metered parking lot, at any time
when the lot is open for use and the meters are to be in operation, the
driver of the vehicle, upon entering the parking space, shall immediately
deposit, or cause to be deposited, in the proper parking meter, one or more
proper coins of the United States of America as specified in the legend
on the parking meter. Upon the deposit of the coin or coins, and placing
the meter in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by the
vehicle for the time indicated on the meter. If any vehicle remains in any
such parking space for such length of time that the meter indicates that the
lawful parking time has expired, that vehicle shall be considered as being
parked overtime, and the parking of a vehicle overtime shall be a violation
of this article. Provided, every hour that a vehicle remains parked at a meter
showing a violation shall constitute a separate violation of this article.
§ 380-60. Depositing substitute for coin in meter prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking meter installed
under the provisions of this article any slug or other substitute for a coin of
the United States of America.
§ 380-61. Remaining parked at meter showing violation prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to permit a
vehicle to remain in a parking space adjacent to a parking meter installed
under this article when that meter displays a signal indicating that the
vehicle has already been parked there beyond the period of time prescribed
for that parking space, or the time for which a coin or coins was deposited
in that meter for the parking of that vehicle.
§ 380-62. Tampering with meter prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to deface,
tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of
any parking meter installed under the provisions of this article. Provided,
nothing in this section shall apply to the servicing or opening of parking
meters by officers, employees or police officers of the City under the
direction of the Chief of Police or City Council.
A. With any part of the vehicle touching the meter post or head or the
raised base or barrier on which meters are erected.
§ 380-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-63
1:535
§ 380-63. Metered parking lots for certain types of vehicles only.
The metered parking lots established by this article shall be for the use
of passenger cars, passenger vans and pickup trucks only, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to park any other type of vehicle in any of those
lots.
§ 380-64. Ticketing of vehicles parked unlawfully; effect of payment
within time limit.
§ 380-65. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers and parking enforcement
personnel of the City, acting in accordance with the direction of the
Chief of Police, to report:
(1) The number of each parking meter that indicates that a vehicle
occupying the adjacent parking space is, or has been, parked in
violation of any provision of this article.
(2) The date and hour of the violation.
(3) The license number of the vehicle.
(4) Any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
B. The police officer or other person making the report shall also place on
or attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or driver of the vehicle
that the vehicle was parked in violation of this article, and instructing
the owner or driver that if he will report to the office of the City
Treasurer and pay, for the use of the City, the sum of $3 within five
calendar days after the time of the notice, or will place the sum of $3
enclosed within the envelope provided, in any of the special parking
fine boxes installed at various locations within the City, or places a
stamp on the return envelope and mails payment to the address
indicated, within the time limit, that act will save the violator from
prosecution and from payment of the fine prescribed in § 380-65A.
[Amended 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 708]
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article, with the exception
of § 380-62, and who fails to pay the fine set forth in § 380-64, shall be
cited within 30 days of the violation and, upon conviction, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs. The City Manager or his
designee shall have sole discretion to waive fines and determination
will be made on individual merit. [Amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
942]
B. Any person who violates any provision of § 380-62 shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs
and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to imprisonment for not
more than 30 days.
§ 380-63 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-65
1:536
§ 380-66. Parking permits.
The Council of the City of Lock Haven hereby authorizes the issuance
of parking permits to those making application therefor under the terms,
provisions and conditions hereinafter established.
C. Maximum amounts of fines for violations of various parking
restrictions: [Added 6-28-2004 by Res. No. 963]
Fine When
Issued
Fine After 5
Days
Fine After 10
Days
Off-street-meter
violations
$3 $5 $6
On-street-meter
violations
$5 $7 $8
Hydrant $15 $20 $25
No-parking zone $15 $20 $25
Opposing traffic $15 $20 $25
Blocking driveway $15 $20 $25
Within 20 feet of
intersection
$15 $20 $25
Double parking $15 $20 $25
More than 12 inches
from curb
$10 $15 $20
Other $15 $20 $25
A. Permits shall be issued by the Lock Haven City Police Department and
may be obtained at City Hall, 20 East Church Street, on Monday
through Friday, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
B. Permits will be issued for the lots listed below. [Amended 12-12-2016
by Ord. No. 963]
(1) Permit fees shall be at the rate(s) set from time to time by Council
by resolution and shall be valid for the entire calendar month for
which it was issued:
(a) Lot No. 1 (Lower Church Street lot).
(b) Lot No. 2 (Upper Church Street lot).
(c) Lot No. 3 (Water Street lot).
(d) Lot No. 4 (City Hall parking lot).
(e) Lot No. 5 (beach parking lot).
§ 380-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-66
1:537
(2) Permits may be purchased on a monthly, quarterly or yearly basis.
Permits for the subsequent year can only be purchased during the
month of December of the preceding year.
C. Holders of 24-hour permits for lots are entitled to park only in a
designated 24-hour permit stall in the particular lot for which the
permit is issued. Holders of eight-hour permits for lots are entitled to
park at any metered stall in the particular lot for which the permit is
issued if prominently displaying the valid permit for that lot. Holders of
eight-hour permits may not park in designed 24-hour permit stalls,
through the expiration date shown on the permit. It does not entitle the
holder to a reserved parking stall or to any particular parking stall and
does not guarantee availability of a parking stall at any given time
within the particular lot for which it is issued. The permit does not allow
parking within the area of any City street or on private property. The
holders of permits for Lots 4 and 5 (City Hall lot and beach lot) are
entitled only to park within the hours of 8:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m.
within any stall signed for permit parking in the particular lot for which
the permit is issued, through the expiration date shown on the permit.
An eight-hour permit entitles the holder to park at any metered stall in
the particular lot for which the permit is issued without placing coins in
that meter. A 24-hour permit does not entitle the holder to park at any
metered stall without placing coins in that meter. The permit does not
allow parking within the area of any City street or on private property.
[Amended 1-16-2017 by Ord. No. 966]
D. All vehicles that are owned by the applicant may be covered by one
permit if the applicant provides the appropriate license plate numbers
to the City at the time the permit is issued. Vehicles that are not
identified on the permit cannot use the permit. Should one permit be
issued for two or more vehicles, it is the holder's responsibility to insure
that the permit is placed in the vehicle that is parked in a City lot.
E. The permit must be prominently displayed on the vehicle dashboard so
the license plate number(s) and the expiration date can be readily seen
by the enforcement officer. Holders of permits that are not left in clear
view on the dashboard will be ticketed.
F. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to
permit a vehicle to remain parked in any area designated as permit
parking only, without displaying a proper, valid parking permit for that
particular lot. The Lock Haven City Police Department reserves the
right to ticket, tow and impound any vehicle found to be parked in an
area designated for permit parking only that does not display the
proper parking permit. Vehicles will be ticketed and towed to an
impoundment facility designated by the Lock Haven City Police
Department. All expenses related to the towing of vehicles and any
storage charges are the responsibility of the owner. Illegally parked
vehicles may be towed without notice to the operator, registrant or
owner.
§ 380-66 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-66
1:538
G. All fines, towing charges and storage charges must be paid in full
before vehicle will be released to the operator, registrant or owner.
§ 380-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-66
1:539

ARTICLE VII
Off-Street Unmetered Parking
§ 380-67. Unmetered parking lots established.
The following are established as the unmetered parking lots operated by the
City:
Lot Location
Maximum
Parking
Time
Days in
Operation
Hours in
Operation
Municipal lot
(municipal
employees
only)
Liberty Street
and Mary's
Alley
— — —
§ 380-68. Reserved parking spaces for handicapped may be
provided.
The City Council, at its discretion, may provide, at convenient and suitable
locations in one or more of the unmetered parking lots, reserved parking
spaces for handicapped, and shall designate those spaces by appropriate
signs. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to
park in any such reserved parking space any vehicle unless that vehicle
bears or displays either a handicapped registration plate, a handicapped
parking placard, a disabled veteran registration plate, or a disabled veteran
placard. Provided, all provisions, requirements and restrictions contained in
the other sections of this article shall apply to vehicles lawfully parked in
reserved parking spaces for handicapped.
§ 380-69. Parking overtime or when lot closed prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow a vehicle to
remain parked in any unmetered parking lot:
§ 380-70. Unmetered lots for certain types of vehicles.
The unmetered parking lots established by § 380-67 shall be for the use
of passenger cars, passenger vans and pickup trucks only, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to park any other kind or class of vehicle in any
such lot.
§ 380-71. Manner of parking.
Every vehicle parked in an unmetered parking lot shall be parked wholly
within the lines bounding or marking the individual parking space assigned
A. For longer than the maximum parking time prescribed by § 380-67.
B. At any time when the lot is not in operation and is closed to public use.
§ 380-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-71
1:541
to that vehicle, and shall be parked headed into the parking space. It shall
be unlawful for any person:
§ 380-72. Parking on rental basis only.
The parking spaces in the unmetered parking lots shall be available for
parking on a monthly rental basis only. The rental fee shall be fixed by the
City Council by resolution and shall be for a calendar month or the part
of a calendar month remaining after the rental arrangements are made.
The rental fee shall be paid in advance to the Police Department for the
use of the City, and after the first month shall be automatically renewable
until the renter notifies the City that he wishes to terminate the rental
arrangements. At any time, however, the City may, by amending § 380-67,
discontinue provision of a specific unmetered parking lot or a portion of the
parking spaces in any such lot, or may change any unmetered parking lot,
or part of an unmetered parking lot, to a metered parking lot or to metered
parking spaces. The rental parking spaces shall be assigned by the Police
Department. The name of the renter of a parking space and/or the numbers
and/or letters on the registration tag of the vehicle entitled to be parked
there shall be posted by the City at the rental space or shall be painted on
the surface of that parking space.
§ 380-73. Off-street municipal parking lots.
Lock Haven City Council will grant free parking in the off-street municipal
parking lots starting the day after Thanksgiving until the day after New
Year's Day. Exception: The municipal parking lots located on Water Street
(Lot Nos. 5 and 6) near the levee system shall be exempted from this
provision.
§ 380-74. Violations and penalties.
A. To park a vehicle in a space not rented by him.
B. To park a vehicle otherwise than as required by this section.
C. To park a vehicle elsewhere than in an individual parking space, the
prohibited areas including, but not limited to, the access and exit
driveways and turning and maneuvering spaces.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs.
Provided, it shall be the duty of the police officers and of parking
enforcement personnel of the City to report to the appropriate official
all violations of any provision of this article, indicating, in each case, the
section violated; the license number of the vehicle involved in the
violation; the location where the violation took place; and any other
facts that might be necessary in order to secure a clear understanding
of the circumstances attending the violation. The police officer or other
person making the report shall also attach to or place upon every such
vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle was parked in violation of this
§ 380-71 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-74
1:542
article. The notice shall contain instructions to the owner or driver of
the vehicle that he may pay this by placing the amount in the fine
envelope and depositing it in any of the yellow Traf-O-Teria courtesy
boxes or by paying at City Hall between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday (except holidays), or by placing a stamp on
the reverse side and mailing using address indicated. [Amended
4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 733]
B. Maximum amounts of fines for violations of various parking
restrictions: [Added 6-28-2004 by Res. No. 963]
Fine When
Issued
Fine After 5
Days
Fine After 10
Days
Off-street-meter
violations
$3 $5 $6
On-street-meter
violations
$5 $7 $8
Hydrant $15 $20 $25
No-parking zone $15 $20 $25
Opposing traffic $15 $20 $25
Blocking driveway $15 $20 $25
Within 20 feet of
intersection
$15 $20 $25
Double parking $15 $20 $25
More than 12 inches
from curb
$10 $15 $20
Other $15 $20 $25
§ 380-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-74
1:543

ARTICLE VIII
Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 380-75. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle Code,
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(22), and gives authority to the City to remove and
impound those vehicles which are parked in a tow-away zone and in
violation of parking regulations of this chapter. Vehicles which have been
abandoned (as defined by the Vehicle Code) or which are parked in such a
manner as to interfere with traffic or pose a hazard to others may be towed
under the provisions of the Vehicle Code.
§ 380-76. Authority to remove and impound. [Amended 4-18-2005
by Ord. No. 733]
The City shall have authority to remove and impound, or to order the
removal and impounding, of any vehicle when the removal of such vehicle is
necessary in order to fix, construct, or repair utility pipes, lines or wires, or
in order to work on the roadway, and a reasonable search fails to locate the
owner or other person to remove such vehicle.
§ 380-77. Tow-away zones designated.
The following designated streets and/or parking lots are hereby established
as tow-away zones. Signs shall be posted to place the public on notice that
their vehicles may be towed for violation of City parking regulations:
Street Side Between Parking Lot
(Reserved)
§ 380-78. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time
by the City Council. Every such garage shall submit evidence to the City
Council that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount
satisfactory to the City Council as sufficient to indemnify owners of
impounded vehicles against loss or damage to those vehicles while in the
custody of the garage keeper for the purpose of towing or storage. The
approved storage garage shall submit to the City Council its schedule of
charges for towing and storage of vehicles under this article and, when the
schedule is approved by the City Council, those charges shall be adhered
to by the approved storage garage; no different schedule of charges shall
be demanded of or collected from any person whose vehicle is removed
or impounded under this article by any approved storage garage. The City
Council shall delete from its list of approved storage garages any garage
that makes any unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle removed
or impounded under this article.
§ 380-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-79
1:545
§ 380-79. Payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or
driver of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation
of the provision of this article for which the vehicle was removed or
impounded.
§ 380-80. Reclamation costs.
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage
costs plus a $25 fee, of which $10 shall be transferred to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation by the garage to which the vehicle was taken.
§ 380-81. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The City shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under this
article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or the
agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to the place of
storage of the vehicle.
§ 380-82. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article or the Vehicle
Code if, at the time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the
time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness
and intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 380-83. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 together with all costs
of disposing of the vehicle under the provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 P.S.
§ 7301 et seq.
§ 380-84. Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles.
If after a period of 15 days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed,
a report shall be filed with PennDOT in accordance with § 7311 of the
Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7311, by the person having legal custody of
the vehicle. If the vehicle has not been claimed after 30 days, the vehicle
may be transferred to a licensed salvor who will then be responsible for
filing the proper reports and disposing of the vehicle in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 73 of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa C.S.A. § 7301 et seq.
§ 380-79 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-84
1:546
ARTICLE IX
Snow and Ice Emergency
§ 380-85. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named in § 380-87, the
City Manager, in his discretion, may declare a snow and ice emergency
(designated in this article as a "snow emergency"). Information on the
existence of a snow emergency shall be given by the City through radio,
newspaper or other available media, and information on the termination of
the emergency may be given by use of the same media.
§ 380-86. Parking prohibited; driving motor vehicles restricted on
snow emergency routes during emergency.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful at any time
during the continuance of the emergency for any person:
§ 380-87. Snow emergency routes.
The following are designated as snow emergency routes:
Street Location
Bellefonte Avenue From the City line to East Church
Street
East Church Street From Belletone Avenue to Henderson
Street
East Main Street From the City line to Bellefonte Avenue
Henderson Street From Church Street to Main Street
North Fairview Street From Bellefonte Avenue to
Susquehanna Avenue
§ 380-88. Violations and penalties.
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated in § 380-87.
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
A. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 380-85, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a motor vehicle to
remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency route, that person
shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs.
B. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 380-85, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow emergency
§ 380-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-88
1:547
route without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires or chains,
that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 380-88 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-88
1:548
ARTICLE X
Regulation of Pedalcycles and Nonmotorized Vehicles
§ 380-89. Riding and parking of pedalcycles on sidewalks along
certain streets prohibited.
§ 380-90. Restrictions on use of pushcarts.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or to park a pedalcycle on the
sidewalk along the following portions of the streets in the City:
Street Between
Business Area
All streets and alleys within the
above street, as listed
Bellefonte Avenue West Church Street and City
line
East and West Church Street Jay Street and First Street
East and West Main Street Jay Street and Bellfonte Avenue
East and West Water Street Jay Street and First Street
Residential Areas; Housing for the Elderly
Barton Street Center Street and West Fourth
Street
Bellefonte Avenue North Fairview Street and West
Fourth Street
Bellefonte Avenue South Jones Street and West
Bald Eagle Street
Center Street Barton Street and Hampton
Street
East Park Street Myrtle Street and Jessamine
Street
Jessamine Street156 East Park Street and Walnut
Street
Lock Haven University All sidewalks adjoining Lock
Haven University property and
all sidewalks within Lock Haven
University
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
A. The word "pushcart," as used in this section, shall mean a vehicle,
including a pedalcycle, propelled solely by human power, and used or
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 380-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-90
1:549
§ 380-91. Skates, skateboards, coasters, sleds and other toy
vehicles.
intended for use for the display, transport, exhibit or sale of goods,
wares or merchandise.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any
sidewalk in any business district except as necessary to move the
pushcart to a location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded or from
which goods, wares or merchandise are to be sold or dispensed under
permit from the City Council as provided in Subsection C of this section.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a pushcart upon any sidewalk
except for the purpose of selling or dispensing from that pushcart
goods, wares or merchandise to passersby under permit from the City
Council. Every such permit shall be issued to the person making
application for the permit, upon payment of a fee, which shall be for the
use of the City set by the City Council by resolution. The permit shall be
granted to the applicant, upon payment of the fee, and upon the
applicant signing an agreement with the City Council that he shall be
bound by the conditions imposed by City Council and made a part of the
permit, dealing with the following matters:
(1) Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or more
stated locations upon the sidewalk and to stated days and hours at
each location.
(2) Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the
disposal of garbage and refuse resulting from the operations
carried on.
(3) Requiring that there be no violation of any law, ordinance or
regulation pertaining to health, sanitation and the handling of food
or drink.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section, or any condition
of any permit granted under this section, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on a sled upon any sidewalk in
the City, or upon any roadway unless that roadway is on a portion of a
street blocked off for sledding by authority of § 380-5 or 380-21.
Provided, nothing in this subsection shall prevent a pedestrian from
pulling a sled, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in roller-skating,
skateboarding or to ride upon or propel any coaster or other toy vehicle
upon:
(1) Any street except in order to cross the roadway.
§ 380-90 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-91
1:550
(2) Any sidewalk located in a business district, except that nothing in
this subsection shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a coaster or
other toy vehicle, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
§ 380-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-91
1:551

ARTICLE XI
Pedestrian Regulations
§ 380-92. Pedestrians to obey traffic-control signs.
At all locations in the City where official traffic-control signals are installed,
pedestrians, except where directed otherwise by pedestrian-control signals
installed under § 380-93, shall obey the directions of those traffic-control
signals, as follows:
§ 380-93. Pedestrian-control signal locations established.
A. When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the
roadway within a crosswalk, when safe to do so.
B. When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to cross
the roadway.
C. When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the
roadway.
A. At the following locations, official pedestrian-control signals shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected):
Location
Intersection of East Church Street and North Henderson Street
Intersection of East Main Street and North Jay Street
Intersection of East Main Street and North Grove Street
Intersection of East Main Street and North Vesper Street
Intersection of North Fairview Street, West Water Street and
Susquehanna Avenue
B. Every pedestrian facing a steady or flashing "Don't Walk" signal shall
obey the directions of that signal, as follows:
(1) When facing a steady "Don't Walk" signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any
pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk"
signal should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "Don't
Walk" signal is showing.
(2) When facing a flashing "Don't Walk" signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the indication, but any
pedestrian who has partly completed crossing during the "Walk"
indication should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone.
C. Any pedestrian who fails to obey the directions of a "Don't Walk" signal,
as indicated above, shall be guilty of an offense and a violation of this
article.
§ 380-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-94
1:553
§ 380-94. Locations where pedestrian crossing in unmarked
crosswalks restricted.
Except when authorized by a police officer or other appropriately attired
person authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic, it shall be unlawful
for any pedestrian to cross the roadway at any of the following streets, at
the intersection with that street indicated.
Street Intersection Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
§ 380-95. Locations where pedestrians may cross only in crosswalk.
§ 380-96. Violations and penalties.
Any pedestrian who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
$5 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian:
(1) To cross any roadway in a business district within the City except in
a crosswalk.
(2) To cross the roadway, in any of the following portions of streets in
the City, except in a crosswalk:
Street Between
(Reserved)
B. Provided, nothing in this section shall permit any pedestrian to cross in
a crosswalk at any location where that crossing is prohibited by
§ 380-93.
§ 380-94 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-96
1:554
ARTICLE XII
Parking Regulations on Private Property
[Added 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 813]
§ 380-97. Intent.
The indiscriminate parking of vehicles on lawn areas and areas other than
approved off-street parking areas, which were specifically built and
designed for the parking of vehicles, has many deleterious effects on the
community. These include the destroying of lawn areas, resulting in
creating dirt, mud and other debris on private and public property. Not only
do these deleterious conditions lower the value of individual properties,
thereby causing an overall lowering of all property value in the
neighborhoods, but also mud, dirt and other debris are scattered and
spread onto public streets by vehicles so parked when those vehicles leave
the premises. Therefore, in order to stop the scattering of these materials
which have a deleterious effect on the public streets and the community as
a whole, the City hereby declares that the parking of vehicles on private
and public property other than approved off-street parking areas is a public
nuisance and prohibits the same.
§ 380-98. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED OFF-STREET PARKING AREA — Any off-street parking area,
including driveways, serving one- or two-family dwellings, which is
designed and built to all applicable standards, as prescribed in Chapter 410,
Zoning, for off-street parking areas, and which has been duly approved by
the City.
DRIVER — A person who drives or is in actual physical control of the
movement of the vehicle.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer, the Zoning
Officer, any City police officer, or any other City employee assigned to
enforcing City ordinances.
OCCUPANT — Any person living in a dwelling or having possession of a
space within a building.
OFF-STREET PARKING — The halting of a vehicle in any area beyond the
street right-of-way, whether occupied or not, except momentarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers.
OFF-STREET PARKING AREA — An area or structure located beyond the
street right-of-way, which is designed to be used for parking vehicles.
OWNER — Any person, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of
§ 380-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-98
1:555
the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and
the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take
possession of real property by a court.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, whether improved or unimproved,
including portions occupied by a street or alley and portions of land
between sidewalks and streets.
VEHICLE — Any vehicle, including trucks, tractor trucks, automobiles,
motorcycles, pedalcycles, campers, motor homes, trailers, fifth-wheel units,
and any other devices included in the definition of vehicles in the Vehicle
Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 380-99. Parking prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as a private
property owner, vehicle owner, occupant, lessee, agent, tenant or otherwise,
to permit off-street parking of vehicles other than approved off-street
parking areas, and parking is expressly prohibited on lawn or landscaped
areas.
§ 380-100. Responsibility of owners/drivers.
The owner and/or driver shall be responsible for complying with the
provisions of § 380-99 of this chapter.
§ 380-101. Notice of violation.
§ 380-102. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail to make payment in
accordance with § 380-101 hereof violate any provision of this article shall,
A. Upon the discovery of any violation under the terms of this article, the
Enforcement Officer is hereby empowered to give notice to the owner
and/or driver of a violation either by personal delivery to such owner
and/or driver, by United States mail directed to the last known address
of such owner and/or driver or by leaving the same on the vehicle which
is parked in violation of this article.
B. If such owner and/or driver, within seven days after personal delivery,
mailing or leaving of such notice, pays to the Treasurer of the City the
sum of $35 for the violation, the same will constitute full satisfaction for
the violation noted in said notice.
C. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation. The
failure of such owner and/or drive to make payment, as aforesaid,
within seven days shall render such owner and/or driver subject to the
penalties as provided herein.
§ 380-98 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 380-102
1:556
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300,
nor more than $1,000, plus costs. Each day's violation shall constitute
a separate offense, and notice to the offender shall not be necessary in
order to constitute a separate offense, nor shall notice to the offender be
necessary in order to constitute an offense. In default of payment of the
penalty stated herein, such offender may be committed to the county jail for
a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 380-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-102
1:557
Chapter 386
VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 307. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 380.
§ 386-1. Findings; purpose.
The outdoor storage of abandoned, junked or discarded vehicles upon
private property within the City of Lock Haven is hereby declared to be
detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the community,
aesthetically unattractive and detracting from the enjoyment of the
environment by said residents, tending to depreciate neighborhood
property values, and is an infringement on their properties and homes. The
same also constitutes a potential nuisance to the children of the community
and may imperil their safety. The fuel tanks of abandoned, junked or
discarded vehicles containing gasoline or gasoline fumes constitute an everpresent
danger of explosion. The abandoned, junked or discarded vehicles
may also contain broken glass and sharp metal edges, and such vehicles
usually are stored or abandoned with batteries containing harmful acids or
air-conditioning units containing Freon. The control of the outdoor storage
of abandoned, junked or discarded vehicles is therefore regulated for the
preservation of the health, safety and general welfare of the community.
§ 386-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — A vehicle:
That is inoperable and left unattended on a highway or other public
property for more than 48 hours; or
A.
That has remained illegally on a highway, street or on other public
property for a period of more than 48 hours; or
B.
Without a valid registration plate or certificate of inspection or title left
unattended on or along a public property; or
C.
That is left unattended or along a highway or other public property for
more than 48 hours and does not bear the following:
(1) A valid registration plate;
(2) A certificate of inspection;
(3) An ascertainable vehicle identification number; or
D.
§ 380-102 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 386-2
1:558
DISCARDED VEHICLE — Any vehicle(s) which the owner thereof, as
established by the surrounding circumstances, relinquishes ownership and
possession of, and any vehicle(s) the owner of which cannot be found after
due and reasonable inquiry.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer, the Zoning
Officer, any City police officer, or any other City employee assigned to
enforcing City ordinances.
JUNKED VEHICLE — Any vehicle which has no valid registration or
certificate of inspection and has been stripped or partially disassembled so
that it is inoperable or immovable and is parked or permitted to stand on
private property for a continuous period in excess of 48 hours.
JUNKYARD — A premises permitted by the City of Lock Haven as a
junkyard.
NUISANCE — Any condition, structure, improvement, materials or toxins
which shall constitute a danger or potential danger to the health, safety, or
welfare of the citizens of the City of Lock Haven.
OCCUPANT — Any person living in a dwelling or having possession of a
space within a building.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of
the municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control
of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and
the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take
possession of real property by a court.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, whether improved or unimproved,
including portions occupied by a street or alley and portions of land
between sidewalks and streets.
VEHICLE — Any vehicle, including trucks, tractor trucks, automobiles,
motorcycles, pedalcycles, campers, motor homes, trailers, fifth-wheel units,
and any other device included in the definition of "vehicles" in the Vehicle
Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
VEHICLE ACCESSORIES — Any part or parts of any motor vehicle.
§ 386-3. Storage of vehicle nuisances restricted.
That has remained on private property without the consent of the owner
or person in control of the property for more than 48 hours.
E.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as a
private property owner, vehicle owner, occupant, lessee, agent, tenant
or otherwise, to openly store or deposit or cause or permit to be openly
stored or deposited an abandoned, junked, discarded or unlicensed
vehicle or vehicles or parts or pieces thereof on any private property
§ 386-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-3
1:559
within the City of Lock Haven, except as permitted in junkyards or
by this chapter, unless such vehicle or part or piece thereof is stored
or deposited in a completely enclosed building or such vehicle or part
or piece thereof is under repair, reconstruction or refurbishing by the
owner thereof, who must actually be residing upon the premises where
such repair, reconstruction or refurbishing is being done. Such vehicle
or part or piece thereof must be maintained and protected so as not to
create a safety hazard or nuisance to surrounding property owners and
shall not remain on the premises for more than 48 hours.
B. A vehicle nuisance shall include any vehicle which has any of the
following physical defects:
(1) Broken windshields, mirrors or other glass with sharp edges.
(2) One or more flat or open tires or tubes which could permit vermin
harborage.
(3) Missing doors, windows, hood, trunk or other body parts which
could permit animal harborage.
(4) Any body parts with sharp edges, including holes resulting from
rust.
(5) Missing tires resulting in unsafe suspension of the motor vehicle.
(6) Upholstery which is torn or open which could permit animal and/or
vermin harborage.
(7) Broken headlamps or tail lamps with sharp edges.
(8) Disassembled chassis parts apart from the motor vehicle stored in a
disorderly fashion or loose in or on the vehicle.
(9) Protruding sharp objects from the chassis.
(10) Broken sharp objects from the chassis.
(11) Leaking fluids.
(12) Exposed battery containing acid.
(13) Inoperable locking mechanism for doors or trunk.
(14) Open or damaged floorboards, including trunk and fire wall.
(15) Damaged bumpers pulled away from the perimeter of the vehicle.
(16) Broken grill with protruding edges.
(17) Loose or damaged metal trim and clips.
(18) Broken communications equipment antennas.
(19) Suspended or unstable supports.
§ 386-3 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 386-3
1:560
§ 386-4. Exceptions.
It shall be permissible for a person to park, store, keep and maintain a
junked vehicle on private property under the following conditions:
§ 386-5. Vehicle restoration permit.
A vehicle restoration permit will be issued by the enforcement officer for
the City on the following terms and conditions:
(20) Such other defects which could threaten the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the City.
A. The junked vehicle is completely enclosed within a building where
neither the vehicle nor any part of it is visible from the street or from
any other abutting property. This exception shall not exempt the owner
or person in possession of the property from any zoning, building,
housing, property maintenance and other regulations governing the
building in which such vehicle is enclosed.
B. The junked vehicle is parked or stored on property lawfully zoned for
businesses engaged in wrecking, junking or repairing vehicles. This
exception shall not exempt the owner or operator of any such business
from any other zoning, building, fencing, property maintenance and
other regulations governing businesses engaged in wrecking, junking
or repairing vehicles.
A. A restoration permit will be issued to the private property owner only.
B. The vehicle being restored shall be titled to the property owner being
issued the permit.
C. Only one vehicle restoration permit at a time will be issued to a
property owner.
D. The vehicle restoration permit shall be valid for a maximum of one
vehicle and shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance.
E. The vehicle shall be stored on the property owner's premises on an
adequately maintained surface in the side or rear yard.
F. At all times that the vehicle is not being worked on for restoration, said
vehicle of the property owner shall be covered with a car cover, and the
area shall be free of debris, litter, discarded parts or equipment utilized
for the restoration. A car cover must cover the entire vehicle and be
securely fastened to the vehicle. A car cover shall be made of material
which will resist wind, rain and other weather-related circumstances.
The use of bricks, stones, blocks or other material as a fastener shall
not be permitted.
G. The area where the vehicle is being stored, placed or left shall be
subject to periodic and random inspections by the City enforcement
officer. Should it be determined that the subject vehicle is not being
§ 386-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-5
1:561
§ 386-6. Inspections; notice of violation.
§ 386-7. Authority to remedy noncompliance.
If the owner of the premises on which the vehicle(s) are stored does not
comply with the notice to abate the nuisance within the time limit
prescribed, the City shall have the authority to take measures to correct
the conditions so as to comply with the provisions of this chapter, and the
reasonable cost thereof, together with any additional penalty authorized by
law, may be collected by the City from such owner or occupant as a penalty
under the provisions of this chapter, or in any other manner provided by
law. This right, as herein vested in the City, shall be in addition to penalties
prescribed by the provisions of this chapter for the failure of the owner or
occupant, as aforesaid, to comply with the terms of this chapter. The City,
in such event and pursuant to its statutory or otherwise authorized police
powers, shall have the right and power to enter upon the offending premises
to accomplish the foregoing.
§ 386-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail to make payment in
accordance with § 386-6 hereof shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $1,000, plus costs. Each
abandoned, junked, discarded or unregistered vehicle stored in violation
of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation. Each day that such
restored or the area surrounding the vehicle being restored is not
properly maintained and free of debris, litter, unused parts or
equipment, then, in that event, the restoration permit will be rescinded,
and the property owner will be subject to other provisions of this
chapter.
A. The enforcement officer is hereby empowered to inspect private
property on which vehicle(s) are stored to determine if there is
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If noncompliance with
the provisions of this chapter constitutes a nuisance, or if any condition,
structure, improvement, material or toxin poses a threat to the health,
safety, or welfare of the public, he/she shall issue a written notice to the
owner and/or occupant either by personal delivery, by United States
mail directed to the last known address, or by posting the written notice
conspicuously upon the offending premises.
B. If such owner and/or occupant, within seven days after personal
delivery, mailing or leaving of such notice, pays to the Treasurer of the
City the sum of $35 for the violation, the same will constitute full
satisfaction for the violation noted in said notice.
C. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation. The
failure of such owner and/or occupant to make payment, as aforesaid,
within seven days shall render such owner and/or occupant subject to
the penalties as provided herein.
§ 386-5 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 386-8
1:562
separate violation shall continue or be carried on shall constitute an
additional separate violation for which the court may impose an additional
fine and continuing fine until the vehicle is removed or enclosed. Notice
to the offender shall not be necessary in order to constitute a separate
violation, nor shall notice to the offender be necessary in order to constitute
an offense. In default of payment of the penalty stated herein, such offender
may be committed to the County Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 394
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 328.
§ 386-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 386-8
1:563

ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations for Water Supply Users
[Adopted 12-27-1979 by Ord. No. 98B; amended in its entirety
6-3-1996 by Ord. No. 507B (Ch. 26, Part 1, of the 2003 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 394-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSUMER — Any party receiving water from the City.
CUSTOMER — A party who contracts for water service to a property,
which property is hereinafter described as follows, but not limited to such
description:
SERVICE CONNECTION — The service pipe beginning at its connection
with the street main and ending with and including the curb stop box,
generally just inside the line of the curb.
§ 394-2. Application for service.
A building under one roof, owned or leased by one party and occupied
as one residence or business, shall be considered as one customer.
A.
A group or combination of buildings owned or leased by one party, in
one common enclosure and occupied by one family or business as a
residence or a place of business, or for manufacturing or industrial
purposes, or as a hospital or other institution shall be considered as one
customer.
B.
A public building such as a town hall, schoolhouse, fire engine house,
etc., shall be considered as one customer.
C.
A. Service connections will be made and water will be furnished upon
written application by the prospective customer, or his properly
authorized agent, on the form furnished by the water office, at least two
weeks before service is required and upon approval by the Water
Department or its duly authorized agent.
B. The application and its acceptance by the City of Lock Haven Water
Department shall constitute a contract between the City and the
applicant obligating the applicant to pay the City its rates for water
service from the date the water is turned on.
C. The rules and regulations are part of the contract with every person,
municipal authority or political subdivision which takes water service,
and every such person, authority or political subdivision, by contracting
with the City, agrees to be bound thereby.
D. A customer who has made application for water service to any property
shall be held liable for all water service furnished to such property until
§ 394-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-2
1:565
§ 394-3. Service connections.
such time as the customer properly notifies the City Water Department
to discontinue the service for his account.
E. A new application for service must be made to, and approved by, the
City Water Department upon any change in the ownership of the
property or in the service as described in the application.
F. No agreement will be entered into by the City Water Department with
any applicant for water service until all arrearages for water service
rendered at any property now or heretofore owned or occupied by him
shall have been paid or until satisfactory arrangements for payment of
such unpaid bill have been made.
G. The payment of any undisputed bill, within the meaning of the Public
Utility Law,157 shall be payment of the bill, with or without interest,
within 30 days for residential and commercial customers following the
date of the bill, except in the case of bills to the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. (See § 394-7C.)
H. Upon approval of the application made by any customer for a supply of
water, the City will tap the main, insert the corporation stop, install the
service line to the curb or property line and install the curb stop,
service box and meter at its expense. The City will supply a meter setter
at the customer's expense for basement settings.
I. Adequate pressure must be available to provide proper service, which
determination will be by the City.
A. The City will install and maintain, at its own cost and expense, all
service connections for general service. Service connections for special
service not considered to be permanent shall be installed and
maintained, unless otherwise provided, at the expense of the applicant.
B. The service line beyond the curb stop shall be installed and maintained
by and at the expense of the customer. The portion of the service line
installed by the customer shall not be less in size and quality than the
service line in the street laid by the City and shall be laid not less than
48 inches below the surface and shall not be covered until the top on
the main is made and the service line tested. If any defects in
workmanship are found, the service shall not be turned on until such
defects are remedied. All service pipes must meet the specifications
established by the City and be installed to the specifications of the pipe
manufacturer and the City. The minimum service line shall be 3/4 inch.
C. The service line from the curb to the premises of the customer shall be
kept in good condition by the customer under penalty of discontinuance
of service by the City. No service line shall be laid in the same trench
157. Editor's Note: See 66 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 394-2 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 394-3
1:566
with any gas pipe, sewer pipe or any other facility of a public service
company, nor within three feet of any manhole, vault or open ditch.
D. A service line will be used to supply property only. No property shall
have more than one service connection, except where impossible or
impracticable to adequately furnish water thereto through one service
connection, in which event the City may agree to the installation and
use of more than one service connection. In case two or more customers
are supplied with water from the same service pipe, a distinct and
separate curb stop and curb box will be provided for each customer.
E. Where two or more premises are supplied through a single service, and
it is not possible to provide a separate curb stop for each premises, any
violation of these rules by either or any of the consumers shall be
deemed a violation as to all, and unless said violation is corrected, the
City may, after reasonable notice (30 days), take such action as can be
taken for a single customer, except that such action shall not be taken
until the innocent consumer, who has not violated the rules and
regulations, has been given a reasonable opportunity to attach his
service pipe to a separately controlled service connection and make
application to become a customer.
F. Service lines will not be installed when the service line must pass
through property which, at the time, may be the property of a party
other than the owner of the premises to be supplied, unless the owner
of the premises supplied provides, in writing, all necessary rights-ofway
in the name of Lock Haven City Authority and assumes all liability
and provides free access for installation and maintenance.
G. Curb stops at the curbline are for the exclusive use of the City and shall
not be used by the consumer or customer. The customer shall have
installed on his service line a stop and waste valve, meter and check
valve to be located, in general, just inside the building wall at the
nearest point of entry. This stop and waste valve is the customer's
control of his water supply and will provide for the turn off of water in
case of leaks and to drain pipes to prevent freezing.
H. The City reserves the right to require any customer to install on or in
conjunction with his service connection such valves, backflow
preventers, check valves, relief valves, pressure regulator, air chamber,
tank, float valves or other apparatus of approved design when and
where, in the opinion of the City, the conditions may require it for the
safeguarding and protection of the City's property or water supply.
I. The City shall, in no event, be liable for any damage done by water
escaping from the service pipe or any other pipe or fixture on the outlet
side of the curb stop, and it is expressly understood by the City and the
customer that no claims shall be made against the City on account of
the bursting or breaking of any main or service pipe or any attachment
to said waterworks unless said damage is a direct result of gross
negligence on the part of the City. All leaks in service lines from the
§ 394-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-3
1:567
§ 394-4. Service interruptions; service terminated by customer;
access for inspections; work by unauthorized persons.
curb stop to, in and upon the premises supplied shall be promptly
repaired. On failure to make repairs with reasonable dispatch, the City
will turn off the water, and it will not be again turned on until all proper
and necessary repairs are made and the sum of $20 for turning on the
water is paid in full.
J. All water passing through a meter shall be billed at the regular rate,
and no allowance will be made for excessive consumption due to leaks
and waste.
K. The proper officials of the City may prescribe the size, material and
weight per foot of the service pipe when it is deemed necessary in order
to give satisfactory service.
A. In case of accident, breakdown, emergency or for any other
unavoidable cause, the City shall have the right to temporarily shut off
the water supply to make necessary repairs, renewals or replacements
and shall in no manner be held responsible for any consequences of
such shutoffs.
B. The City shall have the right to renew all service pipe from the main to
the curbline upon notification to resurface or rebuild any street, alley or
roadway.
C. Every effort to give continuous and uninterrupted service will be made
by the City, and in the event of any shutoff, notice will be given, when
practicable, to all consumers affected. Nothing in these rules shall be
construed as a guarantee, covenant or agreement to give such notice of
shutoff or to give such continuous and uninterrupted service, and such
temporary shutoff of the water supply shall not entitle the customer to
any abatement or reduction in charges.
D. Whenever the customer desires to have his service contract terminated,
he shall notify the City Water Department to that effect in writing. The
customer will be responsible for the payment for all services rendered
by the City until such written notice is received or until water service is
actually discontinued by the City.
E. The properly identified agents of the City shall have, at all reasonable
hours, free access to all parts of the property to which water is
delivered for the purpose of inspection, examination of fixtures, etc.,
and all persons using water must, at all times, answer all questions
asked of them relating to their service consumption.
F. Under no circumstances shall any person not authorized by the City
open or close curb stops or valves in any public line.
§ 394-3 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 394-5
1:568
§ 394-5. Discontinuance of service.
Service under any contract may be discontinued, after due notice, for any
of the following reasons:
§ 394-6. Renewal of service after discontinuance.
When water service to any property has been terminated for any reason, it
will be renewed only after the acceptance of a new application and when
the conditions, circumstances or practices which cause the water service to
be discontinued are corrected to the satisfaction of the City.
§ 394-7. Bills for water service.
A. For any misrepresentation in the application.
B. For adding to said property or fixtures or altering the use to be made of
the water supplies, without notice to the City.
C. For waste of water.
D. For failure to maintain in good order any connection, service lines or
fixtures beyond the curb stop and owned by the customer.
E. For molesting any service pipe, meter seal, curb stop or any appliance
of the Water Department.
F. For neglecting to make payments of any account for water supplied or
service maintained.
G. For refusal of access to property for purpose of inspection or for
reading, caring for or removing meters and to install remote meters.
H. For failure to maintain a healthy atmosphere in the area where the
water meter is located or failure to maintain open access to the meter.
I. For violation of any rules and regulations of the City.
A. All water bills shall be rendered quarterly for service during the
previous quarter. Bills for metered service shall be determined by meter
registration, unless the meter fails to register, in which case a bill will
be rendered based on previous average consumption. "Average
consumption," as used herein, is defined as the average of the previous
four quarters' actual usage. Estimated bills will not be included in an
average.
B. All charges shall be due and payable upon presentation of bill(s)
covering service for the billing period completed and shall be payable
30 days from date of billing.
C. If water rental and water service invoices are not paid within 30 days
from the date of the bill, the Water Department will add to the bill for
service a late payment penalty at a monthly rate of 1 1/2% for
residential customers and 5% for all other customers. In the case of
§ 394-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-7
1:569
bills to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any department or
institution thereof, the nonpenalty provision of all schedules are
extended as to provide a sixty-day period during which payment may be
made at net rates.
D. The City will accept, without penalty, remittances bearing local
postmarks for the last day for payment without penalty.
E. Payments in advance of furnishing service may be required for:
(1) Private fire-protection service.
(2) Restoration or connection of service where the service has been
actually discontinued for failure to comply with tariff provisions.
(3) Construction of facilities and special equipment.
(4) Public fire hydrant service.
F. Any customer, upon receipt of bill, having reason to doubt its accuracy
shall bring or mail the bill, within 10 days, to the Water Department for
investigation.
G. Failure to receive a bill shall not exempt any customer from accruing a
penalty. The presentation of a bill to the customer is only a matter of
accommodation and not a waiver of the rules and regulations of this
article.
H. Final billing. When a final billing is requested, and less than the
appropriate minimum number of gallons of water is consumed, the
minimum charge for the size meter in service will be assessed. Where
multiple-unit buildings are involved, if the total metered consumption
divided by the number of units results in a per-unit consumption figure
of less than the appropriate minimum number of gallons, the final bill
shall be based on the total metered consumption as if the building were
a single unit. The new customer on the premises will be afforded the
same courtesy in his initial bill.
I. There shall be no service rendered free of charge.
J. All water bills and water charges shall be the ultimate responsibility of
the customer or his authorized representative or agent.
K. Payment may be made either in person or by mailing check, draft, post
office or express money order drawn to the order of "Water
Department, City of Lock Haven."
L. Partial payments may be accepted upon approval of the Water
Department; however, full payment must be made within 90 days from
the date of billing. Customers may participate in a payment plan
whereby the bill may be paid in two equal payments at no additional
cost. Customers must execute a written payment agreement at the
water office to participate. The first payment (50% of total bill) must be
§ 394-7 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 394-7
1:570
§ 394-8. Meters.
made by the normal due date of the bill and the second payment 30
days thereafter. If the first payment is not made by the normal due date,
the full amount of the bill will be subject to the late payment penalty
under Subsection C above. If the second payment is not made within 30
days after the normal due date, any unpaid balance will be subject to
the late payment penalty under Subsection C.
A. The City will, without charge, furnish and install for each customer
supplied with water a suitable meter of a type and size to be determined
by the City and will keep the same in repair, except in case of misuse or
damage by frost in a basement setting, hot water or external cause, in
which case the expense of repair must be borne by the customer.
Auxiliary water meters may be installed at the expense of the customer
with prior approval of the City Water Department.
B. The customer will provide, at no expense to the City, a meter location in
an easily accessible place in the cellar near the entrance of service
pipes to the cellar, with a stop and waste valve at the inlet side of the
pipes to the cellar, with a stop and waste valve at the inlet side of the
meter and a check valve on the outlet side of the meter.158 In any case
where it is not convenient to place the meter within the building, it must
be placed in an approved meter box furnished by the City at the
expense of the customer, installed according to City specifications with
suitable stop and waste valves and backflow connections. The
installation must be inspected and approved by an authorized
representative of the Water Department before the service will be
turned on.
C. Under no circumstances shall any party receive water from the City
without the water first passing through a water meter; any violation
hereof shall result in termination of service.
D. Each customer shall have a separate meter.
E. All water meters connected directly to the Lock Haven water system
shall be furnished by and remain the property of the Water Department.
The City will not furnish any additional or auxiliary water meter, where
the water to be metered by the additional meter has not been previously
metered.
F. Meters will be maintained by the Water Department as far as ordinary
wear and tear is concerned, but the customer shall be responsible for
any injury to or loss of any meter arising out of or caused by the
customer's negligence or carelessness or that of his servants,
employees, members of his household or any person upon his property
under or by his consent or sufferance. The customer shall permit no
158. Editor's Note: The City will supply a meter setter at the expense of the customer for all
cellar or basement locations.
§ 394-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-8
1:571
one, except an agent of the City, to remove, inspect or tamper with the
City meter or other property of the City on his premises.
G. Meter bypass. All meters two inches in size or over are required to have
a bypass with approved valves. It is the responsibility of the customer to
provide all required bypasses and valves at his own expense for all
meters two inches and over in size presently installed, which do not
have an approved bypass and valves. If, for any reason, a water meter
which does not have an approved bypass cannot be repaired or tested
during regular working hours, the additional costs (overtime) for
working irregular hours shall and will be charged to the customer. All
valves on the approved bypass shall be sealed by the City.
H. Remote reading meter.
(1) The City shall have the right to install upon all metered properties a
remote reading device which shall be located at a mutually
agreeable spot on said property to be determined by the property
owner and the City.
(2) Any structure hereafter built or moved within the service area of
the Lock Haven water system requiring the installation of water
meters shall be constructed so that the remote reading device
connected to the water meter shall be located outside the building,
at a location easily accessible to City personnel.
(3) The City is hereby authorized to alter all existing water meters so
that a remote reading device connected to said meter is in a
convenient and accessible location. The cost of such alteration shall
be borne by the City.
(4) The City reserves the right to determine type, location and number
of remote reading devices required for any service.
(5) If a discrepancy occurs between the remote reading device and the
meter generator, the generator shall take precedence over the
remote reading.
(6) If, due to a discrepancy between the meter generator and the
remote reading device, the volume of water used differs from the
amount billed, that difference will be included in the next regular
quarterly water bill.
I. Testing of meters.
(1) At the written request of a customer, the Water Department will
test the meter supplying his premises upon payment of the fee
specified herein. If the meter tested upon such request shall be
found to be accurate within the limits specified in Subsection I(2)
below, the fee shall be retained by the Water Department; but if not
so found, then the cost thereof shall be borne by the utility, and the
fee paid by the customer shall be refunded. However, if a meter has
§ 394-8 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 394-8
1:572
been in service without being tested within the time period defined
by the PUC as the "current test cycle," the meter will be tested at
the customer's request at no cost to the customer.
(2) No water meter shall be placed in service which has an error in
registration of more than 2%, and no meter shall be allowed to
remain in service which has an error in registration of more than
4% when water is passing through it at approximately the following
rates of flow:
Meter Size
(inches) Gallons Per Minute
5/8 6
3/4 10
1 20
1 1/2 30
2 50
3 90
4 180
6 300
(3) Schedule of fees for testing meters.
(a) For each water meter having an outlet not exceeding one inch:
$10.
(b) For water meters having an outlet not exceeding two inches:
$20.
(c) For other water meters having an outlet exceeding two inches,
the charge shall be on a time and materials basis.
(4) Periodic testing. Periodic testing of meters shall be done in
accordance with PUC Water Regulation No. 7B.
(5) Adjustment of bills for meter error.
(a) Fast meters. If, upon test of any meter, the meter is found to
have an error of more than 4% fast, the public utility shall
refund to the consumer the overcharge, based upon the
corrected meter reading for a period equal to 1/2 the time
elapsed since the last previous test, but not to exceed 12
months. If the period of registration error can be definitely
fixed, the overcharge shall be computed for such period. If the
meter has not been tested in accordance with this section, the
period for which it has been in service beyond the regular test
period shall be added to the 12 months in computing the
refund.
§ 394-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-8
1:573
§ 394-9. Main extensions.
(b) Slow meters. If, upon test of any meter, the meter is found to
have an error of more than 4% slow, the public utility may
render a bill for the water consumed but not covered by bills
previously rendered for a period equal to 1/2 of the time
elapsed since the last previous test, but not to exceed 12
months. If the period of registration error can be definitely
fixed, the charge may be computed for such period.
A. Application for extension. The City of Lock Haven may extend the water
pipes and improvements of any or all of its waterworks within and
beyond the bounds of the City of Lock Haven within the approved
service area. The City shall, upon application made to and approved by
the Council of the City of Lock Haven, furnish water to any and all
persons, corporations, institutions, authorities and municipalities with
the approval of the governing body of the affected community;
provided, however, that any person, corporation, authority, institution
or municipality desiring to be furnished water outside the limits of the
City shall apply for such service to the Council of the City of Lock
Haven, on a form provided by the City for that purpose, and procure a
permit which shall stipulate the rates, terms and conditions at and upon
which the desired service will be supplied. No extension will be made or
agreement executed until the necessary rights-of-way have been
furnished to the City, and the City may require an enabling ordinance
from the municipality being served by the extension of mains.
B. In determining the length of and necessity for any extension required
pursuant hereto, the terminal point of such extension shall, in all cases,
be at the point in the curbline which is equidistant from the side
property lines of the last lot for which water service is requested.
C. Permits required. No extension of street mains shall be made unless the
required permits and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation and the Department of Environmental Protection have
been complied with.
D. The City of Lock Haven will extend existing mains a distance of 35 feet
for each bona fide prospective customer making application for water
service therefrom. The type and size of the main will be determined by
the City. "Bona fide prospective customer" shall mean any owner or
lessee for an existing premises which is not a portion of a subdivision
from which more than one new lot is subdivided during the calendar
year during which the application is made for water service and having
a curbline abutting on that part of a street or public highway in which
there is, or is to be, located a distribution main of the City and who shall
file a signed application for a new street service connection to such
premises and for water service to begin immediately following
installation of the street service connection.
E. Main extension reimbursement agreement.
§ 394-8 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 394-9
1:574
(1) When an extension greater than 35 feet in length for each bona fide
prospective customer is required or requested, such extension will
be made under the terms of a main extension reimbursement
agreement, as provided by the City. The City shall have exclusive
rights to determine the type and size of mains to be installed and
the facilities required to render adequate service; provided,
however, that where the City decides to install pipe larger than the
minimum size necessary to render adequate service throughout the
extension, all estimated or actual cost figures referred to in the
main extension reimbursement agreement shall include the
estimated costs for the size of the pipe necessary to provide
adequate service; however, the minimum size shall be six inches.
All estimated or actual cost figures referred to in the agreement
shall include a reasonable allowance for overhead costs. The costs
of material greater than that of six inches, or the minimum size
necessary to render adequate service, whichever is the larger size,
will be borne by the City.
(2) Under the main extension agreement, the applicant or applicants
for water service shall agree to reimburse the City for all costs
attributable to the extension of the mains beyond the initial 35 feet
per customer. The agreement will be based on estimated costs of
the main extension, which shall be adjusted upon completion of the
construction to reflect actual costs.
(3) Upon completion of construction and prior to the initiation of
service, the applicant or applicants shall reimburse the City for the
actual costs of the main extension beyond the initial 35 feet per
customer. Water service shall not be supplied until said
reimbursement is made in full.
F. Main extension agreement. When application has been received for
water service requiring an extension of the main to provide such
service, excluding that required for a bona fide prospective customer,
or where application has been received for extension of mains into a
newly developed tract of land, such extension will be made under the
terms of a main extension agreement, as provided by the City. The City
shall have the exclusive right to determine the type and size of mains to
be installed and other facilities required to render adequate service.
However, where the City decides to install pipe larger than the
minimum size necessary to render adequate service throughout the
extension, all estimated or actual cost figures referred to in the main
extension agreement shall include the estimated material cost for the
size of the pipe necessary to provide adequate service. However, the
minimum size of the pipe shall be six inches. All estimated or actual cost
figures referred to in the main extension agreement shall include a
reasonable allowance for overhead cost. The cost of materials which
exceed the cost necessary to provide adequate service to the
development shall be borne by the City.
§ 394-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-9
1:575
(1) Main extension deposit required. At the time of the execution of the
main extension agreement by the developer, a deposit must be
made by the developer covering the entire estimated cost of
installing the necessary pipelines and appurtenances, as
determined by the City. Such deposits shall not bear interest and
shall be adjusted from the estimated cost to the actual cost upon
completion of the work. The developer shall increase his deposit or
receive a refund as determined by the final cost. Reimbursement of
the deposit shall be made to the developer at such time as each
house abutting on such pipeline is completed, the prospective
customer's equipment installed and the house occupied by a water
customer who has entered into a contract for use of the City's
water service. Reimbursement to the developer shall be in the
amount of $300 per service tap where the water consumed passes
through a water meter for each property within the development.
(2) Extension of street mains where the developer wishes to use his
own engineer or perform the actual work himself. The Council of
the City of Lock Haven shall give approval for the extension of
street mains within an area supplied by the Lock Haven water
system, provided the developer agrees to the following terms and
conditions, which shall be formalized in a main extension
agreement:
(a) The City shall have the exclusive right to determine the type
and size of the mains to be installed and the method of
installation. Six-inch mains shall be the minimum diameter of
said mains, and all such mains shall, upon completion, become
the property of the Lock Haven City Authority.
(b) The developer shall submit two sets of complete plans for the
construction of said extension, stating the specifications for all
construction, pipe, fittings and appurtenances.
(c) All construction and appurtenances must adhere to the
specifications set up by the City of Lock Haven.
(d) Upon acceptance of the construction plans and specifications
by the City of Lock Haven Engineer, both sets of submitted
plans will be signed by the developer and City Engineer, and
the developer's engineer shall stamp said construction plans.
One set of these construction plans shall remain on record in
the office of the City Engineer.
(e) It shall be the responsibility of the developer to acquire all
necessary permits, at his cost.
(f) No extension shall be considered by the City of Lock Haven if
the street or streets do not meet the specifications of line and
grade established by the governing body of the community
affected.
§ 394-9 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 394-9
1:576
§ 394-10. Shutoff of water due to nonpayment; turn-on charges.
The City reserves the right at all times, after 30 days' due notice to the
customer, to shut off water for nonpayment of water bills, and the water
shall remain shut off until the water bill(s), together with all applicable
penalties and the charge of $20 for turning on water, except as otherwise
provided herein, have been fully paid. Notice shall be sent in accordance
with the following:
(g) The main extension agreement between the developer and the
City of Lock Haven will be recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Clinton County, the cost of which shall be
borne by the developer. Proof of recording will be presented to
the City Engineer.
(h) After the construction specifications are typed and ready for
bid acceptance, two copies must first be submitted to the City
Engineer for his approval. Upon approval of these
specifications, these two submitted copies shall be signed by
the developer and the City Engineer. The developer's engineer
shall stamp both copies, and one shall remain on record in the
office of the City Engineer.
(i) The City of Lock Haven will have an authorized inspector at the
job site during all working hours, and the cost of the inspection
will be borne by the developer by means of reimbursement to
the City.
(j) If there are any deviations from the construction plans or
specifications without prior documented approval by the City
Engineer, the City of Lock Haven shall not be bound to any
agreement signed by the City and the developer.
(k) After completion of said main extensions, two sets of as-built
plans will be submitted to the City Engineer by the developer.
(l) The developer shall provide a maintenance bond in the amount
to be determined by the City Engineer for a period of one year
from the date of acceptance of the extension by the City. The
bond shall be submitted to the City at the time of application.
G. Quality of mains. All mains must be cement-lined ductile iron or PVC
plastic pipe meeting the specifications of AWWA and the City.
Installation of said pipe shall be to the specifications of the pipe
manufacturer and the City.
A. Water shall not be shut off while the premises are occupied by human
beings, except for the purpose of making repairs to the building piping
system or for carrying out provisions of the rules and regulations.
B. The charge for turning on water service following the discontinuance
thereof, whether at the request of the customer or his duly appointed
§ 394-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-10
1:577
§ 394-11. Vacant premises.
§ 394-12. Fire protection.
agent, or by City forces as a result of settlement on nonpayment or
correction of violations of the rules and regulations, shall be $20.
C. At times other than normal working hours, the charge for turn on shall
be $50.
D. Only Water Department employees or its authorized agents shall turn
on or shut off water.
E. Termination of service to any health care facility as defined in current
PUC regulations shall not be made unless the facility has received at
least 37 days' notice.
A. When the premises are vacated, the customer must give notice at the
office of the Water Department so that water may be turned off at the
curb. The customer will be responsible for the water rent until such
notice is given.
B. A new application must be made on any change in ownership or
residence of property as described in any application, and the Water
Department shall be at liberty to discontinue the water supply until
such new applications have been made and approved.
C. A customer desiring an abatement from water bills during a temporary
vacancy shall report the same in writing at the office of the Department
of Water. When a temporary vacancy (not less than 90 days) is properly
reported in advance, an allowance will be made for the vacancy.
A. Private fire system. The customer or premises having a private fireprotection
system shall pay, in addition to the established meter rates
for all water used, except that used for fire extinguishment of fires, the
following amount, which is hereby termed a "fire service charge":
Premises having a 3-inch fire connection $1.95 per month
Premises having a 4-inch fire connection $3.90 per month
Premises having a 6-inch fire connection $6.50 per month
Premises having an 8-inch fire connection $9.10 per month
Premises having a 10-inch fire connection $11.70 per month
Premises having a 12-inch fire connection $14.30 per month
For every 1 inch thereafter, charge will
increase
$1.30 per month
(1) For each private hydrant directly connected to mains furnishing
water which does not pass through a water meter, the charge is $65
per annum.
§ 394-10 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 394-12
1:578
(2) When a fire meter indicates that water has been used for some
purpose other than fire extinguishment, the full service charge, as
listed under § 394-15, will be enforced.
(3) An application, in duplicate, for special connections must be made
for each connection to the distribution system. Private fireprotection
customers will understand that fire-protection charges
are a compensation for standing by in reserve, and that for said
charge the use of water is not contemplated for the actual
extinguishing of fires or for testing the system. Testing shall not be
done without first notifying and receiving approval of the Water
Department.
(4) It will be expressly understood by and agreed between the parties
receiving private fire service and the City that the City does not
assume any liability as insurers of property or person(s) and that
the agreement does not contemplate any special service, pressure,
capacity or facility, other than the ordinary or changing conditions
of the City as the same exist from day to day, and the City hereby
declares and it is agreed by the party receiving service that the City
shall be free and exempt from any and all claims for injuries to
persons or property by reason of fire, water, failure to supply water,
pressure or capacity, or any reason incidental hereto.
(5) Private company fire service. Where private fire service
connections are to be made to the City's system, the City shall have
the right to approve the plans for such installation prior to approval
of the application for service. The City shall make any connection to
the distribution system that is required, and the customer shall pay
City the actual cost for making such connections. The City shall
have the right to require a compound-type meter for installation in
the private fire line, if deemed necessary. Waiver of the
requirements for installation of a meter at the time the connection
is made shall not prohibit the City from requiring a meter
installation at a future date, if such installation is warranted in the
opinion of the City. Any meter required will be supplied and
installed by the City with the cost for the meter, together with labor
and materials for installation, to be borne by the customer. Where a
private fire connection is approved by the City, no other connection
for domestic, commercial or industrial use shall be made to the fire
connection line unless prior approval is received from the City and
unless a compound-type meter is installed between the City's main
and the connection for such line.
(6) All fire services shall have an approved check valve and a gate
valve. If a fire connection is used for the sole purpose of fire
protection, no meter shall be required on such connection, nor shall
any extension be made or any additional fixtures be installed on
such connection.
§ 394-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-12
1:579
(7) All roof tanks and storage tanks must be provided with an antisiphon
device and an automatic device for complete shutoff of
water supply when said tanks are filled.
(8) It shall be expressly understood by and agreed between the parties
having a private hydrant that the maintenance of the private
hydrant is the responsibility of the property owner. The City hereby
declares and it is hereby agreed by the owner on whose property
the private hydrant is located that the City shall be free and exempt
from any and all claims for injuries to persons or property due to an
inoperative hydrant, and said property owner shall hold the City
safe and harmless from any and all claims arising as a result of any
injuries or damages caused thereby.
(9) A private fire hydrant shall be any hydrant that is situated on
private property and is owned or maintained by a party other than
the Lock Haven City Authority or the City.
B. Public fire hydrants. The Lock Haven City Authority shall own all public
fire hydrants within the service area. The City shall maintain said
hydrants in working condition, provided that the conditions hereinafter
set forth are complied with in full:
(1) The City shall inspect and maintain all public fire hydrants and
branches located within the service area. The City shall furnish and
install hydrants as prudent and necessary in areas of existing
development.
(2) Public fire hydrants will be installed at the written request of any
municipality included in the City's defined service area, provided
that the system mains are of sufficient size. All costs of installing
such hydrants, including labor and materials, shall be the
responsibility of the municipality. The City may require posting of a
deposit covering the estimated cost of the installation, with the
balance to be refunded or the excess billed upon completion of the
installation.
(3) For all public fire services, the following charge shall be made: for
each hydrant in each township or municipality other than the City
of Lock Haven, there will be a charge of $65 per hydrant per
annum.
(4) In the event any public fire hydrant requires replacing in the
judgment of the City, it will be done at the cost of the City.
C. General fire hydrant usage. No person or persons shall take water from
any hydrant, public or private, except for fire purposes. Fire companies
may test the hydrants with the permission and prior approval of the
Water Department. No public or private fire hydrant shall be used for
any purpose other than fire purposes, unless specifically permitted by
the Water Department for that particular time or occasion. The person
or persons requesting permission for the use of a public or private fire
§ 394-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 394-12
1:580
§ 394-13. Deposits.
hydrant must obtain from the Water Department a permit stating the
time, location and purpose for use of the hydrant and the person or
persons, including property owner or his duly authorized agent, who
will be responsible for all costs and water consumed at the regular
meter rates as measured by a hydrant meter supplied by the Water
Department.
(1) The cost for installing and removing the hydrant meter shall be at
the regular labor rate plus 20% compensation expense and
equipment usage during regular working hours.
(2) The cost for installing the hydrant meter at times other than
regular working hours shall be based on the overtime rate plus 20%
compensation expense and equipment usage.
(3) The hydrant meter and hydrant wrench shall be the sole
responsibility of the person or persons granted use of the public or
private fire hydrant.
(4) The City shall be free from all claims and damages resulting from
any such use of public or private fire hydrants.
A. The City reserves the right to require a deposit equal to the estimated
bill for any single billing period, plus one month, with a minimum $5, to
secure payments for water service rendered where the credit of the
customer has not been established to the satisfaction of the City. On
deposits held more than a year, the utility will pay to the customer, at
the end of the year, the interest accrued thereon at the rate defined in
Title 52, Chapter 56, § 56.57.159 Deposits shall be due and payable in
accordance with the latest Title 52, Chapter 56, § 56.42.160 The City
reserves the right to require a deposit equal to the estimated bill for any
single billing period, plus one month, with a minimum of $5.
B. Deposits will be required from customers who apply for a period of less
than 60 days, in an amount equal to the estimated bill for such
temporary service.
C. The City will refund said deposit on notice to discontinue service and
after payment in full has been made for all services rendered or when
the customer shall have paid bills for service over a period of 12
consecutive months; any customer having secured the return of a
deposit shall not be required to make a new deposit unless the service
has been discontinued and the customer's credit standing impaired
through failure to comply with these rules and regulations.
D. The payment of any undisputed bill, within the meaning of the rules,
shall be payment of the bill within 30 days following the date of the bill
159. Editor's Note: See 52 Pa. Code § 56.57.
160. Editor's Note: See 52 Pa. Code § 56.42.
§ 394-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-13
1:581
§ 394-14. General regulations.
or the payment of any contested bill, payment of which is withheld
beyond the period herein mentioned, if the dispute is terminated
substantially in favor of the customer and if payment be made by the
customer within 10 days thereafter.
E. Any customer having placed a deposit shall pay bills for water service
as rendered in accordance with these rules and regulations, and the
deposit shall not be considered as payment toward any bill during the
time the customer is receiving water service.
A. No customer supplied with water by the City will be allowed to supply
other persons or families or other premises, except by written permit
from the City. A person who violates this section may have his water
shut off 30 days after written notice is given to that person, and it may
remain so until the City is satisfied that provisions of the rules and
regulations have been complied with.
B. Where two or more premises are supplied through a single service, any
violation by either or any of said customers shall be deemed a violation
as to all, and the City may take such action as could be taken against a
single customer, except that such action shall not be taken until the
innocent consumer who is not in violation of the rules has been given
reasonable opportunity to make application to attach his pipes to a
separately controlled service connection.
C. In the case of large properties, two or more connections may be
allowed, provided they meet City approval, as described in § 394-3D.
D. The City may, at any time, declare that an emergency situation exists
and restrict use of water. After notice of said order is published on three
different days in at least one local newspaper, any consumer who
violates said order shall be subject to discontinuance of service.
E. No customer shall permit any condition to exist upon premises served
whereby there is, or, in the opinion of the Water Department, could be,
a backflow into the mains of the City of nonpotable matter, hot or other
liquids or any leakage or seepage of such matter into said main.
F. For the prevention of backflow, all connections are required to have a
stop and waste valve on the inlet side of the meter and a check valve on
the outlet side of the meter of a type approved by the City.
G. The City will not be responsible for any damage caused within the
consumer's premises by an increase or decrease of pressure within the
City's distribution mains. It shall be incumbent on the customer to
install and maintain in his service line, between the curb and the meter,
such pressure-regulating devices as may be necessary to prohibit
excessive pressure from being transmitted to the inside piping or
fixtures.
§ 394-13 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 394-14
1:582
§ 394-15. Schedule of rates. [Amended 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 542B;
12-13-2010 by Ord. No. 871]
The quarterly charges for the supply of water by the City of Lock Haven
to customers within the City of Lock Haven be and hereby are fixed and
established based on the schedules below.
H. Changing of rates. Lock Haven City Council may change or amend the
rates, rules and regulations for water service as necessary, subject to
filing with the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, if required.
I. No agent or authorized representative of the Water Department of the
City of Lock Haven shall have the authority to exercise any promise,
agreement or representation not provided herein, unless such authority
is in writing and signed by the proper City officials.
J. The City shall not be liable for turbidity in water or a deficiency or
failure in the supply or increase or decrease in pressure when
occasioned by shutting off water to make repairs or connections or
failure from any cause beyond its control.
A. Minimum charges.
(1) Residential customers. Minimum charges per quarter shall be
based on the size of the meter. Consumption allowance for the
minimum charge is 2,000 gallons per quarter.
Meter Size
(inches) Minimum Charge Per Quarter
5/8 or 3/4 $51.40
1 $61.90
1 1/4 $71.25
1 1/2 $81.95
2 $103.70
3 $116
4 $164
6 $217.90
8 $348.25
10 $436.50
12 $604
(2) Commercial and industrial customers. Minimum charges per
quarter shall be based on the size of the meter. Consumption
allowance for the minimum charge is 4,000 gallons per quarter.
§ 394-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-15
1:583
Meter Size
(inches)
Minimum Charge Per
Quarter
5/8 or 3/4 $63.90
1 $71
1 1/4 $81.65
1 1/2 $94
2 $119
3 $133
4 $188
6 $250
8 $400
10 $500
12 $692
(3) Public and health care customers. Minimum charges per quarter
shall be based on the size of the meter. Consumption allowance for
the minimum charge is 4,000 gallons per quarter.
Meter Size
(inches)
Minimum Charge Per
Quarter
5/8 or 3/4 $59.40
1 $66
1 1/4 $76
1 1/2 $87
2 $110
3 $124
4 $175
6 $233
8 $371
10 $465
12 $644
(4) Educational customers. Minimum charges per quarter shall be
based on the size of the meter. Consumption allowance for the
minimum charge is 4,000 gallons per quarter.
§ 394-15 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 394-15
1:584
Meter Size
(inches)
Minimum Charge Per
Quarter
5/8 or 3/4 $65.25
1 $72.50
1 1/4 $84
1 1/2 $96
2 $121
3 $136
4 $192
6 $256
8 $408
10 $511
12 $707
B. Metered service schedule.
(1) Residential customers (applicable to all metered service). The
quarterly charges for water service furnished by the City of Lock
Haven are fixed and established based on consumption as follows:
Gallons Charge Per Quarter
0 to 2,000 Minimum based on meter size
Next 2,000 $4.16 per thousand
Next 21,000 $4.28 per thousand
Next 35,000 $3.45 per thousand
Next 140,000 $2.30 per thousand
Next 2,800,000 $1.57 per thousand
Over 3,000,000 $1.26 per thousand
(2) Commercial and industrial customers (applicable to all metered
service). The quarterly charges for water service furnished by the
City of Lock Haven are fixed and established based on consumption
as follows:
Gallons Charge Per Quarter
0 to 4,000 Minimum based on meter size
Next 21,000 $4.88 per thousand
Next 35,000 $3.91 per thousand
Next 140,000 $2.60 per thousand
Next 2,800,000 $1.78 per thousand
§ 394-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-15
1:585
§ 394-16. Water conservation.
Gallons Charge Per Quarter
Over 3,000,000 $1.42 per thousand
(3) Public and health care customers (applicable to all metered
service). The quarterly charges for water service furnished by the
City of Lock Haven are fixed and established based on consumption
as follows:
Gallons Charge Per Quarter
0 to 4,000 Minimum based on meter size
Next 21,000 $4.54 per thousand
Next 35,000 $3.63 per thousand
Next 140,000 $2.42 per thousand
Next 2,800,000 $1.65 per thousand
Over 3,000,000 $1.32 per thousand
(4) Educational customers (applicable to all metered service). The
quarterly charges for water service furnished by the City of Lock
Haven are fixed and established based on consumption as follows:
Gallons Charge Per Quarter
0 to 4,000 Minimum based on meter size
Next 21,000 $4.99 per thousand
Next 35,000 $3.99 per thousand
Next 140,000 $2.65 per thousand
Next 2,800,000 $1.81 per thousand
Over 3,000,000 $1.45 per thousand
C. This section shall become effective on January 1, 2011, consistent with
the date established by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission for
an increase in the rates and charges imposed on customers outside the
corporate limits of the City of Lock Haven.
A. General. If the City is experiencing a short-term supply shortage, the
City may request general conservation of inside uses and may impose
mandatory conservation measures to reduce or eliminate nonessential
uses of water.
B. Voluntary conservation. The City shall first request voluntary
curtailment of all nonessential uses of water.
C. Mandatory conservation. If voluntary cooperation does not achieve
satisfactory results, mandatory compliance will be imposed. If any
§ 394-15 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 394-16
1:586
§ 394-17. Collection of excess use charges.
In the event of a drought emergency, as declared by a basin commission
and by a proclamation or executive order issued by the Governor, the
Lock Haven Water Department is authorized to collect fines set forth in its
local water rationing plan, as filed with and approved by the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Agency.
§ 394-18. Water use standards for certain plumbing fixtures.
customer refuses to comply with such mandatory measures, the City
may either adjust the outside water valve connection in a manner which
will restrict water flow by up to 1/2 or otherwise restrict flow, such as
by the insertion of a plug device.
D. Nonessential uses of water include:
(1) The use of hoses, sprinklers or other means for sprinkling or
watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants, vines, gardens,
vegetables, flowers or other vegetation.
(2) The use of water for washing automobiles, trucks, trailers, trailer
houses or any other type of mobile equipment.
(3) The washing of streets, driveways, parking lots, service station
aprons, office buildings, exteriors of homes, sidewalks, apartments
or other outdoor surfaces.
(4) The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structures
making a similar use of water.
(5) The use of water for filling swimming pools or wading pools.
(6) The operation of any water-cooled comfort air conditioning which
does not have water-conserving equipment.
(7) The use of water from fire hydrants for construction purposes or
fire drills.
(8) The use of water to flush a sewer line or sewer manhole.
(9) The use of water for commercial farms and nurseries, other than a
bare minimum to preserve plants, crops and livestock.
E. In addition to the provisions as set forth above, the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Council is authorized to promulgate, adopt
and enforce a water rationing plan by virtue of the Emergency
Management Services Code, 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et seq., as
implemented by the Drought Emergency Proclamation dated November
6, 1980.
A. This section establishes the maximum water use of certain plumbing
fixtures installed in all new construction or renovation. Such standards
§ 394-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-18
1:587
have been implemented to achieve the maximum efficiency of water use
which the City of Lock Haven determined is technologically feasible and
economically justified.
Plumbing Fixture
Maximum Water Use
(gallons/minute) Effective Date
Shower heads 3.0 February 6, 1996
Lavatory faucet 3.0 February 6, 1996
Kitchen faucets 3.0 February 6, 1996
Water closets 1.6 February 6, 1996
Urinals 1.5 February 6, 1996
B. Reevaluation of water use standards. The City of Lock Haven may, at
any appropriate time, amend any of the water use standards listed
above relevant to technological developments relating to the water use
or water efficiency of any of the specified plumbing fixtures.
Amendments will also apply only to new construction and renovation.
C. Exemptions. The City of Lock Haven may exempt a particular type of
customer when it is determined that the water use standards for
plumbing fixtures listed above are inappropriate or cannot be
accommodated by existing technology.
§ 394-18 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 394-18
1:588
ARTICLE II
Groundwater as Potable Water
[Adopted 2-22-2010 by Ord. No. 853]
§ 394-19. Groundwater for potable use prohibited.
The use by any person of groundwater from within the corporate limits of
the City of Lock Haven as a supply of water for potable uses is hereby
prohibited.
§ 394-20. Installation and use of equipment or other methods of
conveying groundwater for potable use prohibited.
The installation or use by any person of any means for conveyance of
groundwater as a supply of water for potable uses within the corporate
limits of the City of Lock Haven is hereby prohibited, including but not
limited to wells, pipes, cisterns, tanks, pumps, or any other equipment or
method of conveying groundwater.
§ 394-21. Existing potable groundwater uses.
If any person uses groundwater as a supply of water for potable uses within
the corporate limits of the City of Lock Haven at the effective date of this
article, such person shall, within 90 days of the effective date of this article:
§ 394-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is found to have violated this article shall pay a fine of
not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, plus costs. For a continuing
violation, each day on which a violation of this article shall occur or continue
shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense and may be prosecuted and
fined as such.
§ 394-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
A. Cease such potable use;
B. Close and abandon any means used to convey such groundwater for
potable use to the surface of the land, including any wells, pipes,
cisterns, tanks, pumps, or any other equipment or method of
conveyance of such groundwater for potable use;
C. Make written application to the City of Lock Haven Water Department
for water service connection in accordance with Chapter 394, Article I,
of this Code or otherwise demonstrate acquisition of potable water from
an alternative source; and
D. Provide certification in writing to the City Engineer of compliance with
this section.
§ 394-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-23
1:589
GROUNDWATER — Any source of water acquired from beneath the surface
of the land, including but not limited to any subsurface aquifer, spring, seep,
rock or soil formation.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
limited-liability company, corporation, association, joint-stock company,
trust, estate, political subdivision, state, city, including the City of Lock
Haven, governmental entity, agency, department, or officer, or any other
legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns.
POTABLE USE — Any use of water for human or domestic consumption
purposes, including but not limited to drinking, bathing, swimming,
washing food or dishes, or preparing foods.
§ 394-23 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 394-23
1:590
Chapter 410
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 30, Art. I.
Animals — See Ch. 182.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 212.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
352.
§ 394-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-23
1:591

ARTICLE I
General and Legal Provisions
§ 410-1. Title.
This is a chapter permitting, prohibiting, regulating, restricting and
determining the uses of land, watercourses and other bodies of water;
the size, height, bulk, location, erection, construction, repair, maintenance,
alteration, razing, removal and use of structures; the areas and dimensions
of land and bodies of water to be occupied by uses and structures as well
as court yards and other open spaces and distances to be left unoccupied
by uses and structures; the density of population and intensity of use; and
providing for the administration of such ordinance.
§ 410-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Lock Haven
Zoning Ordinance," hereinafter referred to as the "Zoning Ordinance." The
accompanying map is hereby declared to be a part of this chapter and shall
be known and may be cited as the "City of Lock Haven, Clinton County,
Pennsylvania Official Zoning Map" hereinafter referred to as the "Zoning
Map."161
§ 410-3. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,
as reenacted and amended (MPC).162
§ 410-4. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
A. To promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following: the
public health, safety, morals, general welfare, the provision of adequate
light and air, and other public requirements.
B. To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding, blight, loss of
health, life or property from fire, flood or other dangers.
C. To adopt a Zoning Map dividing the City of Lock Haven into zoning
districts with varying regulations.
D. To permit, prohibit, regulate and determine the uses of land,
watercourses and other bodies of water, the size, height, bulk, location,
erection, construction, repair, expansion, razing, removal and use of
buildings and structures, as well as yards and other open areas to be
left unoccupied.
161. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
162. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-4
1:593
E. To establish the maximum density and intensity of uses.
F. To provide for the protection of natural and historic features and
resources.
G. To protect existing residential neighborhoods.
H. To promote innovative residential design and encourage the creation of
a sense of community.
I. To provide diverse housing opportunities, including housing that is
affordable.
J. To encourage adaptive reuse and infill development.
K. To act as an overall plan for the orderly growth and development of the
City of Lock Haven and, as such, seek to implement the most recent
version of the City of Lock Haven Comprehensive Plan. Although this
document amends the 1991 Comprehensive Plan, the specific goals and
objectives set forth herein remain valid:
(1) Goal No. 1: land use. Encourage an organized land use pattern in
harmony with the existing character and natural constraints of the
City providing for a safe, attractive and economically viable
community for its residents.
(a) Objectives.
[1] Preserve the established land use patterns of the City,
encouraging development and redevelopment of land uses
appropriate to the scale and character of the established
neighborhood.
[2] Promote opportunities for development and
redevelopment of diversified economic activities in
appropriate areas of the City while maintaining the quality
of life.
[3] Protect environmentally sensitive areas and ensure a
compatible balance between economic and environmental
interests.
[4] Ensure preservation and encourage adaptation of the
City's historic district and structures in a manner
conducive to the character of the City.
(2) Goal No. 2: housing. Provide a range of housing types satisfying all
housing needs as well as preserving established residential
neighborhoods.
(a) Objectives.
[1] Preserve the existing residential neighborhoods while
maintaining public health and safety through the
§ 410-4 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-4
1:594
§ 410-5. Interpretation; effect on other provisions.
In interpreting and applying this chapter, its provisions shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for promotion of health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the City of Lock Haven. Any use permitted subject to
the regulations prescribed by the provisions of this chapter shall conform
with all the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located and with
all other pertinent regulations of this and other related ordinances and/or
chapters. This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, annul,
supersede, or cancel any easements, covenants, restrictions or reservations
contained in deeds or other agreements, but if this chapter imposes more
stringent restrictions upon the use of buildings, structures and land than
are elsewhere established, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
Wherever and whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance
with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted laws, rules,
regulations, ordinances or chapters, the most restrictive or that imposing
continued physical maintenance and upgrading of
housing.
[2] Continue to ensure the opportunity for a diverse
population to obtain satisfactory housing through
encouraging the provision of a range of housing types
where appropriate.
(3) Goal No. 3: local transportation/circulation. Ensure a coordinated
circulation system which enables the safe and efficient movement
of people and goods.
(a) Objectives.
[1] Improve the local transportation/circulation network
ensuring a safe system through the City.
[2] Enhance the local transportation/circulation system
through accessibility with the regional transportation/
circulation system.
(4) Goal No. 4: community services/facilities. Ensure the provision of
an adequate range of services and facilities to accommodate the
changing needs of the City in an effective manner.
(a) Objectives.
[1] Promote the efficient delivery of services, ensuring all
areas of the City are adequately serviced.
[2] Plan for changes in land use and population changes which
require change in municipal services and their delivery.
[3] Continue to provide the opportunity for varied recreational
activity serving a diverse population, convenient to the
residents.
§ 410-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-5
1:595
the higher standards shall govern. In interpreting the language of this
chapter to determine the extent of the restriction upon the use of property,
the language shall be interpreted, where doubt exists as to the intended
meaning of the adopted language, in favor of the property owner and
against any implied extension of the restriction.
§ 410-6. Applicability.
§ 410-7. Municipal liability.
The granting of a zoning permit for the erection and/or use of a structure,
building or lot shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty
of any kind or nature by City of Lock Haven or an official or employee,
thereof, of the safety of any structure, building, use or other proposed plan
from cause whatsoever, and shall create no liability upon or a course of
action against such public official or employee for any damage that may be
pursuant thereto.
§ 410-8. Statutory preemption of zoning ordinances.
It is recognized that: the Act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known
as "The Clean Streams Law";163 the Act of May 31, 1945 (P.L. 1198, No.
418) known as the "Surface Mining Conservation and Reclamation Act";164
A. Except for existing legal nonconformities as of the effective date of this
chapter, which may be altered in compliance with Article XXI, any of the
following activities or any other activity regulated by this chapter shall
only be carried out in conformity with this chapter:
(1) Use, occupation, erection, construction, reconstruction, movement,
alteration, razing, demolition, removal, placement of extension
(vertical or horizontal) of a structure, building or sign, unless relief
is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(2) Change of the type of use or expansion of the use of a structure,
building or area of land.
(3) Creation of a lot or alteration of lot lines.
(4) Creation of a new use.
B. This chapter shall not apply to an existing or proposed building or
extension thereof, used or to be used by a public utility corporation, if
upon petition of the corporation, the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or
proposed situation of the building in question is reasonably necessary
for the convenience or welfare of the public. It shall be the
responsibility of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission to ensure
that both the corporation and the City of Lock Haven have notice of the
hearing and are granted as opportunity to appear, present witnesses,
cross-examine witnesses presented by other parties, and otherwise
exercise the rights of a party to the proceedings.
§ 410-5 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-8
1:596
the Act of April 27, 1966 (1st Special Session, P.L. 31, No. 1) known as
"The Bituminous Mine Subsidence and Land Conservation Act";165 the Act
of September 24, 1968 (P.L. 1040, No. 318) known as the "Coal Refuse
Disposal Control Act";166 the Act of December 19, 1984 (P.L. 1140, No.
223) known as the "Noncoal Surface Mining Conservation and Reclamation
Act";167 the Act of June 30, 1981 (P.L. 128, No. 43) known as the
"Agricultural Area Security Law";168 the Act of June 10, 1982 (P.L. 454, No.
133) entitled "An act protecting agricultural operations from nuisance suits
and ordinances under certain circumstances"; 169and the Act of May 20,
1993 (P.L. 12, No. 6) known as the "Nutrient Management Act,"170 preempt
zoning ordinances. Therefore, suggestions, recommendations, options or
directives contained herein are intended to be implemented only to the
extent that they are consistent with and do not exceed the requirements
of those acts. Nothing contrary to those acts shall be mandated by this
chapter.
§ 410-9. Effect on existing provisions and proceedings.
The preexisting Lock Haven City Zoning Ordinance, as amended, is hereby
expressly repealed; provided, further, that nothing in this chapter shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or
any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any permit issued or approval
granted or any cause or causes of action arising prior to the enactment of
this chapter. All ordinances or chapters or parts of ordinances or chapters
and all resolutions or parts of resolutions which are inconsistent herewith
by virtue of references or incorporation of requirements contained in the
preexisting ordinance, as amended, shall, as nearly as possible, be
construed to reference this chapter.
§ 410-10. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on the 14th day of December 2008.
163. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
164. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 1396.1 et seq.
165. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 1406.1 et seq.
166. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq.
167. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 3301 et seq.
168. Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 901 et seq.
169. Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 951 et seq.
170. Editor's Note: See now the Nutrient Management and Odor Management Act, 3 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 501 et seq.
§ 410-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-10
1:597

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 410-11. Word usage.
For the purpose of interpreting and administering this chapter, certain
terms and words used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows:
§ 410-12. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
B. Words used in the singular shall include the plural.
C. The word "person" includes a corporation as well as an individual, or an
association of individuals.
D. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel."
E. The term "shall" is always mandatory.
F. The term "may" is always permissive.
G. The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or buildings shall
be occupied.
H. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED — The visible or otherwise apparent discontinuance of
a nonconforming use of a building or premises, or the removal of the
characteristic equipment or furnishings used in the performance of
a nonconforming use without its replacement by similar equipment
or furnishings, or the replacement of the nonconforming use or
structure.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
ABUT — [Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
ACCESS DRIVE — A permanent service way, other than a street, which
provides vehicular access from a street or public road to a lot; such as
a driveway.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to and detached
from the principal or main building on the same lot, used for the
Physically touching or bordering on another lot, use, or district
boundary; or
(1)
(2) Sharing a common boundary line. (See also "adjoining.")
§ 410-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:599
purposes customarily incidental to that of the main or principal
building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use on the same lot with, and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or the main
building.
ADDITION — Any construction which increases the size of a building,
such as a porch, attached garage or carport, or a new room or wing.
ADJOINING — For the purposes of this chapter, the term "adjoining"
shall be defined as the sharing of all or part of a common lot line with
another lot or parcel of land. (See also "abut.")[Added 5-16-2011 by
Ord. No. 880]
ADULT OTHER — Any other business or establishment that offers its
patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
AGENT — Any person, other than the landowner of a lot, who, acting
under specific authorization of the landowner, submits plans, and/or
applications to the Zoning Officer or other designated City official for
the purpose of obtaining approval thereof.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord.
No. 880]
AIRPORT — Except as otherwise specifically defined in the Airport
Zoning Act, 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5911 et seq., any area of land or water which
is used, or intended to be used, for the landing and takeoff of aircraft
and any appurtenant areas which are used, or intended to be used, for
airport buildings or air navigation facilities or rights-of-way, together
with all airport buildings and facilities thereon. As used herein, the
term "airport" includes public airports, but excludes private airports
and heliports.
AIRPORT-RELATED FACILITIES —
AIRCRAFT ASSEMBLY AND REHABILITATION — Any facility
designed and used for the assembly and rehabilitation of aircraft.
(1)
AIRCRAFT MAINTENANCE AND STORAGE HANGAR — A facility
designed and used for the shelter and maintenance of aircraft.
(2)
AIRCRAFT SALES — An establishment involving display, sale, or
rental of new and used aircrafts, including airplanes, helicopter,
and other motor-powered and non-motor-powered aircrafts,
including gliders.
(3)
AIRPORT OFFICE — Any building in which one or more persons
are employed in the management or direction of airport operations
and maintenance.
(4)
AIRPORT PARKING — An open area of land or structure, other
than a street, owned and/or maintained by an airport used for the
long-term or short-term parking of vehicles with or without a fee
(5)
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:600
ADULT-RELATED USES — A business or club that engages in one or
more of the following areas of sales, services or entertainment:
being charged and available to the public, or as an accommodation
to employees, clients or customers, or for the storage of delivery
vehicles and rental cars and the like.
AIRPORT SERVICE FACILITY — A retail, professional and business
office, hotel, business service, personal service establishment, or
restaurant which are accessory uses to the operation of the airport,
provide direct services to the traveling public and are located on
the premises of or are directly related to an airport facility.
(6)
AIRPORT TERMINAL — Any building in which one or more persons
are employed for airline ticketing, luggage checking facilities,
restaurants, bars, retail shops, confections, post office, lot shipping
facilities and janitorial services.
(7)
AIRPORT TRAFFIC CONTROL FACILITIES — Any buildings,
towers, observation decks, nav aids reserved for the
communication and relay of aviation commands between ground
operators and airborne vehicle operators.
(8)
ADULT BATH HOUSE — An establishment or business that
provides the services of baths of all kinds, including all forms and
methods of hydrotherapy during which specified anatomical areas
are displayed or specified sexual activity occurs. This section shall
not apply to hydrotherapy treatment practiced by, or under the
supervision of a medical practitioner. A medical practitioner, for
the purpose of this chapter, shall be a medical doctor, physician,
chiropractor, physical therapist or similar professional licensed by
the commonwealth.
(1)
ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO — Any establishment or business
that provides the service of applying paint or other substance,
whether transparent or nontransparent to or on the human body
when specified anatomical areas are exposed.
(2)
ADULT BOOKSTORE — Any establishment that has a substantial or
significant-portion of its stock-in-trade:
Books, films, magazines or other periodicals or other forms
of audio or visual representation which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and
(a)
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for
use in connection with specified sexual activities.
(b)
(3)
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, theater, bar or other
establishment that features live or media representations of
performances by topless or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers,
exotic dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers, where such
(4)
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:601
performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or
business that provides the services of massage and body
manipulation, including exercises, heat and light treatments of the
body, and all forms and methods of physiotherapy, unless operated
by a medical practitioner, chiropractor or professional physical
therapist licensed by the commonwealth, or a person having
graduated from a massage therapy training program approved
by the Pennsylvania State Board of Private Licensed Schools or
equivalent agency if trained in another state; by a person certified
through a massage therapy certification examination approved by
the National Commission for Certifying Agencies; by a person
certified through the National Certification Board for Therapeutic
Massage and Bodywork; or is a practitioner or member of either
of the American Massage Therapy Association (AMTA), Associated
Bodywork and Massage Professionals (ABMP), or International
Massage Association (IMA). This definition does not include an
athletic club, health club, massage therapy establishment school,
gymnasium, reducing salon, spa or similar establishment where
massage or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an
incidental or accessory service.
(5)
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed or
unenclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used
for presenting any form of audio or visual material, and in which
a substantial portion of the total presentation time measured on
an annual basis is devoted to the showing of material that is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
(6)
ADULT MODEL STUDIO — Any place where, for any form of
consideration or gratuity, figure models who display specified
anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn,
painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by persons
paying such consideration or gratuity, except that this provision
shall not apply to any figure studio or school of art or similar
establishment that meets the requirements established in the
Education Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the
issuance or conferring of, and is in fact authorized thereunder to
issue and confer, a diploma.
(7)
ADULT MOTEL — A motel or similar establishment offering public
accommodations for any consideration, that provides patrons with
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
(8)
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:602
AISLE — The traveled way by which motor vehicles enter and depart
parking spaces.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE — Any place to which the
public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or
electronically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors or other image producing devices are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at
any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(9)
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed or unenclosed
building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting
any form of audio or visual material, and in which a substantial
portion of the total presentation time, measured on an annual
basis, is devoted to the showing of material that is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(10)
ADULT NEWSRACK — Any coin-operated machine or device that
dispenses material substantially devoted to the depiction of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(11)
ADULT OUT-CALL SERVICE ACTIVITY — Any establishment or
business that provides an out-call service that consists of
individuals leaving the premises upon request or by appointment
to visit other premises for a period of time for the purpose of
providing any service, during which time specified anatomical
areas are displayed or specified sexual activity occurs.
(12)
ADULT SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — Any business, agency,
or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides
a place where two or more persons, not all members of the same
family may congregate, assemble or associate for the purpose of
engaging in specified sexual activity or exposing specified
anatomical areas, excluding psychosexual workshops operated by
a medical practitioner licensed by the commonwealth to engage in
sexual therapy.
(13)
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or other
similar establishment, either indoor or outdoor in nature, that
regularly features live performances that are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or by
exposure of specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.
(14)
ADULT VIDEO STORE — A commercial use that has 50% or more
of its stock-in-trade consisting of video tapes, video discs, or both,
which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis, depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
(15)
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:603
ALLEY — A minor right-of-way other than a local, collector, or arterial
street providing secondary vehicular access to abutting property on the
side or rear of one or more properties, not intended for general traffic
circulation.
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, means a change
or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the existing facilities or
an enlargement, whether by extending on a rear, front or side end or
by increasing height or the moving from one location or position to
another.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL — Any change in the supporting
members of a building or structure such as bearing walls, columns,
beams or girders.
AMENDMENT — A change in use in any zoning district which includes
revisions to this chapter's text and/or the Official Zoning Map.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL/VETERINARY CLINIC — An establishment
operated by a veterinary medical doctor(s), certified in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the medical or surgical treatment
of domestic, agricultural or zoological animals, but excluding the
boarding and grooming of animals not subject to medical or surgical
treatment.
ANTENNA — Any arrangement of wires or metal rods used in sending
and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord.
No. 880]
ANTENNA HEIGHT — The measurement of the overall vertical length
of antenna and its support structure above the average finished grade.
If such system is located on a building or other structure, the overall
vertical length shall be measured and shall include the height of the
building upon which the antenna and its structure is situated.[Added
5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer (as herein defined) who has
filed an application for development including his personal
representatives, heirs, successors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of
construction or development, including but not limited to an application
for a building permit or for the approval of a subdivision plat or plan or
for approval of a land development plan.
AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant to the
Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the "Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945."171
AUTOMATED BANKING FACILITY — An establishment whereby
automated devices that perform banking or financial functions are
operated by the consumer or patron primarily for those who remain
171. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:604
in their automobile, but may also be operated by those customers who
walk up to the device.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING, JUNK AND SCRAP STORAGE AND SALES
ESTABLISHMENTS — An establishment used for the storage,
collection, baling, packing, sorting, handling, disassembling, recycling,
resource recovery, purchase or sale of any material which has been
used, salvaged, scrapped or reclaimed, but is capable of being reused
in some form including, but not limited to, metals, fiber, paper, cloth
and rags, rubber, rope, bottles, machinery, tools, appliances, fixtures,
utensils, lumber, boxes, crates, pipe and pipe fittings, tires, two or
more motor vehicles which are inoperable and do not have a current
and valid inspection sticker as required by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and motor vehicle parts, but not including garbage or
other organic wastes. No material which fails to meet this definition
because it is discarded and incapable of being reused in some form
shall be placed in any establishment as herein defined. In no district
shall this use be considered to be accessory or incidental to another
use.
AUTOMOBILE, HEAVY EQUIPMENT AND SIMILAR MOTOR VEHICLE
RENTAL AND SALES — An establishment involving the indoor and/or
outdoor display, sale, or rental of new and used cars, trailers, boats,
heavy equipment, recreational vehicles, trucks, other similar motor
vehicles, and mobile homes, and which may minor incidental
mechanical repairs, state inspections, oil changes and lubrications, and
tune-ups be conducted within an completely enclosed building as an
accessory use, incidental to the principal use.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION — An establishment where
passenger motor fuel, oil, grease, batteries, tires, or automobile
accessories are supplied and dispensed at retail, which may include
making minor incidental repairs, state inspections, oil changes and
lubrications, and tune-ups. This use specifically prohibits body work;
straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of wrecked
vehicles, automobile sales, and other major mechanical work is not
permitted as part of this use. This definition excludes general
convenience stores.
AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLE REPAIR CENTER —
An establishment where major and minor mechanical work,
servicing and repair of passenger vehicles is conducted as a
primary activity. Included in this definition are:
Repair or overhaul of engines, transmissions, differentials,
axles, spring, clutches, radiators, etc.;
(a)
Tire sale, repair, wheel balancing, and front-end alignment
facilities;
(b)
(c) Oil change establishments; and
(1)
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:605
BANK — An establishment in which money is kept for saving or
commercial purposes or is invested, supplied for loans or is exchanged.
A bank may also provide financial counseling, planning, and services
related to money management.
BASEMENT — A portion of building or space having 1/2 or more of its
floor-to-ceiling height above the average level of the adjoining ground
and with a floor-to-ceiling height of not less than 6 1/2 feet. A basement
shall be counted as a story for living and occupancy purposes.
BEAUTY/BARBER SHOP — An establishment providing personal
grooming services that may include hair cutting, coloring, facial, nail
grooming, and ancillary uses such as tanning salons.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — An establishment which is an accessory use
to an owner-occupied single-family detached dwelling and/or its
accessory structure that includes the rental of overnight sleeping
accommodations and bathroom access for temporary overnight guests
and does not exceed the maximum number of overnight guests
specified in Article XX of this chapter for this use; and that does not
provide any cooking facilities for actual use by guests, and that only
provides one meal to overnight guests, employees of the establishment
and residents of the single-family detached dwelling. Overnight stays
shall be restricted to transient guests, and employees of the
establishment and their family. This use does not include a boarding
house, group home, hotel or motel.
BLOCK — A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination
of streets and public land, rail rights-of-way, waterways or any other
barrier to the continuity to development.
BOARDING HOUSE — A residential use of a building in which
individual room(s) that do not meet the definition of a lawful dwelling
unit; or a dwelling unit with an occupancy of more than four unrelated
persons or group otherwise not meeting the definition of family in
said dwelling unit; is rented for more than five consecutive days. A
boarding house may either involve or not involve the provision of meals
to residents, but shall not include a restaurant open to the public. This
term shall not include those uses meeting the definition of bed-andbreakfast,
group home, hotel, motel, or nursing home.
BUFFER YARD — An open area whose dimensions may coincide with
the normal building setback or yard requirements used to protect lowdensity
or low-intensity uses and zoning districts from adjacent higherdensity
or higher-intensity uses and districts.
Collision service, including body, fender and frame repair,
welding, painting and refinishing and glass replacement body
work.
(d)
This use also permits the retail sale of automotive parts and
accessories but prohibits the sale of fuel for retail purposes.
(2)
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:606
BUILDING — A man-made structure enclosed within exterior walls or
fire walls and a roof; built, erected and framed of component structural
parts; designed for the housing, shelter, enclosure and support of
individuals, animals or property of any kind.
BUILDING AREA — The total of area, in square feet, of all floors,
excluding basement, of the principal building and all accessory
buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, and steps.
BUILDING FOOTPRINT — The area of a building measured from the
exterior surface of the exterior walls at grade level. Where a building
is elevated above grade level, the building footprint is the area the
building would cover if it were located at ground level.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the
average elevation of the proposed finished grade in front of the building
where the address is taken to the top of the highest roof beams on flat
or shed roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the average
distance between eaves and the ridge levels for gable, hip and gambrel
roofs.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line within the property defining the
required distance between any principal or accessory building, and the
adjacent street right-of-way or property line, and a line defining side
and rear yards where required.
BUSINESS SERVICE — An establishment engaged in rendering
services to businesses and offices on a fee or contract basis, including
but not limited to advertising and mailing; data processing; secretarial;
financial; photocopying; quick printing and fax; office supplies; building
maintenance; equipment servicing, rental, leasing and sales;
employment service; management and consulting services; and other
similar business services.
CAFE/OUTDOOR DINING — An exterior seating area associated with a
restaurant or a tavern/bar.
CAR WASH — An area of land and/or a structure with machine- or
hand-operated facilities used principally for the interior and/or exterior
cleaning, washing, polishing, or waxing of motor vehicles and where
no repairs or sales of petroleum fuel or lubricants are performed. A
car wash facility may or may not include accessory uses such as auto
detailing.
CARPORT — A roofed structure providing space for the parking of
motor vehicles in the same manner as a private garage, and enclosed
on not more than three sides, and accessory to a principal or accessory
building.
CARTWAY — That portion of the right-of-way surfaced for vehicular use.
Width is determined from face of curb to face of curb or from one edge
of driving surface to the other edge of driving surface.
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:607
CELLAR — A portion of a building or space with less than 1/2 of its
floor-to-ceiling height above the average finished grade of the adjoining
ground or with a floor-to-ceiling height of less than 6 1/2 feet.
CEMETERY — Any public or private lot, building or structure that
is designed for and used for the burial of the deceased, including
columbaria, crematoria, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in
conjunction with the cemetery and within the boundaries thereof.
CERTIFICATE OF NONCONFORMANCE — A certificate issued by the
Zoning Officer which acknowledges the existence of a nonconforming
use, structure or lot as of the effective date of the chapter, thereby
authorizing its right to continue until eliminated or abandoned.[Added
5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
CERTIFICATE OF USE — The certificate, based on an inspection signed
and issued by the City Zoning Officer, which permits the use of a
building, structure or use of a lot in accordance with the approved plans
and specifications and which certifies compliance with the provisions of
this chapter for the use and occupancy of the land and structure in its
several parts, together with any special stipulations or conditions of the
building permit.
CHANGE OF USE — A change of use existing within a building or on
a lot to a new use which would be required to meet other provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
CITY COUNCIL — The City Council of Lock Haven, Clinton County,
Pennsylvania.
CITY PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the
City of Lock Haven, Clinton County, Pennsylvania.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land
established at street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed,
planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the
sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
CLINIC — An establishment where patients are admitted for
examination and treatment on an outpatient basis by one or more
physicians, dentists, other medical personnel, psychologists, or social
workers, and where patients are not usually lodged overnight.
CLUB ROOM, CLUB GROUND, OR MEETING HALL, PRIVATE — An
establishment within which a private club conducts recreational, social,
administrative or athletic activities primarily not for profit, providing
that any vending stands, merchandise or commercial activities are
conducted only as required generally for the membership of such club.
Private club, club rooms and meeting halls shall not be used for adultrelated
facilities.
COFFEEHOUSE — A retail food establishment whose primary business
is the sale of coffee and other nonalcoholic beverages, and where food
service such as the sale of baked or deli goods is secondary to the sale
of beverages.
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:608
COMMERCIAL RECREATION — Any establishment operated as a
gainful business whose main purpose is to provide the general public
with an amusing or entertaining activity, and where tickets are sold or
fees are collected for the activity:
COMMON WALL — A shared wall between two separate structures,
buildings, or dwelling units.172
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING — An unmanned
building or cabinet containing communications equipment required for
the operation of communications antennas and covering an area on the
ground not greater than 250 square feet.173
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The official public document prepared in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act
of July 31, 1968, P.O. 805, No. 247, as amended and reenacted,174
consisting of maps, charts and textual material, that constitutes
decisions about the physical and social development of the City of Lock
Haven as amended from time to time.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted and approved by the City
Council in a particular zoning district upon showing that such use in
a specified location will comply with all the conditions and standards
for the location or operation of the use as specified in this chapter.
Procedures and criteria for granting approval shall comply with
provisions of Article XXII of this chapter and Articles VI and IX of the
INDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATION — An establishment
operated as a gainful business, open to the public, for the purpose
of leisure-time activities, public recreation or entertainment,
including, but not limited to, arcade, arena, assembly hall, bingo
parlor, bowling alley, gymnasium, health and fitness club, miniature
golf course, skating rink, swimming pool, dance or gymnastic
instructional school, tennis courts, etc., when operated within a
completely enclosed building. This use does not include a theater.
(1)
OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATION — An establishment
operated as a gainful business and open to the public upon open
land, wholly or partially outside of a building, for the purpose of
leisure-time activities, public recreation or entertainment such as
a swimming pool, tennis court, batting and pitching cages, go-cart
track, and skating rinks, but also including amusement rides or
regular live entertainment. This use excludes a park, golf course
and an outdoor shooting range.
(2)
172. Editor's Note: The definition of "communications antenna," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 957. See now Subsection D, Wireless
communications facilities.
173. Editor's Note: The definition of "communications tower," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 957. See now Subsection D, Wireless
communications facilities.
174. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:609
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No.
247, as reenacted and amended.
CONDOMINIUM — A set of individual dwelling units or other areas
of buildings each owned by an individual person(s) in fee simple, with
such owners assigned a shared interest in the remainder of the real
estate which is designated for common ownership, and which is created
under the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act of 1980175 or
Uniform Planned Community Act of 1996, as amended.176
CONTRACTOR'S YARD — An establishment of any general contractor
or builder where equipment and materials are stored or where a
contractor performs shop or assembly work but does not include any
other yard or establishment otherwise defined or classified herein.
CONVENIENCE STORE — An establishment primarily engaged in the
retail sale of frequently or reoccurring needed goods for household
consumption.
CORRECTIONAL FACILITY — A public or privately owned building or
structure and related facilities used for the housing or detention of
persons who have been charged with or have been convicted of criminal
offenses.
COUNTRY CLUB/GOLF COURSE — A recreational facility operated
by a public or private entity which has, as its principal use, facilities
for playing golf and which may include one or more of the following
accessory uses: a clubhouse, restaurant, locker rooms, pro shop,
swimming pool and facilities for racquet sports.
COUNTY — Clinton County, Pennsylvania.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord.
No. 880]
CRAFTSMAN OR ARTISAN STUDIO — An establishment primarily
engaged in the on-site production, display and sale of goods created
on-site by hand manufacturing involving only the use of hand tools or
GENERAL CONVENIENCE STORE — A convenience store which
generally includes the retail sale of fuel for passenger vehicles,
oil, grease, automobile accessories, propane, kerosene, along with
prepackaged food and beverages, foods prepared on site,
magazines, lottery tickets, tobacco products, and limited household
supplies, and hardware.
(1)
NEIGHBORHOOD CONVENIENCE STORE — A convenience store
which generally includes the retail sale of prepackaged food and
beverages, foods prepared on site, magazines, lottery tickets,
tobacco products, and limited household supplies, and hardware.
Neighborhood convenience stores generally shall not include fuel
pumps or the selling of fuel for motor vehicles. Typical uses include
neighborhood markets.
(2)
175. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
176. Editor's Note: See Editor's Note: See 68 Pa. C.S.A. § 5101 et seq.
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:610
domestic mechanical equipment not exceeding eight kilowatts. Typical
uses include painting and other media-art, ceramics, fabric crafts,
candle-making, and jewelry manufacturing. All such production
associated with this use shall occur within a completely enclosed
building.
CRIMINAL HOUSING FACILITY — [Added 7-11-2016 by Ord. No.
955]
CURATIVE AMENDMENT — A specific process provided in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code177 whereby an individual
landowner or the municipality may propose an amendment to cure
or overcome a perceived invalidity of a zoning ordinance.[Added
5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
CURB CUT — The opening along the curbline at which point vehicles
may enter or leave the roadway.
DAY CARE — The offering of care or supervision of persons under
the age of 16, special needs adults in lieu of care or supervision by
family members, or elderly persons. This definition does not include the
offering of overnight accommodations.
A use (other than a "correction facility," "treatment center" or
a "halfway house" as otherwise defined in this article) providing
housing facilities for persons who require restricted or specialized
housing because of their status as:
(a) Inmates under sentence.
(b) Inmates in prerelease status.
(c) Parolees.
(d) Court-adjudicated juveniles.
(1)
Such restricted or specialized housing shall include such uses as
criminal rehabilitation facilities, criminal halfway houses, criminal
transitional living facilities, criminal prerelease centers,
community corrections housing facilities and juvenile facilities, but
this definition excludes any uses otherwise specifically defined in
this article, including housing facilities for persons convicted of
driving under the influence of alcohol as defined under "treatment
center."
(2)
DAY CARE, ACCESSORY — An accessory use to a dwelling unit,
whereby care and supervision is offered to no more than three
nonresidents of the site during any calendar day. An accessory day
care does not require zoning approval.
(1)
DAY CARE, COMMERCIAL — An establishment operated as a
gainful business which the care and supervision to more than six
(2)
177. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:611
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under any land use ordinance either by reason of the grant
of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from determinations.
All decisions shall be appealable to the court of common pleas of
Clinton County.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
DECK — A structure with or without sides projecting from the front,
side or rear wall of a building.
DENSITY — A ratio of the number of dwelling units per acre which
occupy, or may occupy, an area of land.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of the landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision or land development.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to the construction,
reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings
or other structures; the placement of mobile home or manufactured
housing; streets, and other paving; utilities; filling; grading and
excavation; mining; dredging or drilling operations; storage of
equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.[Added 5-16-2011
by Ord. No. 880]
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY — A disability of a person which has
continued or can be expected to continue indefinitely, which disability
is attributable to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy or autism;
is found to be attributable to any other condition found to be closely
related to mental retardation because such condition results in similar
impairment of general intellectual functioning or adaptive behavior to
that of mentally retarded persons or requires treatment and services
similar to those required for such persons; or is attributable to dyslexia
resulting from such disability.
nonresidents of the site during any calendar day. Commercial day
care facilities can be operated as principal uses or as accessory
uses associated with other uses (e.g., schools, places of worship,
industries, residential complex, etc.); however, in no case shall
a commercial day care be considered an accessory use to an
individual dwelling unit. Commercial day-care facilities shall
include "group child day-care homes" and "child day-care centers,"
as defined and regulated by the Department of Public Welfare of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DAY CARE, FAMILY — An accessory use to a single-family detached
dwelling, in which the care and supervision is offered to between
four and six nonresidents of the site during any calendar day.
Family day-care facilities must be registered with the Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(3)
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:612
DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED PERSON — A person with a
developmental disability.
DORMITORY — See "university housing."[Added 10-18-2010 by Ord.
No. 863]
DRIVE-IN USE — An establishment which by design, physical facilities,
service, or by packaging procedures encourages or permits patrons and
customers to receive services, obtain goods, or be entertained while
remaining in their motor vehicles, but also serve those customers who
walk up to a window counter.
DRIVE-THROUGH — A portion of a business establishment depending
on providing an access drive approach or parking spaces for motor
vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle rather than
within a building or a structure.
DRIVEWAY — A vehicular service way providing access between a
street and a parking area or garage on a lot or property.[Added
5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof located on a permanent
foundation and designed or used as the permanent living quarters for
one or more families, not including those uses meeting the definition of
boarding house, hotel, or motel.
DWELLING TYPE —
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building having three or more
individual dwelling units, designed to be used or occupied as a
residence by three or more families living independently of each
other, located upon one lot. This term shall include those uses
considered apartment buildings/houses and other similar-family
residential buildings occupied for and used for individual dwelling
units, but shall not include those uses meeting the definition of
bed-and-breakfast, boarding house, group home, townhouse, row
house, hotel, motel, or nursing home. Minimum floor area must
comply with the most recent building code in effect at the time of
erection.
(1)
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED (TOWNHOUSE/ROW
HOUSE) — A building having only one dwelling unit
accommodating a single family, attached to two or more dwelling
units in a row of at least three such units in which each unit has
its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located
over another unit and each unit is separated from any other unit
by one or more common fire-resistant party walls. Minimum floor
area must comply with the most recent building code in effect at
the time of erection.
(2)
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building having only
one dwelling unit accommodating a single family, upon one lot and
having four yards (two sides, one front and one rear). Minimum
(3)
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:613
DWELLING UNIT — One or more room(s) which is designed and used
exclusively as an individual unit of habitable residential living purposes
of not more than one family, and includes separate cooking and sanitary
facilities serving said individual unit, and which is accessible from the
outdoors, either directly or by an access shared with other dwelling
units.
EMERGENCY SERVICES FACILITY — An establishment used for the
maintenance, fueling, storage, dispatching or parking of vehicles and/
or equipment utilized to provided police, fire, rescue or ambulatory
services.
ESSENTIAL SERVICE — The provision by public utilities, municipal or
other governmental units regulated by the Public Utility Commission
(PUC) or other governmental agencies of underground or overhead
gas, electrical, steam or water pipes, sewer and storm sewer facilities,
and wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm
boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar equipment and accessories
in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of
adequate services by such public utilities or municipal or governmental
units or for the public health, safety or general welfare.
FACADE — The front face or elevation of a building, often the side of
the building facing the street.
FAMILY — An individual person, two or more persons related by blood,
marriage, or adoption, or a group of not more than four persons who
are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption living together in an
individual dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit. This term shall
floor area must comply with the most recent building code in effect
at the time of erection.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED — A building
having only one dwelling unit accommodating a single family upon
one lot and having three yards (one side, one front and one rear),
attached to one other dwelling unit separated from any other unit
by one common fire-resistant party wall and which each unit has
its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located
over another unit. Minimum floor area must comply with the most
recent building code in effect at the time of erection.
(4)
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building having two dwelling units
upon one lot, accommodating two families and may be either:
semidetached with one family living on either side of a common
fire-resistant party wall; or with one family living over the other;
each with its own exterior (to the unit) entrance door. Minimum
floor area must comply with the most recent building code in effect
at the time of erection.
(5)
RESIDENTIAL CONVERSION TO MULTIPLE DWELLING UNITS
— The addition of one or more new individual dwelling unit(s)
created within an existing building.
(6)
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:614
also include the number(s) of unrelated persons defined by and
consider those living in a licensed group home and licensed group
residence.
FARMERS/FLEA MARKET — An indoor and/or outdoor establishment
used for the sale of assorted new and used goods by auctioneers or by
vendors on a periodic basis.
FENCE — Any freestanding and uninhabitable structure constructed
of wood, glass, metal, plastic materials, wire, wire mesh, or masonry,
singly or in combination, erected for the purpose of screening or
dividing one property from another to assure privacy, or to protect the
property so screened or divided, or to define and mark the property
line.
FILL — The difference in elevation between a point on the original
ground and a designated point of higher elevation on the final grade;
or the material used to make a fill which is in turn used to elevate
or floodproof a building or structure.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No.
880]
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of a building and its accessory buildings on the same
lot measured from the exterior faces of walls or from the center line
of party walls separating two buildings, excluding cellar and basement
areas used only for storage and the operation and maintenance of the
building.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS LEASABLE — The sum of the floor area of
the several floors of a building designed for the conduct of business
and occupancy by an owner or tenant, as measured to the center of
the interior joint walls and exterior of outside walls. For purposes of
this definition, "gross leasable floor area" shall not include public or
common areas such as utility rooms, stairwells, hallways or corridors,
etc.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — The sum of the floor area of the several
floors of a dwelling unit as measured to the outside surfaces of exterior
walls and including all rooms used for habitation, such as living room,
dining room, kitchen, bedroom, bathroom, closets, hallways, stairways,
but not including basement, attic space, service rooms or areas such
as utility rooms, unheated areas such as enclosed porches, nor rooms
without at least one window or skylight opening onto an outside yard or
court. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a
ceiling height of not less than seven feet, and the floor area of that part
of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be
considered as part of the habitable floor area.
FOOD SERVICE FACILITY — An establishment in which food is
processed and/or prepared on the premises, and may be sold on the
premises. This term shall also include bakeries and catering
establishments.
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:615
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when
practiced in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through
developing, cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for
commercial purposes, which does not involve any land development.
FUNERAL HOME — An establishment conducting embalming and
cremation of the deceased prior to burial, but not including cemeteries,
columbaria, mausoleums, entombments, and for the viewing of the
deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or
cremation.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An enclosed or covered space used as an
accessory use for the storage of one or more motor vehicles; provided,
that no business, occupation or service is conducted for profit therein,
nor space therein for more than one car is leased.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A City-owned and/or operated building or
structure where motor vehicles can be stored or parked for a
prearranged fee.
GOVERNING BODY — The City Council of Lock Haven, Clinton County,
Pennsylvania.
GREENHOUSE — A building whose sides and roof are made largely
of glass or other transparent or translucent material, and in which
the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation
of delicate or out-of-season plants for subsequent sale or personal
enjoyment. (See also "plant nursery.")[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No.
880]
HALFWAY HOUSE — A use (other than a "criminal housing facility" or
"treatment center" as otherwise defined in this article) as a residence
for those who have completed treatment at a rehabilitation facility but
are not yet ready to return to independent living in the community and
where residents participate in structured programs designated to ease
successful reintegration into society.[Amended 7-11-2016 by Ord.
No. 955]
HEALTH AND FITNESS CLUB — An establishment that offers active
indoor recreational activities, fitness activities, or both. Such activities
are provided only to club members and their guests. Such facilities do
not include any outdoor facilities, golf courses or other uses identified
as indoor commercial recreation.
HOME IMPROVEMENT CENTER, LUMBER, BUILDING MATERIALS
SALES FACILITY — An establishment providing for the sale of home,
lawn, and garden supplies, lumber, and other similar building materials
and products.
HOME OCCUPATION — A business or commercial activity, other than a
no-impact home occupation, administered or conducted as an accessory
use which is clearly secondary to the principal use of a single-family
detached or single-family semidetached dwelling for gainful
employment involving the manufacture, provision or sale of goods and/
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:616
or services. The use is clearly incidental and secondary to the principal
use of the single-family detached or single family semidetached
dwelling for residential purposes and does not change the character
thereof or adversely affect the uses permitted in the residential district
of which it is a part.
HOSPITAL — An establishment licensed in the commonwealth as a
hospital, which renders inpatient and outpatient medical care for a
twenty-four-hour-per-day basis; and provides primary health services
and medical/surgical care to persons suffering from illness, disease,
injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions. A
hospital use can also include attached and detached accessory uses,
provided that all uses are contained upon the hospital property. A
medical care use that does not provide overnight stays nor for periods
longer than 24 continuous hours shall be considered a medical office.
A treatment center shall also be permitted with a conditional use
approval as an accessory use within an existing building of an existing
permitted state-licensed general hospital within the Public Institutional
District. Any expansion of such treatment center or any relocation
from one building to another building shall require conditional use
approval.[Amended 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 955]
HOTEL — An establishment which provides transient lodging
accommodations to the general public in sleeping units which each
have separate access to a common interior corridor and which may
provide such additional supporting services such as restaurants,
meeting rooms, recreation facilities and living quarters for a resident
manager or proprietor.
HOUSEHOLD PETS — An animal that is normally or can generally be
kept within the immediate living quarters of a residential structure.
However, the keeping of horses as pets is permitted in accordance with
the provisions in Article XX of this chapter.
HOUSEHOLD PETS — Dogs, cats and other similar animals that are
housed in a private residence as personal companions. Livestock,
agricultural animals, including but not limited to chickens and ducks,
and zoological animals, shall not be considered household pets.[Added
5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
HOUSING (FOR ELDERLY AND/OR DISABLED PERSONS) — A
residential building or complex of buildings with dwelling units
specifically designed for the use of and occupied by any person(s) 55
years of age or older and their spouse and dependent relatives, or any
person(s) less than 55 years of age who has a record of or is regarded
as having a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one
or more of the major life activities of that person(s) and their spouse
and dependent relatives and live-in caregivers. Impairment does not
include those exemptions listed in the Americans with Disabilities Act
of 1990.178
178. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:617
INDUSTRIAL USES —
JUNK — Any discarded article or material, including but not limited to,
scrap metal, paper, rags, glass, containers, tires, junked or abandoned
motor vehicles, trailers, machinery and equipment, and other
GENERAL INDUSTRIAL — A use:
Involving the processing and manufacturing of semifinished
and/or finished materials or products predominately from
extracted, raw, and/or recycled materials;
(a)
Engaged in the storage of, manufacturing processes using,
and/or shipping of flammable or explosive materials; and/or
(b)
Engaged in the storage, manufacturing processes, and/or
shipping of materials or products that potentially involve
hazardous or commonly offensive conditions; and
(c)
Due to the more intensive nature of the processes, materials,
products, etc. such uses may disturb or endanger neighboring
properties.
(d)
(1)
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL — A use:
Involving the manufacturing, predominately from previously
prepared semifinished or finished materials products or parts,
finished materials and products, including processing,
fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental
storage, sales and distribution, as well as the repair of such
finished products, but:
(a)
Excluding the processing of extracted, raw, and/or recycled
materials; and
(b)
Due to the lower-intensity nature of processes, materials, or
products, produce no noise, vibration, air pollution, fire hazard
or noxious emission, which would disturb or endanger
neighboring properties.
(c)
Establishments involved in the production and/or repair
services when such facilities are in a completely enclosed
building including home appliances; electrical instruments;
office machines; precision instruments; electronic devices;
timepieces; jewelry; optical goods; musical instruments;
novelties; mass-produced furniture; wood products such as
cabinetry, printed material; lithographic plates; type
composition; machine tools; dies and gauges; ceramics;
apparel; lightweight metal castings; film processing; light
sheet metal products; tinsmithing, welding, plumbing, heating,
ventilating and air-conditioning plastic goods; pharmaceutical
goods; and food products, but not animal slaughtering or
curing nor rendering of fats.
(d)
(2)
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:618
salvageable materials. "Junk" shall not include hazardous wastes or
materials, industrial residual wastes, or municipal wastes as defined in
the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act.179[Added 5-16-2011
by Ord. No. 880]
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL — A business offering housing or boarding of
domestic animals and which is operated for a profit.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is
authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or
other person having a proprietary interest in land.
The improvement of one or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels
of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land between or among two or
more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the
purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
The following are exempted from the definition of "land
development":
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling
or single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than
three residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
(a)
The addition of an accessory building, including a farm
building, on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal
building; or
(b)
The addition or conversion of a building for rides within the
confines of an enterprise, which would be considered an
amusement park. For the purpose of this subsection, an
"amusement park" is defined as a tract or area used principally
as a location for a permanent amusement structures or rides.
This exclusion shall not comply to newly acquired acreage by
an amusement park until initial land for the expanded area
have been approved by the proper authorities.
(c)
(3)
179. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:619
LANDSCAPING CENTER/NURSERY — An establishment engaged in
the raising non-agriculturally related trees, shrubs, flowers, and other
plants for wholesale or retail sale or for transplanting.
LAUNDROMAT — An establishment equipped with individual clotheswashing
and drying machines and/or dry-cleaning machines for use and
operation by patrons.
LICENSED GROUP HOME — A place, home, or institution which is
licensed and directly associated with and operated by a responsible
individual, family or organization with a program of care and
supervision of the residents by full-time professional, resident staff
providing a supportive living arrangement including board, shelter,
and personal services to not more than eight persons, regardless of
age, who have a need for supervision or assisted community living
based on emotional, mental, physical, familial, or social differences.
(Examples of such persons include but shall not be limited to the
mentally challenged, physically handicapped; elderly. This definition
shall expressly include facilities for the care of developmentally
disabled persons.)
LICENSED GROUP RESIDENCE — An institution which is licensed and
directly associated with and operated by a responsible organization
with a program of care and supervision of the residents by full-time
professional, resident staff providing a supportive living arrangement
including board, shelter, and personal services to nine but not more
than 16 persons, regardless of age, who have a need for supervision
or assisted community living based on emotional, mental, physical,
familial, or social differences. (Examples of such persons include but
shall not be limited to the mentally challenged, physically handicapped;
elderly. This definition shall expressly include facilities for the care of
developmentally disabled persons.)[Amended 7-11-2016 by Ord. No.
955]
LIGHTING —
LIVESTOCK — Cattle, pigs, goats, horses, sheep, llamas, emus,
ostriches, and other similar types of animals with hooves, whether split
or not.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
LOADING SPACE OR UNIT — An off-street space or berth on the
same lot with a building or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the
DIFFUSED — That form of lighting wherein the light passes from
the source through a translucent cover or shade.
(1)
DIRECT or FLOOD — That form of lighting wherein the source is
visible and the light is distributed directly from it to the object to
be illuminated.
(2)
INDIRECT — That form of lighting wherein the light source is
entirely hidden, the light being projected to a suitable reflector for
which it is reflected to be illuminated.
(3)
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:620
temporary stopping of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials and which abuts upon an alley, street or other
appropriate means of access to a street.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat,
subdivision or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed
or built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the lot lines of a lot, excluding
space within all streets and within permanent drainage easements, but
including the areas of all other easements.
LOT, CORNER — A lot or parcel abutting upon two or more streets
at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street forming an
interior angle of less than 135°.
LOT COVERAGE — That portion or percentage of the plot or lot area
covered by any material that prevents the absorption of stormwater
into the ground, including buildings, sidewalks, driveways/access
drives, but excluding surface water area of swimming pools.
LOT, FLAG — A lot not fronting on or abutting a public roadway except
for a narrow strip of ground or private right-of-way not less than 24 feet
wide.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
LOT FRONTAGE — The front portion of a lot meeting the requirements
of § 410-114 of this chapter.
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from
another lot or from a public or private street.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which individually or as a part of a subdivision
has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Clinton
County, Pennsylvania.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
LOT WIDTH — The continuous linear horizontal distance measured at
the required front setback, between side lot lines for interior lots. For
corner lots, lot width shall be measured at both required front setbacks,
one between a front lot line and opposite rear lot line, and one between
a front lot line and opposite side lot line.
MANUFACTURING — The act of producing, preparing and assembling
finished products or goods from raw materials or component parts
through the repetitious use of an established or set process.[Added
5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT — Any business or part
thereof, other than an adult massage establishment, where massage
services are provided by a person having graduated from a massage
therapy training program approved by the Pennsylvania State Board
of Private Licensed Schools or equivalent agency if trained in another
state; by a person certified through a massage therapy certification
examination approved by the National Commission for Certifying
Agencies; by a person certified through the National Certification Board
for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork; or is a practitioner or member
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:621
of either of the American Massage Therapy Association (AMTA),
Associated Bodywork and Massage Professionals (ABMP), or
International Massage Association (IMA).
MEDIATION — A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a
dispute mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly
exploring and settling their differences, culminating in a written
agreement which the parties themselves create and consider
acceptable.
MINERAL BATCHING OR MIXING PLANT — A facility where extracted
materials are amassed, sorted, mixed, and/or crushed, ground, or
otherwise treated for distribution or use or sale.[Added 5-16-2011 by
Ord. No. 880]
MINERAL EXTRACTION OPERATION — The commercial extraction of
natural minerals from the earth, including facilities for the batching
or mixing of extracted materials. Oil and gas operations shall not be
considered to be mineral extraction.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No.
880]
MINI-STORAGE/SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — An establishment
including a building and/or series of buildings divided into separate
storage units for personal property and/or property associated with
some business or other organization. These units shall be used solely
for dead storage and no processing, manufacturing, sales, research and
development testing, service and repair, or other non-storage activities
shall be permitted.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling located on
a permanent foundation intended for permanent occupancy, contained
in one unit, or in two or more units designed to be joined into one
integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing,
which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy, except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations and
constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park,
improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land greater
than or equal to the minimum size set forth in Article XX of this chapter
which has/have been so designated and improved that it contains two
or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MOTEL — An establishment which provides transient lodging
accommodations to the general public in sleeping units which each
have separate access directly to the outside and which may provide
such additional supporting services as restaurants, recreation facilities
and living quarters for a resident manager or proprietor.
MULTI-MIXED-USE FACILITY — Any combination of uses, including
but not limited to, offices, commercial and light industrial in one or
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:622
more structures on a single parcel or contiguous parcels under the
same ownership.[Amended 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
NEIGHBORHOOD RETAIL/SERVICE — An establishment conducting
the following retail and personal service business, or professional
service establishments are permitted within specified residential
zoning districts as permitted uses: neighborhood convenience store;
barber and beauty shops; gift/craft shops; business and medical offices;
and restaurants, which are limited to 900 square feet of floor area
devoted to the business and intended to supply commodities or perform
services for residents of the neighborhood. This use may include one
accessory residential dwelling unit located within the principal
building. The sale, service or distribution of alcoholic beverages is
prohibited.
NO-IMPACT HOME OCCUPATION — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly
secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no
customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian,
pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess
of those normally associated with residential use. The business or
commercial activity must satisfy all requirements set forth in Article XX
of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area or dimension of which was
lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter, but which
fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of
use provisions in this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter
enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment
of such chapter or amendment or prior to the application of such
chapter or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such
nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to,
nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this
chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use
was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of such chapter or
amendment, or prior to the application of such chapter or amendment
to its location by reason of annexation.
NURSING HOME — An establishment, licensed by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, engaged in providing twenty-four-hour inpatient
nursing and health-related personal care for nine or more adults,
utilizing in whole or part licensed and/or registered nurses, excluding
hospital services and excluding day-to-day personal care which is not
health care by licensed or registered nurses.
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:623
OFFICE, BUSINESS — A building or part of a building in which one
or more persons are employed in the management, direction or
conducting of business/commerce and whose staffs/employees serve
clients who seek advice and consultation regarding business/
commerce. A business office may include the administrative, corporate
or professional offices for profit, nonprofit or charitable organizations.
OFFICE/CLINIC, MEDICAL — A building or structure where one or
more licensed medical professionals, provide diagnosis and treatment
to the general public without surgical procedures, overnight
accommodation or pharmacy and shall include such uses as reception
areas, offices, consultation rooms, and X-ray, providing that all such
uses have access only from the interior of the building or structure.
OIL AND GAS OPERATION — The underground exploration for, and
commercial extraction of, crude oil and natural gas.[Added 5-16-2011
by Ord. No. 880]
OPEN SPACE — Space not occupied by a structure, open to the sky, and
on the same lot with a building or structure.[Amended 5-16-2011 by
Ord. No. 880]
PARK — A public or private lot or portion thereof that is used for active
and/or passive recreational uses; and includes all landscaping, facilities
and apparatus, playing fields, playgrounds, play equipment, utilities,
buildings and other structures that are consistent with the general
purposes of a park, and whether or not such recreational facilities
are publicly operated or operated by other organizations pursuant to
arrangements to the applicable government unit.
PARKING COMPOUND — A public or private lot, building or structure
that is designed and used for the short-term, daily, or overnight offstreet
storage and parking of passenger vehicles. This use shall include
surface parking lots and parking structures including buildings and
decks.
PARKING SPACE — A space within an off-street parking compound or
within a dedicated public right-of-way, for the parking of passenger
vehicles.
PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET — A space within a parking compound,
for the off-street temporary storage and parking of passenger vehicles.
PARKS and PLAYGROUNDS — A public or private lot or portion thereof
that is used for active and/or passive recreational uses, including all
landscaping, facilities and apparatus, playing fields, playgrounds, play
equipment, utilities, buildings and other structures that are consistent
with the general purposes of a park, whether such recreational facilities
are publicly operated or operated by other organizations pursuant to
arrangements to the applicable government unit.[Added 5-16-2011
by Ord. No. 880]
PATIO — An outside surfaced area at ground level or no more than eight
inches above ground level having no roof and no sides. For the purpose
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:624
of the chapter, a patio is not considered a part of the principal building
and is not permitted to extend into any required yards.
PERMANENT FOUNDATION — An underlying prepared base or
support of cemented concrete blocks or similar masonry placed upon
a footer upon which a structure is placed. The foundation must be
completely enclosed, exclusive of half windows, windows or doors,
except as otherwise required.
PERMITTED USE — A principal use allowed in a zoning district, subject
to the applicable district regulations.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No.
880]
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No.
880]
PERSONAL CARE CENTER — A building or structure, licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in which food, shelter and personal
assistance and/or supervision by full time, professional resident staff
are provided for a period exceeding 24 hours for nine or more adults
who are not relatives of the operator, who do not require the services in
or of a "nursing home" but who do require assistance or supervision in
matters such as dressing, bathing, diet, financial matters, evacuation of
a residence in the event of an emergency or medication prescribed for
self-administration.
PERSONAL CARE HOME — A building or structure, licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in which food, shelter and personal
assistance and/or supervision by full-time, professional resident staff
are provided for a period exceeding 24 hours for four to eight adults
who are not relatives of the operator, who do not require the services in
or of a "nursing home" but who do require assistance or supervision in
matters such as dressing, bathing, diet, financial matters, evacuation of
a residence in the event of an emergency or medication prescribed for
self-administration.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Any enterprise providing domestic
commodities and services pertaining to the person, their apparel or
personal effects commonly carried on or about the person, including
but not limited to shoe repair, tailoring, clothes cleaning, watch
repairing, barbershops, beauty parlors and related activities.
PLACE OF ASSEMBLY — Any public or private lot, building or structure
that is designed for the assembly or collection of persons at any one
time, or adapted or used for purpose of assembly, where persons may
congregate for civic, political, religious, educational, social, recreation
and amusement purpose. A place of assembly shall include uses such as
a performing arts theater.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — An establishment wherein persons regularly
assemble for religious worship and which is maintained and controlled
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:625
by a religious body organized to sustain public worship, together with
all buildings accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily
associated with such primary purpose including rectories, convents
and church-related schools and day-care facilities. Includes synagogue,
temple, mosque, or other such place for worship and religious
activities.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the City of
Lock Haven, Clinton County, Pennsylvania.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord.
No. 880]
PLANT NURSERY — Land and/or greenhouses used to raise flowers,
shrubs, trees and plants for public use or sale or private use.[Added
5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
PLAT — A map or layout of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PORCH — A roofed-over structure projecting from the front, side or
rear wall of a building. For the purpose of this chapter, a porch is
considered a part of the principal building and is not permitted to
extend into any required yards.
POST OFFICE — A facility owned and/or maintained by the United
States Postal Service for the purpose of distributing mail to the public.
PREMISES — Any lot, parcel or tract of land and any building
constructed thereon.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the principal
or main use of the lot on which it is located, and which is not an
accessory building.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main or primary purpose for which a building,
other structure and/or land is used, occupied or maintained under
this chapter. All other structures or uses on the same lot which are
supplemental thereto and permitted under this chapter shall be
considered accessory uses.
PRIVATE CLUB — An organization catering exclusively to members and
their guests and not the general public. Private clubs shall include
but not be limited to, educational, fraternal, service and political
organizations, labor unions and social and athletic clubs.
PROPERTY LINE — A recorded boundary of a lot; provided, however,
that any property line that abuts a street or other public way shall be
measured from the edge of the full right-of-way of such street or public
way.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any structure used or intended for supporting
or sheltering uses for the public including municipal, county, state and
federal government units.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:626
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the governing body or planning agency, intended to inform and
obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No.
247, as reenacted and amended.180
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under 65 Pa.C.S.
Ch. 7 (relating to open meetings), in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as
reenacted and amended.181
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the
particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first
publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication
shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing, in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code Act of
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended.182
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land acquired by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the City of Lock Haven via
reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription or
condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road,
crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline,
water line, sanitary storm sewer and other similar uses, and maintained
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the City of Lock Haven.
PUBLIC/PRIVATE WORKS FACILITY — The erection, construction,
alteration, operation or maintenance of buildings, power plants or
substations, water treatment plants or pumping stations, sewage
disposal or pumping plants, public transportation and road
maintenance facilities, and other similar public service structures by
a utility, whether publicly or privately owned, or by a municipal or
other government agency, including the furnishing of electrical, gas,
communication, water supply and sewage disposal services.
RAIL YARD — The use of a lot, or building or structure or part thereof
for activities directly associated with the operation of a railway. Without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, such activities may include
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and
other public areas.
(1)
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other
publicly owned or operated facilities.
(2)
(3) Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
180. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
181. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
182. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:627
loading and off-loading freight, and/or maintenance and repair of
railway cars.
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT — Includes travel trailers, pickup
coaches, motorized homes and recreational vehicles as follows:
RECYCLING COLLECTION POINT, PUBLIC — Any place that serves as
a collection point for the temporary storage of refuse items, such as
bottles, cans, and newspapers, from which resources are recovered at
another location.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT — Any establishment which carries
on investigations in the natural, physical, technical or social science or
engineering and development as an extension of such investigation with
the objective of creating end products.
RESEARCH LABORATORY — A building or groups of buildings in which
are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or
experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of
products except as accessory and incidental to the main purpose of the
laboratory.
RESTAURANT — An establishment that sells ready-to-consume food or
drink and that routinely involves the consumption of at least a portion
of such food on the premises. A restaurant may include the accessory
sale of alcoholic beverages. However, if such sales is a primary or
substantial portion of the total trade, the requirement of a "tavern/bar,"
as applicable, must be met.
RETAIL BUSINESS — An establishment located entirely within an
enclosed building which sells goods or merchandise and repair services
for goods or similar merchandise sold on the premises to the general
public for personal, household or office consumption and which shall
not include wholesaling, light industrial or processing of the goods
offered for sale.
ROADSIDE STAND — A temporary or permanent booth, stand or
shelter located along a roadway (but off the road right-of-way), from
(1) BOAT — A vessel designed or used to travel on water.
(2) BOAT TRAILER — A trailer designed or used to haul a boat.
MOTORIZED HOME — A portable dwelling designed and
constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
(3)
PICKUP COACH — A structure designed primarily to be mounted
on a pickup or other truck chassis with sufficient equipment to
render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling, travel,
recreational and vacation purposes.
(4)
TRAVEL TRAILER — A portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be towed and used as a temporary dwelling for travel,
recreational and vacation purposes and permanently identified as a
travel trailer by the manufacturer of the trailer.
(5)
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:628
which farm, plant nursery or greenhouse products primarily grown or
raised on the adjacent or nearby premises are offered for sale to the
general public.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL — An academic or nonacademic
establishment providing nonacademic training, vocational or traderelated
educational courses and/or programs.
SCHOOL, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE — Any public, sectarian, or private
nonprofit establishment approved by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania offering formal academic instruction and/or vocational
educational services for state-required or largely state-funded
programs at the kindergarten, elementary, and secondary levels. This
term shall not include those uses considered commercial schools.
SCREENING — The provision of a barrier to visibility, airborne
particles, glare and noise between adjacent properties uses and/or
districts composed entirely of trees, shrubs, sight-tight fences, walls
and/or other similar type materials.
SETBACK — The distance between a building and any lot line.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of stores planned, designed and
constructed to function as a unit for the lot on which it is located with
off-street parking provided as an integral part of the unit.
SMALL WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — A wireless
telecommunications facility that meets the following criteria:[Added
4-1-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use permitted and approved by the Zoning
Hearing Board in a particular zoning district upon showing that such
use in a specified location will comply with all the conditions and
standards for the location or operation of the use as specified in this
chapter. Procedures and criteria for granting approval shall comply
with provisions of Article XXIII of this chapter and Articles VI and IX
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code Act of 1968, P.L. 805,
No. 247, as reenacted and amended.183
The structure on which antenna facilities are mounted is 50 feet or
less in height, or is no more than 10% taller than other adjacent
structures, or is not extended to a height of more than 50 feet or
by more than 10% above its preexisting height as a result of the colocation
of new antenna facilities; and
(1)
Each antenna associated with the deployment (excluding the
associated equipment) is no more than three cubic feet in volume;
and
(2)
All antenna equipment associated with the facility (excluding
antennas) are cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume.
(3)
183. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10601 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq., respectively.
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:629
STABLE, PRIVATE — An accessory building in which horses are raised
or kept for personal use, and not for hire, remuneration or sale.[Added
5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
STOOP — A covered or uncovered structure projecting from the front,
side or rear door of a structure not exceeding 25 square feet.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor or ceiling immediately above
it.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
STREET — The word "street" includes any street, avenue, boulevard,
road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways
used or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether
public or private.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot,
usually referred to as the "right-of-way line."
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the
land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to
heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership, building or lot development;
provided, however, that the subdivision of land by lease of land for
agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, and not
involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SWIMMING POOL — A water-filled enclosure, permanently
constructed or portable, having a depth of more than 18 inches below
the level of the surrounding land, or an above-surface pool, having
a depth of more than 24 inches, designed, used and maintained for
swimming and bathing. Farm ponds and/or lakes are not included;
provided, that swimming was not the primary purpose for their
construction.
TAVERN/BAR — An establishment where the principal use is primarily
serving alcoholic beverages by the drink to the general public mostly
for on-premises consumption and which is licensed by the Pennsylvania
Liquor Control Board. Taverns may also serve food and packaged
beverages as an accessory use.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A nonpermanent structure or building
which is permitted or authorized to be located on a lot for a specified
duration.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
TEMPORARY USE — A use established for a limited duration with the
intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period.
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:630
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to the showing
of motion pictures or theatrical or performing arts productions as a
principal use, but not including an outdoor drive-in theater or uses
considered adult mini-motion and motion-picture theaters.
TREATMENT CENTER — A use (other than a "correctional facility"
or "criminal housing facility" or "halfway house" as otherwise defined
in this article) providing housing facilities for persons who need
specialized housing, treatment and/or counseling because of: a
conviction or convictions for driving under the influence of alcohol;
chronic abuse of or addiction to alcohol and/or a controlled substance;
or a type of mental illness or other behavior that can reasonably be
expected to cause a person to be a threat to the physical safety of
themselves or others.[Added 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 955]
TRUCK REPAIR AND SERVICE FACILITY — An establishment providing
towing, repair, service, inspection, washing of, and/or other similar
services for trucks. Such a use may include the sale of lubricants, tires,
batteries, motor fuel and other petroleum products, truck accessories
and equipment. This use shall include temporary storage of wrecked
and inoperable vehicles awaiting repair.
TRUCK STOP/TRAVEL PLAZAS — A premises used for the refueling,
maintenance and/or service activities for such vehicles and their
drivers. These activities or services may include, but are not limited
to, dispensing motor fuels and petroleum products directly into motor
vehicles, restaurants or cafes, overnight accommodations, showers or
laundry facilities, truck services, including repair services, overnight
truck parking and vehicle washing.[Added 4-2-2018 by Ord. No.
986]
TRUCK TERMINAL — An area or structure where trucks load and
unload goods, products, cargo, materials and/or freight and where the
same may be broken down or aggregated into smaller or larger loads
for transfer to other motor vehicles or modes of transportation or to
other points or junctions. This use may include servicing and truck
repair facilities, fueling, dispensing, storage of petroleum products and
overnight accommodations. Truck "dropoff lots," "drop-and-hook lots"
or similarly defined facilities shall be governed under this definition.
UNIVERSITY HOUSING — Housing offered by colleges and/or
universities to accommodate students in attendance at the university
to include, but not limited to, dormitory housing and dwelling-type
housing. Said housing must be located on a lot owned by the college
and/or university or by a college and/or university foundation.
UNIVERSITY/COLLEGE — An educational establishment, authorized
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as such to award associate,
baccalaureate or higher degrees, including principal uses for
classrooms, libraries, auditoriums, gymnasiums, stadiums,
administrative offices, dormitories and dining facilities, boarding
houses, maintenance and operating facilities, as well as ancillary uses,
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:631
such as research facilities, retail services and businesses that support
student, faculty and staff needs.
USE — The specific purpose, activity, occupation, business or operation
for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, or intended, or for
which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE — Relief granted by the Zoning Hearing Board from the
technical provisions of this chapter, which if strictly adhered to would
inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. Procedures and
criteria for granting such relief shall comply with provisions of Article
XXIII of this chapter and Articles VI and IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as
reenacted and amended.184
VETERINARY CLINIC — See "animal hospital."
WAREHOUSE — An establishment used primarily for the indoor storage
and handling of products, supplies, equipment, but not including the
maintenance or fueling of commercial vehicles.
WAREHOUSING, DISTRIBUTION AND WHOLESALING — A use
engaged in the storage, wholesale and/or distribution of manufactured
products, supplies and equipment, but excluding bulk storage of
materials that are inflammable or explosive or that create hazard or
commonly recognized offensive conditions, and also excluding any
heavy equipment or truck washing, servicing and/or repair, unless such
uses are specifically permitted in that zoning district. Wholesaling of
products, supplies and equipment shall not be open to or accessible
by the general public, unless incidental to the principal warehousing
operation.
YARD — An open space from grade level to the sky unoccupied by a
building or structure.
YARD, FRONT — The open space extending the entire width of the lot
between the front building line of the principal building and the street
right-of-way.
YARD, REAR — The open space extending from the rear of the principal
building to the rear lot line (not necessarily a street line) throughout
the entire width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE — The open space extending from the side of the principal
building to the side lot line through the entire depth of the building.
ZONING — A police power measure, enacted pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No.
247,185 as reenacted and amended by the City of Lock Haven, in which
the City is divided into districts or zones within which permitted and
special uses are established as well as regulations governing lot size,
building bulk, placement and other development standards.
184. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10601 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq., respectively.
185. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:632
ZONING DISTRICT — A section of the City designated by and pursuant
to this chapter via text and delineated on a related map, in which
requirements for the use of land and building and development
standards are prescribed.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of the City
of Lock Haven as duly constituted by and established pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No.
247, as reenacted and amended.186
ZONING MAP — The Official Zoning Map of the City of Lock Haven,
Clinton County, Pennsylvania, together with all notations, references
and amendments which may hereafter be enacted. Said map is made a
part of this chapter.187[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
ZONING OFFICER — The individual authorized by the City Council to
administer and enforce this chapter in accordance with its literal terms.
ZONING PERMIT — The permit required by this chapter which states
the purpose for which a building, structure, or land is proposed to
be used is in conformity with the use regulation, the dimensional
requirements, and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter.[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
B. Airport Overlay words and phrases. The following words and phrases,
when used in Article XIV of this chapter relating to the Airport Overlay,
shall have the meaning given to them herein this subsection unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance, except an unpowered hang glider or
parachute, used for manned ascent into or flight through the air.
AIRPORT ELEVATION — The highest point of an airport's usable
landing area measured in feet above sea level, estimated to be 555 feet
for the William T. Piper Airport.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure or object, natural or man-made, or
use of land which obstructs the airspace required for flight or aircraft in
landing or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous as defined
by "airport hazard" in 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA — Any area of land or water upon which an
airport hazard might be established if not prevented as provided for in
this chapter and the Airport Zoning Act, 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5911 et seq.
APPROACH SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on the
extended runway center line, extending outward and upward from the
end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach
surface zone height limitation slope set forth in § 410-71 of this chapter.
In plan, the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the
perimeter of the approach surface zone.
186. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
187. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:633
APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL, AND CONICAL SURFACE
ZONES — These zones are set forth in § 410-71 of this chapter.
CONICAL SURFACE — A surface extending outward and upward from
the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a
horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
DEPARTMENT — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
FAA — Federal Aviation Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation.
HEIGHT — For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones
set forth in Article XIV of this chapter and shown on the Zoning Map,
the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE — A horizontal plane 150 feet above the
established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides
with the perimeter of the horizontal surface zone.
LARGER-THAN-UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for
and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than
12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any preexisting structure, object of natural
growth or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of Article
XIV of this chapter.
NON-PRECISION-INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an
existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation
equipment, for which a straight-in non-precision-instrument approach
procedure has been approved or planned.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth or other object, including a
mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in § 410-71 of
this chapter.
PERSON — An individual, firm partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association or governmental entity; includes a
trustee, a receiver, an assignee or a similar representative of any of
them.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system
(ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for
which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an
approved airport layout plan or any other planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on a runway.
When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary
surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway. For military
runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface
or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that
runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in § 410-71 of this
chapter. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same
as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway center line.
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:634
PRIVATE AIRPORT — An airport which is privately owned and which is
not open or intended to be open to the public as defined in 74 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 5102.
PUBLIC AIRPORT — An airport which is either publicly or privately
owned and which is open to the public as defined in 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.
RUNWAY — A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and
takeoff of aircraft along its length.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES — These surfaces extend outward at
ninety-degree angles to the runway center line and the runway center
line extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot
vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where
they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces
for those portions of the precision approach surfaces, which project
through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance
of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach
surface and at ninety-degree angles to the extended runway center line.
TREE — Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and intended to
be used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross
weight or less.
VISUAL RUNWAY — A runway intended solely for the operation of
aircraft using visual approach procedures.
C. Flood damage control standards overlay words and phrases. The
following words and phrases, when used in Article XV of this chapter
relating to the Flood Damage Control Standards Overlay, shall have the
meaning given to them herein this subsection unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground
level on all sides.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally dry
during flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent
the passage of water and water vapor.
CONSTRUCTION, EXISTING — Structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced before February 2, 1977, the established
effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) of the City of
Lock Haven, Clinton County, Pennsylvania. "Existing construction" may
also be referred to as "existing structures."
CONSTRUCTION, NEW — Structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after February 2, 1977, and includes any
subsequent improvements thereto.
CONSTRUCTION, START OF — Includes substantial improvement and
means the date the building permit was issued; provided, the actual
start of construction, repair reconstruction, placement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:635
start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond
the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home
on a foundation. "Permanent construction" does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footing, piers or foundations, or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory building, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during
flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage;
the structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the one-hundred year regulatory
floodplain outside the floodway.
FLOODPLAIN — Relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river,
stream or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete
inundation; or, any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOODWAY — The designated area of a floodplain required to carry
and discharge floodwaters of the regulatory flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot
at any point.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of Interior.
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
(4)
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:636
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking vehicles, building access and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered the
lowest floor of a building; provided, that such space is not designed and
built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term
"manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and
other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive
days. The one-hundred-eighty-day provision shall not be applicable in
instances where a park trailer, travel trailer or other similar vehicle
is being stored on the owner's property, providing there is a principal
structure on the property and the recreational equipment is mobile. For
insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not include
park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles.
OBSTRUCTION — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike,
pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, culvert,
building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or other matter in,
along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or regulatory
flood hazard area which may impede, retard or change the direction
of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried
downstream that would or could do damage to life or property.[Added
5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior.
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(1) Built on a single chassis.
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections.
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck.
(3)
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
(4)
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:637
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood
elevation as indicated on profiles of the Flood Insurance Study for the
City of Lock Haven, Clinton County, Pennsylvania.
REGULATORY FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The flood that has been
selected to serve as the basis upon which the flood damage control
standards of this chapter have been prepared; for this chapter, the onehundred-
year flood.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement
of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions.
(a)
Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an "historic structure."
(b)
(1)
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether
or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state, local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions.
(a)
Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.
(b)
(2)
D. Signs. As used in Article XVII of this chapter, the following words and
phrases shall have the meaning given herein below:
BUSINESS SIGN — A sign which is permanently attached to the
premises and used to identify the business establishment upon which it
is erected.
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:638
DIRECTION SIGN — A sign which is permanently attached to the
premises and used to identify the business establishment, commodities
and/or services of said business establishment.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign supported by upright columns, poles
or braces placed in or upon the ground.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which contains a message unrelated
to a business or profession conducted upon the premises where such
sign is located or which is unrelated to a commodity, service or
entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is
located.
PREMISES — The area occupied by a business or other public
enterprise. When more than one business occupies a single building,
each business area shall be considered a separate premises.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign other than a wall sign which projects from
and is supported by a wall of a building.
PROMOTIONAL SIGN — A sign intended for display and normally
used for special events, sales and products offered on the premises.
Promotional signs placed in or on windows do not require permits, are
not included when calculating the number of signs on a premises and
are exempt from square footage requirements.
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected and maintained upon the roof or above
the roof or parapet of a building.
SHOPPING CENTER IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign advertising a
grouping of more than six individual businesses all located in one
building or one lot held in a single and separate ownership.
SIGN AREA — The entire space within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of a sign. When individual letters are
used separately on the surface of a building wall, the spaces between
said letters shall be included in computing the area of the sign. The
structural supports for a sign shall not be included in the area, but all
other ornamental attachments, etc., which are not a part of the main
supports of the sign are to be included in determining sign areas On a
two-sided sign, only one face is counted in computing the sign's area.
SIGN HEIGHT — The greatest vertical dimension between the top of a
sign and the grade.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — Any sign illuminated by electricity, gas or other
artificial light, including reflective or phosphorescent light.
SIGN, INTERIOR — Any sign that is affixed to or painted on the interior
of a window or any sign located inside and within three feet of the face
of the window, which sign is designed to be visible from the exterior of
the window.
WALL SIGN — A sign attached to or painted upon a building wall with
the face area parallel thereto.
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:639
E. Wireless communications facilities. Related words and phrases:
[Added 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 957188]
(1) APPLICANT — Any entity or person that applies for a wireless
communications facility building permit, zoning approval and/or
permission to use the public right-of-way, City-owned land, or other
property.
(2) CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more communications
antennas, on an existing communications tower, or on any
structure that has been approved to support at least one
communications antenna.
(3) COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any antenna and related
equipment attached to a wireless support structure.
Communications antennas shall not include support structures for
antennas or any related equipment that is mounted to the ground
or at ground level.
(4) COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any structure that is constructed
for the primary purpose of supporting one or more communications
antennas, including, but not limited to, self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers and monopoles. DAS hub facilities are
considered to be communications towers.
(5) EMERGENCY — A condition that: (a) constitutes a clear and
immediate danger to the health, welfare, or safety of the public; or
(b) has caused or is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to
be unusable and result in loss of the services provided.
(6) FCC — Federal Communications Commission.
(7) HEIGHT OF A COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — The vertical
distance measured from the ground level, including any base pad,
to the highest point on a communications tower, including antennas
mounted on the tower and any other appurtenances.
(8) RELATED EQUIPMENT — Any piece of equipment related to,
incidental to, or necessary for, the operation of a communications
tower or communications antenna. By way of illustration, not
limitation, related equipment includes generators and base
stations.
(9) STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to
wireless communications facilities which render them more
visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the existing
structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it
minimally visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but
are not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas,
188. Editor's Note: See the Editor's Note at § 410-124A(13) for the purpose and findings of fact
provided by this ordinance.
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:640
building-mounted antennas painted to match the existing structure
and facilities constructed to resemble trees, shrubs, and light
poles.
(10) SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE or SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — A
modification to an existing wireless communications facility that
changes the physical dimensions of a communications tower or
base station if it meets any of the following criteria:
(a) For a communications tower outside the public rights-of-way:
[1] It increases the height of the facility by more than 10%, or
by the height of one additional antenna array with
separation from the nearest existing antenna, not to
exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater;
[2] It protrudes from the edge of the wireless communications
facility by more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the
tower structures are the level off the appurtenance,
whichever is greater.
(b) For a communications tower in the rights-of-way:
[1] It increases the height of the facility by more than 10% or
10 feet, whichever is greater;
[2] It protrudes from the edge of the structure by more than
six feet;
[3] It involves installation of more than the standard number
of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved,
but not to exceed four cabinets;
[4] It entails any excavation of deployment outside the current
site of the communications tower; or
[5] It does not comply with conditions associated with prior
approval of construction or modification of the
communications tower unless the noncompliance is due to
an increase in height, increase in width, or addition of
cabinets.
(11)WBCA — Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S.
§ 11702.1 et seq.).
(12) WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves including, but
not limited to, infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave,
satellite, or radio signals.
(13) WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The antennas,
nodes, control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals,
electronics and other equipment used for the purpose of
§ 410-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12
1:641
transmitting, receiving, distributing, providing, or accommodating
wireless communications services.
(14) WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure,
such as a communications tower or any other support structure
that could support the placement or installation of a wireless
communications facility if approved by the City.
§ 410-12 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-12
1:642
ARTICLE III
Zoning Districts
§ 410-13. Designation of districts.
§ 410-14. Official Zoning Map.
Except for the Flood Damage Control Standards Overlay, which apply to
lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Lock Haven being located within
the boundaries of the Floodplain District as set forth in § 410-84 of this
chapter, the location and boundaries of above-mentioned zoning districts
are hereby established as shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Lock
Haven, as amended, which is attached hereto and is hereby made a part
of this chapter. Said map, or maps, and all notation, references, and
designations shown thereon shall be, as such, a part of this chapter as if the
same were all fully described and set forth herein.
§ 410-15. Zoning district boundaries and interpretation of
boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists regarding the boundaries of the zoning districts
as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the City of Lock Haven, Clinton
County, Pennsylvania, is hereby divided into the following zoning
districts:
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-L Low-Density Residential District
R-M Medium-Density Residential District
R-H High-Density Residential District
CBD Central Business District
GC General Commercial District
GC/LI General Commercial/Light Industrial District
I Industrial District
IP-A Industrial Park - Airport
P/I Public Institutional
B. The following zoning overlay districts include and encompass one or
more underlying zoning districts. These zoning overlay districts impose
additional requirements above that required by the underlying zone:
AO - Airport Overlay
Historic District Overlay
Flood Damage Control Standards Overlay
§ 410-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-15
1:643
§ 410-16. Uses not specifically provided for.
Whenever a use is neither specifically permitted nor prohibited, in any
zoning district established under this chapter, and an application is made
by a property owner to the Zoning Officer for such use, the use may be
permitted in the Industrial Zoning District, but only upon approval of a
special exception, in accordance with the provisions in Article XXIII of this
chapter, by the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 410-17. Annexed and unzoned areas.
For zoning purposes, all areas annexed to the City or which may be
discovered to be unzoned due to administrative oversight or a change in
City boundaries shall be classified as R-1 Single-Family Residential until
such time as this chapter and Zoning Map are officially amended to include
the annexed or excluded areas and classify them in accordance with the
most recent version of the City of Lock Haven Comprehensive Plan.
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such center
lines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following municipality limits
shall be construed as following municipality limits.
D. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be
midway between the main tracks.
E. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streams, rivers or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow
such center lines.
F. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated
in Subsections A through E shall be so construed. Distances not
specifically indicated on the Zoning Map shall be determined by the
scale of the map.
G. Where a zoning district boundary or a municipal boundary divides a lot,
the minimum lot area shall be regulated by the zoning district or the
municipality in which the principal use(s) are located, unless otherwise
provided by applicable case law. The land area within each zoning
district or municipality shall be regulated by the use regulations and
other applicable regulations of each zoning district or municipality.
H. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Zoning Map or in circumstances not
covered by Subsections A through G, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
interpret the district boundaries.
§ 410-15 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-18
1:644
§ 410-18. Application of regulations.
Except as provided herein, no building or land shall hereafter be used or
occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered
unless in conformance with the regulations specified for the zoning district
in which it is located; with the exception of existing nonconformities as of
the effective date of this chapter, which may be altered in compliance with
Article XXI of this chapter.
§ 410-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-18
1:645

ARTICLE IV
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
§ 410-19. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is primarily intended to maintain the lowdensity
household character of the existing neighborhoods, with singlefamily
detached dwellings, parks, schools, places of worship, and other
supportive services that are at an appropriate neighborhood scale.
§ 410-20. Permitted uses.
Only the following uses are permitted within this district, provided that
in addition to the supplemental regulations for specific uses established
in Article XX, all applicable general use provisions in Article XIX and
elsewhere in this chapter are met. Uses permitted by special exception are
subject to the approval by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to a public
hearing set forth with the provisions of Article XXIII of this chapter. Uses
permitted by conditional use are subject to the approval by the City Council
pursuant to a public hearing set forth with the provisions of Article XXII of
this chapter.
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Residential
Single-family
detached dwellings
X
Licensed group home § 410-124A(31) X
Nonresidential
Essential service
installations
X
Forestry § 410-124A(19) X
Parks, playgrounds
and other
noncommercial
recreational uses
§ 410-124A(41) X
Place of worship § 410-124A(44) X
Public/private works
facility
§ 410-124A(46) X
School, public and
private
§ 410-124A(52) X
Accessory
§ 410-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-20
1:647
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Accessory uses and
structures
customarily
incidental to a
permitted principal
use in this zoning
district, not
specifically listed
above or in § 410-22
below
X
Day care, accessory § 410-125C X
Home occupation § 410-125G X
No-impact home
occupation
§ 410-125I X
§ 410-21. Dimensional requirements.
A. Unless further specified in the supplemental regulations for specific
uses established in Article XX and all applicable general use provisions
in Article XIX and elsewhere in this chapter are met, all new permitted
uses and structures (and additions/expansions to existing structures as
specified herein Subsection B) within this district shall comply with the
table of lot and building dimensional requirements.189
B. Applications for zoning permits construction of new principal buildings
or additions/expansions to existing principal buildings. In addition to
the information, required in § 410-145 of this Chapter, applications for
the construction of new principal buildings or additions/expansions to
existing principal buildings in this zoning district shall be submitted
with the following information:
(1) A complete set of calculations (i.e., averages of heights, setbacks,
etc.) used to determine and demonstrate compliance with all
applicable standards set forth in the dimensional requirements for
this district.
(2) A schematic architectural drawing of the principal building's front
facade.
189. Editor's Note: The table of dimensional requirements for this district is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 410-20 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-22
1:648
§ 410-22. Design standards.
In addition to other applicable sections of Article XIX, General Provisions,
all development or uses permitted within this district shall also comply with
the following design standards, as applicable:
A. Signs as required by Article XVII.
B. Parking and loading as required by Article XVIII.
C. Access and traffic control as required by Article XVIII.
D. Landscaping, screening and buffering as required by Article XIX.
E. Storage as required by Article XIX.
§ 410-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-22
1:649

ARTICLE V
R-L Low-Density Residential District
§ 410-23. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is primarily intended to accommodate a wider
variety of housing types and more intensive land use than the R-1 District.
This district preserves the lower-density household character of the existing
neighborhoods, by permitting compatible, low-density residential dwelling
types such as single-family detached, semidetached dwellings, and twofamily,
parks, schools, places of worship, and other supportive services that
are at an appropriate neighborhood scale.
§ 410-24. Permitted uses. [Amended 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
Only the following uses are permitted within this district, provided that
in addition to the supplemental regulations for specific uses established
in Article XX, all applicable general use provisions in Article XIX and
elsewhere in this chapter are met. Uses permitted by special exception are
subject to the approval by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to a public
hearing set forth with the provisions of Article XXIII of this chapter. Uses
permitted by conditional use are subject to the approval by the City Council
pursuant to a public hearing set forth with the provisions of Article XXII of
this chapter.
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Residential
Single-family
detached dwellings
X
Single-family
semidetached
dwellings
X
Two-family
dwellings
X X
Two-family
conversions
X
Licensed group
home
§ 410-124A(31) X
Nonresidential
Essential service
installations
X
Forestry § 410-124A(19) X
§ 410-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-24
1:651
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Parks, playgrounds
and other
noncommercial
recreational uses
§ 410-124A(41) X
Place of worship § 410-124A(44) X
Public/private works
facility
§ 410-124A(46) X
School, public and
private
§ 410-124A(52) X
Accessory
Accessory uses and
structures
customarily
incidental to a
permitted principal
use in this zoning
district, not
specifically listed
above or in § 410-26
below
X
Bed-and-breakfast § 410-125A X
Day care, accessory § 410-125C X
Day care, family § 410-125D X
Home occupation § 410-125G X
No-impact home
occupation
§ 410-125I X
§ 410-25. Dimensional requirements.
A. Unless further specified in the supplemental regulations for specific
uses established in Article XX and all applicable general use provisions
in Article XIX and elsewhere in this chapter are met, all new permitted
uses and structures (and additions/expansions to existing structures as
specified herein Subsection B) within this district shall comply with the
table of lot and building dimensional requirements.190
B. Applications for zoning permits construction of new principal buildings
or additions/expansions to existing principal buildings. In addition to
the information required in § 410-145 of this chapter, applications for
190. Editor's Note: The table of dimensional requirements for this district is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 410-24 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-25
1:652
§ 410-26. Design standards.
In addition to other applicable sections of Article XIX, General Regulations,
all development or uses permitted within this district shall also comply with
the following design standards, as applicable.
§ 410-27. Zoning overlays.
If located within or affected by the following zoning overlay districts,
development or uses shall meet the requirements of the applicable overlay
provisions in accordance with:
the construction of new principal buildings or additions/expansions to
existing principal buildings in this zoning district shall be submitted
with the following information:
(1) A complete set of calculations (i.e., averages of heights, setbacks,
etc.) used to determine and demonstrate compliance with all
applicable standards set forth in the dimensional requirements for
this district.
(2) A schematic architectural drawing of the principal building's front
facade.
A. Building orientation: The front facade of buildings shall be orientated
towards a public street with an entrance provided in this front facade.
B. Signs as required by Article XVII.
C. Parking and loading as required by Article XVIII.
D. Access and traffic control as required by Article XVIII.
E. Landscaping, screening and buffering as required by Article XIX.
F. Storage as required by Article XIX.
A. Article XIV, Airport Overlay;
B. Article XV, Flood Damage and Control Standards; and
C. Article XVI, Historic District Overlay.
§ 410-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-27
1:653

ARTICLE VI
R-M Medium-Density Residential District
§ 410-28. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is primarily intended to accommodate a wider
variety of housing types and more intensive land use than the R-L District,
while also allowing for some neighborhood serving businesses and services.
This district preserves the medium-density household character of the
existing neighborhoods, by generally permitting a range of compatible,
residential dwellings including all forms of housing, parks, schools, places
of worship, and other supportive services that are at an appropriate
neighborhood scale. Additionally, this district permits some neighborhood
oriented retail and service businesses.
§ 410-29. Permitted uses. [Amended 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
Only the following uses are permitted within this district, provided that
in addition to the supplemental regulations for specific uses established
in Article XX, all applicable general use provisions in Article XIX and
elsewhere in this chapter are met. Uses permitted by special exception are
subject to the approval by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to a public
hearing set forth with the provisions of Article XXIII of this chapter. Uses
permitted by conditional use are subject to the approval by the City Council
pursuant to a public hearing set forth with the provisions of Article XXII of
this chapter.
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Residential
Multifamily
dwellings (greater
than or equal to
1,000 square feet of
floor space per unit)
§ 410-124A(36) X
Multifamily
dwellings (less than
1,000 square feet of
floor space per unit)
§ 410-124A(36) X
Residential
conversion to a
multifamily dwelling
§ 410-124A(49) X
Single-family
attached dwellings
§ 410-124A(54) X
Single-family
detached dwellings
X
§ 410-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-29
1:655
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Single-family
semidetached
dwellings
X
Two-family
dwellings
X
Two-family
conversions
X
Licensed group
homes
§ 410-124A(31) X
Nonresidential
Essential service
installations
X
Forestry § 410-124A(19)
Funeral homes § 410-124A(20) X
Libraries X
Neighborhood
retail/service
§ 410-124A(37) X
Parks, playgrounds
and other
noncommercial
recreational uses
§ 410-124A(41) X
Personal care homes § 410-124A(42) X
Place of worship § 410-124A(44) X
Public building § 410-124A(45) X
Public/private works
facility
§ 410-124A(46) X
School, public and
private
§ 410-124A(52) X
Accessory
§ 410-29 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-29
1:656
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Accessory uses and
structures
customarily
incidental to a
permitted principal
use in this zoning
district, not
specifically listed
above or in § 410-31
below
X
Bed-and-breakfast § 410-125A X
Cafe/outdoor dining § 410-125B X
Day care, accessory § 410-125C X
Day care, family § 410-125D X
Home occupation § 410-125G X
No-impact home
occupation
§ 410-125I X
§ 410-30. Dimensional requirements.
A. Unless further specified in the supplemental regulations for specific
uses established in Article XX and all applicable general use provisions
in Article XIX and elsewhere in this chapter are met, all new permitted
uses and structures (and additions/expansions to existing structures as
specified herein Subsection B) within this district shall comply with the
table of lot and building dimensional requirements.191
B. Applications for zoning permits construction of new principal buildings
or additions/expansions to existing principal buildings. In addition to
the information required in § 410-145 of this chapter, applications for
the construction of new principal buildings or additions/expansions to
existing principal buildings in this zoning district shall be submitted
with the following information:
(1) A complete set of calculations (i.e., averages of heights, setbacks,
etc.) used to determine and demonstrate compliance with all
applicable standards set forth in the dimensional requirements for
this district.
(2) A schematic architectural drawing of the principal building's front
facade.
191. Editor's Note: The table of dimensional requirements for this district is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 410-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-31
1:657
§ 410-31. Design standards.
In addition to other applicable sections of Article XIX, General Regulations,
all development or uses permitted within this district shall also comply with
the following design standards, as applicable:
§ 410-32. Zoning overlays.
If located within or affected by the following zoning overlay districts,
development or uses shall meet the requirements of the applicable overlay
provisions in accordance with:
A. Building orientation. The front facade of buildings shall be orientated
towards a public street with an entrance provided in this front facade.
B. Signs as required by Article XVII.
C. Parking and loading as required by Article XVIII.
D. Access and traffic control as required by Article XVIII.
E. Landscaping, screening and buffering as required by Article XIX.
F. Storage as required by Article XIX.
A. Article XIV, Airport Overlay;
B. Article XV, Flood Damage and Control Standards; and
C. Article XVI, Historic District Overlay.
§ 410-31 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-32
1:658
ARTICLE VII
R-H High-Density Residential District
§ 410-33. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is primarily intended to accommodate a wider
variety of housing types and more intensive land use than the R-M District,
while also allowing for some neighborhood-serving businesses and services.
This district preserves the higher-density household character of the
existing neighborhoods, by permitting a range of compatible residential
dwellings including all forms of housing, parks, schools, places of worship,
and other supportive services that are at an appropriate neighborhood
scale. Additionally, this district permits some neighborhood-oriented retail
and service businesses.
§ 410-34. Permitted uses. [Amended 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
Only the following uses are permitted within this district, provided that
in addition to the supplemental regulations for specific uses established
in Article XX, all applicable general use provisions in Article XIX and
elsewhere in this chapter are met. Uses permitted by special exception are
subject to the approval by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to a public
hearing set forth with the provisions of Article XXIII of this chapter. Uses
permitted by conditional use upon are subject to the approval by the City
Council pursuant to a public hearing set forth with the provisions of Article
XXII of this chapter.
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Residential
Multifamily
dwellings
§ 410-124A(36) X
Residential
conversion to a
multifamily dwelling
§ 410-124A(49) X
Single-family
attached dwellings
§ 410-124A(54) X
Single-family
detached dwellings
X
Single-family
semidetached
dwellings
X
Two-family
dwellings
X
§ 410-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-34
1:659
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Two-family
conversions
X
Licensed group
homes
§ 410-124A(31) X
Nonresidential
Bank X
Boarding house § 410-124A(9) X
Day care,
commercial
§ 410-124A(17) X
Essential service
installations
X
Forestry § 410-124A(19) X
Funeral homes § 410-124A(20) X
Laundromat X
Mobile home park § 410-124A(34) X
Neighborhood
retail/service
§ 410-124A(37) X
Parks, playgrounds
and other
noncommercial
recreational uses
§ 410-124A(41) X
Personal care home § 410-124A(42) X
Place of worship § 410-124A(44) X
Public building § 410-124A(45) X
Public/private works
facility
§ 410-124A(46) X
School, public and
private
§ 410-124A(52) X
Accessory
§ 410-34 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-34
1:660
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Accessory uses and
structures
customarily
incidental to a
permitted principal
use in this zoning
district, not
specifically listed
above or in § 410-36
below
X
Bed-and-breakfast § 410-125A X
Cafe/outdoor dining § 410-125B X
Day care, accessory § 410-125C X
Day care, family § 410-125D X
Home occupation § 410-125G X
No-impact home
occupation
§ 410-125I X
§ 410-35. Dimensional requirements.
A. Unless further specified in the supplemental regulations for specific
uses established in Article XX and all applicable general use provisions
in Article XIX and elsewhere in this chapter are met, all new permitted
uses and structures (and additions/expansions to existing structures as
specified herein Subsection B) within this district shall comply with the
table of lot and building dimensional requirements.192
B. Applications for zoning permits construction of new principal buildings
or additions/expansions to existing principal buildings. In addition to
the information required in § 410-145 of this chapter, applications for
the construction of new principal buildings or additions/expansions to
existing principal buildings in this zoning district shall be submitted
with the following information:
(1) A complete set of calculations (i.e., averages of heights, setbacks,
etc.) used to determine and demonstrate compliance with all
applicable standards set forth in the dimensional requirements for
this district.
(2) A schematic architectural drawing of the principal building's front
facade.
192. Editor's Note: The table of dimensional requirements for this district is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 410-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-36
1:661
§ 410-36. Design standards.
In addition to other applicable sections of Article XIX, General Regulations,
all development or uses permitted within this district shall also comply with
the following design standards, as applicable:
§ 410-37. Zoning overlays.
If located within or affected by the following zoning overlay districts,
development or uses shall meet the requirements of the applicable overlay
provisions in accordance with:
A. Building orientation. The front facade of buildings shall be orientated
towards a public street with an entrance provided in this front facade.
B. Signs as required by Article XVII.
C. Parking and loading as required by Article XVIII.
D. Access and traffic control as required by Article XVIII.
E. Landscaping, screening and buffering as required by Article XIX.
F. Storage as required by Article XIX.
A. Article XIV, Airport Overlay;
B. Article XV, Flood Damage and Control Standards; and
C. Article XVI, Historic District Overlay.
§ 410-36 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-37
1:662
ARTICLE VIII
CBD Central Business District
§ 410-38. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is primarily intended to accommodate for a wide
range of pedestrian-oriented and pedestrian-dependent business, public,
and residential uses, in close proximity to one another, within the core of
the City. The district preserves the mixture of compatible and pedestrianfriendly
retail, service, office, public, residential, and other appropriate
uses within buildings that are appropriately scaled and designed to create
distinct storefront character and pleasant gathering, shopping, business,
and living environment for residents, business owners, and visitors alike.
Building forms and types in this district preserve and enhance the
traditional "downtown" character, including buildings that are generally
two to three stories, oriented to and abutting the sidewalk, and include a
mixture of pedestrian-oriented retail and other appropriate businesses on
the lower floors with upper floors used for office, service, and residential
purposes.
§ 410-39. Permitted uses. [Amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 941;
4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 986]
Only the following uses are permitted within this district, provided that
in addition to the supplemental regulations for specific uses established
in Article XX, all applicable general use provisions in Article XIX and
elsewhere in this chapter are met. Uses permitted by special exception are
subject to the approval by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to a public
hearing set forth with the provisions of Article XXIII of this chapter. Uses
permitted by conditional use are subject to the approval by the City Council
pursuant to a public hearing set forth with the provisions of Article XXII of
this chapter.
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Residential
Upper floor
apartment dwelling
units above
permitted
nonresidential use
X
§ 410-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-39
1:663
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Residential uses
may be developed
on the first floor,
rear, but not to
exceed 49% of the
total floor area. No
residential
development will be
permitted along
commercially zoned
street frontage
Nonresidential
Animal hospital/
veterinary clinic
§ 410-124A(3) X
Automated banking
facility
§ 410-124A(4) X
Bank X
Beauty/barber shop X
Boarding house § 410-124A(9) X
Business service X
Club room, club
ground or meeting
hall, private
§ 410-124A(12) X
Coffee house X
Communications
antenna
§ 410-124A(13) X
Crafts or artisans'
studio
X
Convenience store,
general
§ 410-124A(15) X
Day care,
commercial
§ 410-124A(17) X
Emergency services
facility
X
Essential service
installations
X
Farmer/flea market § 410-124A(18) X
Food service X
§ 410-39 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-39
1:664
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Forestry § 410-124A(19) X
Funeral homes § 410-124A(20) X
Health and fitness
clubs
§ 410-124A(22) X
Hotels § 410-124A(25) X
Indoor commercial
recreation
§ 410-124A(26) X
Laundromat X
Libraries X
Licensed group
residence
§ 410-124A(32) X
Massage therapy X
Office, business X
Office, medical X
Parking compound § 410-124A(40) X
Personal service X
Place of assembly § 410-124A(43) X
Place of worship § 410-124A(44) X
Post office X
Public building § 410-124A(45) X
Public/private works
facility
§ 410-124A(46) X
Restaurants § 410-124A(50) X
Retail business X
School, public and
private
§ 410-124A(52) X
Tavern/bar § 410-124A(55) X
Theater X
Accessory
§ 410-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-39
1:665
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Accessory uses and
structures
customarily
incidental to a
permitted principal
use (excluding drivein,
drive-through
facilities)
X
Bed-and-breakfast § 410-125A X
Cafe/outdoor dining § 410-125B X
Day care, accessory § 410-125C X
Home occupation § 410-125G X
No-impact home
occupation
§ 410-125I X
§ 410-40. Dimensional requirements.
A. Unless further specified in the supplemental regulations for specific
uses established in Article XX and all applicable general use provisions
in Article XIX and elsewhere in this chapter are met, all new permitted
uses and structures (and additions/expansions to existing structures as
specified in Subsection B) within this district shall comply with the table
of lot and building dimensional requirements.193
B. Applications for zoning permits construction of new principal buildings
or additions/expansions to existing principal buildings. In addition to
the information required in § 410-145 of this chapter, applications for
the construction of new principal buildings or additions/expansions to
existing principal buildings in this zoning district shall be submitted
with the following information:
(1) A complete set of calculations (i.e., averages of heights, setbacks,
etc.) used to determine and demonstrate compliance with all
applicable standards set forth in the dimensional requirements for
this district.
(2) A schematic architectural drawing of the principal building's front
facade.
193. Editor's Note: The table of dimensional requirements for this district is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 410-39 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-41
1:666
§ 410-41. Design standards.
In addition to other applicable sections of Article XIX, General Regulations,
all development or uses permitted within this district shall also comply with
the following design standards, as applicable:
A. Building requirements.
(1) Building orientation and entrances.
(a) The front facade of buildings shall be orientated towards a
public street, with an everyday public entrance provided in this
front facade.
(b) When buildings are located on corner lots, entrances shall be
provided via one of the following:
[1] One entrance located at and oriented toward the corner
with an appropriate building articulation such as a
chamfered corner, turret, canopy, or other similar building
feature; or
[2] One entrance in each front facade oriented toward each
public street.
(c) All primary building entrances shall be accentuated and
provided with some weather protection. Permitted entrances
types include: recessed, protruding, canopy, awning, portico,
or overhang.
(2) Walls and windows.
(a) Blank walls on building facades facing public streets shall not
be permitted.
(b) A minimum of 45% of a building's first floor facades facing a
public street shall either include windows, doors, or
combination of both.
(c) Smoked, reflective, or black glass is prohibited.
(3) Drive-in/drive-through facilities shall not be permitted.
B. Signs as required by Article XVII.
C. Parking and loading as required by Article XVIII.
D. Access and traffic control as required by Article XVIII.
E. Landscaping, screening and buffering as required by Article XIX.
F. Storage as required by Article XIX.
§ 410-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-42
1:667
§ 410-42. Zoning overlays.
If located within or affected by the following zoning overlay districts,
development or uses shall meet the requirements of the applicable overlay
provisions in accordance with:
A. Article XIV, Airport Overlay;
B. Article XV, Flood Damage and Control Standards; and
C. Article XVI, Historic District Overlay.
§ 410-42 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-42
1:668
ARTICLE IX
GC General Commercial District
§ 410-43. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is primarily intended to accommodate for a
variety of commercial uses and facilities outside of the pedestrian-oriented
and servicing uses and buildings in the CBD, particularly by accommodating
uses and facilities designed for and oriented to conveniently serve
automobile traffic, including drive-through and drive-in businesses. This
district permits a carryover of the retail, service, office, and public uses
from the CBD, but the district is heavily oriented toward providing for more
intense establishments generally requiring more or larger street building
coverage, frontage, parking, signage, etc.
§ 410-44. Permitted uses. [Amended 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
Only the following uses are permitted within this district, provided that
in addition to the supplemental regulations for specific uses established
in Article XX, all applicable general use provisions in Article XIX and
elsewhere in this chapter are met. Uses permitted by special exception are
subject to the approval by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to a public
hearing set forth with the provisions of Article XXIII of this chapter. Uses
permitted by conditional use are subject to the approval by the City Council
pursuant to a public hearing set forth with the provisions of Article XXII of
this chapter.
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Nonresidential
Animal hospital/
veterinary clinic
§ 410-124A(3) X
Automated banking
facility
§ 410-124A(4) X
Automobile, heavy
equipment and
similar motor vehicle
rental and sales
§ 410-124A(5) X
Automotive service
station
§ 410-124A(7) X
Automotive vehicle
repair center
§ 410-124A(8) X
Bank X
Beauty/barber shop X
Business service X
§ 410-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-44
1:669
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Car wash § 410-124A(10) X
Club room, club
ground or meeting
hall, private
§ 410-124A(12) X
Coffee house X
Convenience store,
general
X
Crafts or artisans'
studio
X
Day care,
commercial
§ 410-124A(17) X
Emergency services
facility
X
Essential service
installations
X
Farmer/flea market § 410-124A(18) X
Food service X
Forestry § 410-124A(19) X
Funeral homes § 410-124A(20) X
Health and fitness
club
§ 410-124A(22) X
Home improvement
center, lumber, or
building materials
sales facility
§ 410-124A(23) X
Hotels § 410-124A(25) X
Indoor commercial
recreation
§ 410-124A(26) X
Industrial, light § 410-124A(28) X
Laundromat X
Kennel, commercial § 410-124A(29) X
Massage therapy X
Mini-storage/selfstorage
facility
§ 410-124A(33) X
Motels § 410-124A(35) X
§ 410-44 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-44
1:670
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Multi-mixed use
facility
X
Outdoor commercial
recreation
§ 410-124A(39) X
Office, business X
Office, medical X
Parking compound § 410-124A(40) X
Parks, playgrounds
and other
noncommercial
recreational uses
§ 410-124A(41) X
Personal service X
Place of assembly § 410-124A(43) X
Place of worship § 410-124A(44) X
Plant nursery X
Post office X
Public Building § 410-124A(45) X
Public/private works
facility
§ 410-124A(46) X
Restaurants § 410-124A(50) X
Retail business X
Roadside stand § 410-124A(18) X
School, commercial § 410-124A(51) X
School, public and
private
§ 410-124A(52) X
Shopping center § 410-124A(53) X
Tavern/bar § 410-124A(55) X
Theater X
Upper-floor
residential
X
Accessory
§ 410-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-44
1:671
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Accessory uses and
structures
customarily
incidental to a
permitted principal
use
X
Cafe/outdoor dining § 410-125B X
§ 410-45. Dimensional requirements.
§ 410-46. Design standards.
In addition to other applicable sections of Article XIX, General Regulations,
all development or uses permitted within this district shall also comply with
the following design standards, as applicable:
A. Unless further specified in the supplemental regulations for specific
uses established in Article XX and all applicable general use provisions
in Article XIX and elsewhere in this chapter are met, all new permitted
uses and structures (and additions/expansions to existing structures as
specified in Subsection B) within this district shall comply with the table
of lot and building dimensional requirements.194
B. Applications for zoning permits construction of new principal buildings
or additions/expansions to existing principal buildings. In addition to
the information required in § 410-145 of this chapter, applications for
the construction of new principal buildings or additions/expansions to
existing principal buildings in this zoning district shall be submitted
with the following information:195
(1) A complete set of calculations (i.e., averages of heights, setbacks,
etc.) used to determine and demonstrate compliance with all
applicable standards set forth in the dimensional requirements for
this district.
(2) A schematic architectural drawing of the principal building's front
facade.
A. Signs as required by Article XVII.
B. Parking and loading as required by Article XVIII.
C. Access and traffic control as required by Article XVIII.
194. Editor's Note: The table of dimensional requirements for this district is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
195. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-44 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-46
1:672
§ 410-47. Zoning overlays.
If located within or affected by the following zoning overlay districts,
development or uses shall meet the requirements of the applicable overlay
provisions in accordance with:
D. Landscaping, screening and buffering as required by Article XIX.
E. Storage as required by Article XIX.
A. Article XIV, Airport Overlay;
B. Article XV, Flood Damage and Control Standards; and
C. Article XVI, Historic District Overlay.
§ 410-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-47
1:673

ARTICLE X
GC/LI General Commercial/Light Industrial District
§ 410-48. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is primarily intended to accommodate for a
mixture of more intense commercial uses and facilities that serve and are
compatible with lighter industrial uses and facilities, subject to general
compatibility, design and performance standards to not only help minimize
detrimental impacts on surrounding, lower-density and/or intensity uses
and districts, but also to provide for a high-quality environment for
businesses and employees. The district is intended to provide suitable
locations for a more intense commercial uses and facilities generally
permitted the General Commercial District in the same district as lighter
industrial uses and facilities that, due to the lower intensity nature of
processes, materials, products, etc. and otherwise, would generally be more
compatible with neighboring properties and uses than the more intense
industrial uses permitted in the Industrial District.
§ 410-49. Permitted uses. [Amended 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880;
7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 955; 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 986]
Only the following uses are permitted within this district, provided that
in addition to the supplemental regulations for specific uses established
in Article XX, all applicable general use provisions in Article XIX and
elsewhere in this chapter are met. Uses permitted by special exception are
subject to the approval by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to a public
hearing set forth with the provisions of Article XXIII of this chapter. Uses
permitted by conditional use are subject to the approval by the City Council
pursuant to a public hearing set forth with the provisions of Article XXII of
this chapter.
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Nonresidential
Adult bath house § 410-124A(1) X
Adult body painting § 410-124A(1) X
Adult bookstore § 410-124A(1) X
Adult cabaret § 410-124A(1) X
Adult massage
establishment
§ 410-124A(1) X
Adult mini-motionpicture
theater
§ 410-124A(1) X
Adult model studio § 410-124A(1) X
Adult motel § 410-124A(1) X
§ 410-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-49
1:675
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Adult motion picture
arcade
§ 410-124A(1) X
Adult motion-picture
theater
§ 410-124A(1) X
Adult news rack § 410-124A(1) X
Adult out-call
service
§ 410-124A(1) X
Adult sexual
encounter center
§ 410-124A(1) X
Adult theater § 410-124A(1) X
Adult video store § 410-124A(1) X
Adult, other § 410-124A(1) X
Animal hospital/
veterinary clinic
§ 410-124A(3) X
Automated banking
facility
§ 410-124A(4) X
Automobile, heavy
equipment, and
similar motor
vehicle rental and
sales
§ 410-124A(5) X
Automotive service
station
§ 410-124A(7) X
Automotive vehicle
repair center
§ 410-124A(8) X
Bank X
Beauty/barber shop X
Business service X
Car wash § 410-124A(10) X
Club room, club
ground or meeting
hall, private
§ 410-124A(12) X
Communications
antenna
§ 410-124A(13) X
Contractor's yard § 410-124A(14) X
Convenience store,
general
§ 410-124A(15) X
§ 410-49 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-49
1:676
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Crafts or artisans'
studio
X
Criminal housing
facility
§ 410-124A(61) X
Emergency services
facility
X
Essential service
installations
X
Farmer/flea market § 410-124A(18) X
Food service X
Forestry § 410-124A(19) X
Funeral homes § 410-124A(20) X
Health and fitness
club
§ 410-124A(22) X
Home improvement
center, lumber, or
building materials
sales facility
§ 410-124A(23) X
Hotel § 410-124A(25) X
Indoor commercial
recreation
§ 410-124A(26) X
Industrial, general § 410-124A(27) X
Industrial, light § 410-124A(28) X
Kennel, commercial § 410-124A(29) X
Landscaping center/
nursery
§ 410-124A(30) X
Laundromat X
Massage therapy X
Mini-storage/selfstorage
facility
§ 410-124A(33) X
Motels § 410-124A(35) X
Multi-mixed-use
facility
X
Office, business X
Office, medical X
§ 410-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-49
1:677
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Outdoor commercial
recreation
§ 410-124A(39) X
Parking compound § 410-124A(40) X
Personal service X
Place of assembly § 410-124A(43) X
Place of worship § 410-124A(44) X
Post office X
Public building § 410-124A(45) X
Public/private works
facility
§ 410-124A(46) X
Research and
development
X
Restaurants § 410-124A(50) X
Retail business X
School, commercial § 410-124A(51) X
School, public and
private
§ 410-124A(52) X
Shopping center § 410-124A(53) X
Tavern/bar § 410-124A(55) X
Theater X
Truck repair and
service facility
X
Truck stop/travel
plaza
X
Warehousing,
distributing and
wholesaling
§ 410-124A(59) X
Accessory
Accessory uses and
structures
customarily
incidental to a
permitted principal
use
X
Cafe/outdoor dining § 410-125B X
§ 410-49 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-50
1:678
§ 410-50. Dimensional requirements.
§ 410-51. Design standards.
In addition to other applicable sections of Article XIX, General Regulations,
all development or uses permitted within this district shall also comply with
the following design standards, as applicable.
§ 410-52. Zoning overlays.
If located within or affected by the following zoning overlay districts,
development or uses shall meet the requirements of the applicable overlay
provisions in accordance with:
A. Unless further specified in the supplemental regulations for specific
uses established in Article XX and all applicable general use provisions
in Article XIX and elsewhere in this chapter are met, all new permitted
uses and structures (and additions/expansions to existing structures as
specified in § Subsection B) within this district shall comply with the
table of lot and building dimensional requirements.196
B. Applications for zoning permits construction of new principal buildings
or additions/expansions to existing principal buildings. In addition to
the information required in § 410-145 of this chapter, applications for
the construction of new principal buildings or additions/expansions to
existing principal buildings in this zoning district shall be submitted
with the following information:197
(1) A complete set of calculations (i.e., averages of heights, setbacks,
etc.) used to determine and demonstrate compliance with all
applicable standards set forth in the dimensional requirements for
this district.
(2) A schematic architectural drawing of the principal building's front
facade.
A. Signs as required by Article XVII.
B. Parking and loading as required by Article XVIII.
C. Access and traffic control as required by Article XVIII.
D. Landscaping, screening and buffering as required by Article XIX.
E. Storage as required by Article XIX.
A. Article XIV, Airport Overlay;
B. Article XV, Flood Damage and Control Standards; and
196. Editor's Note: The table of dimensional requirements for this district is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
197. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-52
1:679
C. Article XVI, Historic District Overlay.
§ 410-52 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-52
1:680
ARTICLE XI
I Industrial District
§ 410-53. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is primarily intended to accommodate for a
variety of more intense industrial uses, subject to general compatibility,
design and performance standards to not only help minimize detrimental
impacts on surrounding, lower-density and/or intensity uses and districts
but also to provide for a high-quality environment for businesses and
employees. The district is intended to provide suitable locations for heavy
industrial uses (e.g., raw materials processing; and manufacturing,
assembly, packaging or distribution of heavy or large goods) or more
intense uses that, due to the more intensive nature of the processes,
materials, products, etc., such uses may not otherwise be compatible in
other districts or neighboring properties and uses.
§ 410-54. Permitted uses. [Amended 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 955;
4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 986]
Only the following uses are permitted within this district, provided that,
in addition to the supplemental regulations for specific uses established
in Article XX, all applicable general use provisions in Article XIX and
elsewhere in this chapter are met. Uses permitted by special exception are
subject to the approval by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to a public
hearing set forth with the provisions of Article XXIII of this chapter. Uses
permitted by conditional use are subject to the approval by the City Council
pursuant to a public hearing set forth with the provisions of Article XXII of
this chapter.
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Nonresidential
Adult bath house § 410-124A(1) X
Adult body painting § 410-124A(1) X
Adult bookstore § 410-124A(1) X
Adult cabaret § 410-124A(1) X
Adult massage
establishment
§ 410-124A(1) X
Adult mini-motionpicture
theater
§ 410-124A(1) X
Adult model studio § 410-124A(1) X
Adult motel § 410-124A(1) X
§ 410-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-54
1:681
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Adult motion picture
arcade
§ 410-124A(1) X
Adult motion-picture
theater
§ 410-124A(1) X
Adult news rack § 410-124A(1) X
Adult out-call
service
§ 410-124A(1) X
Adult sexual
encounter center
§ 410-124A(1) X
Adult theater § 410-124A(1) X
Adult video store § 410-124A(1) X
Adult other § 410-124A(1) X
Aircraft assembly
and rehabilitation
X
Automobile
wrecking, junk, and
scrap storage and
sales establishments
§ 410-124A(6) X
Automotive service
station
§ 410-124A(7) X
Automotive vehicle
repair center
§ 410-124A(8) X
Communications
antenna
§ 410-124A(13) X
Communications
tower and
equipment building
§ 410-124A(13) X
Contractor's yard § 410-124A(14) X
Criminal housing
facility
§ 410-124A(61) X
Emergency services
facility
X
Essential service
installations
X
Forestry § 410-124A(19) X
§ 410-54 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-54
1:682
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Home improvement
center, lumber, or
building materials
sales facility
§ 410-124A(23) X
Industrial, general § 410-124A(27) X
Industrial, light § 410-124A(28) X
Landscaping center/
nursery
§ 410-124A(30) X
Mini-storage/selfstorage
facility
§ 410-124A(33) X
Parking compound § 410-124A(40) X
Public building § 410-124A(45) X
Public/private works
facility
§ 410-124A(46) X
Rail yard § 410-124A(47) X
Recycling collection
point, public
§ 410-124A(48) X
Research and
development
X
School, commercial § 410-124A(51) X
Truck repair and
service facility
X
Truck stop/travel
plaza
X
Truck terminal § 410-124A(56) X
Warehousing,
distributing and
wholesaling
§ 410-124A(59) X
Accessory
Accessory uses and
structures
customarily
incidental to a
permitted principal
use
X
§ 410-55. Dimensional requirements.
§ 410-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-55
1:683
§ 410-56. Design standards.
In addition to other applicable sections of Article XIX, General Regulations,
all development or uses permitted within this district shall also comply with
the following design standards, as applicable:
§ 410-57. Zoning overlays.
If located within or affected by the following zoning overlay districts,
development or uses shall meet the requirements of the applicable overlay
provisions in accordance with:
A. Unless further specified in the supplemental regulations for specific
uses established in Article XX and all applicable general use provisions
in Article XIX and elsewhere in this chapter are met, all new permitted
uses and structures (and additions/expansions to existing structures as
specified in Subsection B) within this district shall comply with the table
of lot and building dimensional requirements.198
B. Applications for zoning permits construction of new principal buildings
or additions/expansions to existing principal buildings. In addition to
the information required in § 410-145 of this chapter, applications for
the construction of new principal buildings or additions/expansions to
existing principal buildings in this zoning district shall be submitted
with the following information:199
(1) A complete set of calculations (i.e., averages of heights, setbacks,
etc.) used to determine and demonstrate compliance with all
applicable standards set forth in the dimensional requirements for
this district.
(2) A schematic architectural drawing of the principal building's front
facade.
A. Signs as required by Article XVII.
B. Parking and loading as required by Article XVIII.
C. Access and traffic control as required by Article XVIII.
D. Landscaping, screening and buffering as required by Article XIX.
E. Storage as required by Article XIX.
A. Article XIV, Airport Overlay;
B. Article XV, Flood Damage and Control Standards; and
C. Article XVI, Historic District Overlay.
198. Editor's Note: The table of dimensional requirements for this district is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
199. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-55 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-57
1:684
ARTICLE XII
IPA Industrial Park Airport District
§ 410-58. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is primarily intended to provide an integrated,
high-quality, and flexible mixture of industrial uses and facilities, supporting
businesses, services, and offices, along with uses and facilities compatible
with, associated with and supporting the continued operation of the William
T. Piper Memorial Airport; subject to general compatibility, design and
performance standards, to not only help minimize detrimental impacts on
surrounding, lower-density and/or intensity uses and districts, but also to
provide for a high-quality environment for businesses and employees.
§ 410-59. Permitted uses. [Amended 12-13-2010 by Ord. No. 870]
Only the following uses are permitted within this district, provided that,
in addition to the supplemental regulations for specific uses established
in Article XX, all applicable general use provisions in Article XIX and
elsewhere in this chapter are met. Uses permitted by special exception are
subject to the approval by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to a public
hearing set forth with the provisions of Article XXIII of this chapter. Uses
permitted by conditional use are subject to the approval by the City Council
pursuant to a public hearing set forth with the provisions of Article XXII of
this chapter.
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Nonresidential
Airport. § 410-124A(2) X
Aircraft assembly
and rehabilitation
X
Aircraft maintenance
and storage hangar
X
Aircraft sales X
Airport office X
Airport parking X
Airport runway/
taxiway
X
Airport service
facility
X
Airport terminal X
Airport traffic control
facility
X
§ 410-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-59
1:685
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Bank X
Business service X
Communications
antenna
§ 410-124A(13) X
Communications
tower and equipment
building
§ 410-124A(13) X
Day care,
commercial
§ 410-124A(17) X
Emergency services
facility
X
Essential service
installations
X
Forestry § 410-124A(19) X
Indoor commercial
recreation
§ 410-124A(26) X
Industrial, general § 410-124A(27) X
Industrial, light § 410-124A(28) X
Mini-storage/selfstorage
facility
§ 410-124A(33) X
Office, business X
Office, medical X
Personal service X
Public building § 410-124A(45) X
Public/private works
facility
§ 410-124A(46) X
Rail yard § 410-124A(47) X
Research and
development
X
Restaurants § 410-124A(50) X
Retail business X
School, commercial § 410-124A(51) X
School, public and
private
§ 410-124A(52) X
Truck terminal § 410-124A(56) X
§ 410-59 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-59
1:686
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Warehousing,
distributing and
wholesaling
§ 410-124A(59) X
Accessory
Accessory uses and
structures
customarily
incidental to a
permitted principal
use
X
§ 410-60. Dimensional requirements.
§ 410-61. Design standards.
In addition to other applicable sections of Article XIX, General Regulations,
all development or uses permitted within this district shall also comply with
the following design standards, as applicable.
A. Unless further specified in the supplemental regulations for specific
uses established in Article XX and all applicable general use provisions
in Article XIX and elsewhere in this chapter are met, all new permitted
uses and structures (and additions/expansions to existing structures as
specified in Subsection B) within this district shall comply with the table
of lot and building dimensional requirements.200
B. Applications for zoning permits construction of new principal buildings
or additions/expansions to existing principal buildings. In addition to
the information required in § 410-145 of this chapter, applications for
the construction of new principal buildings or additions/expansions to
existing principal buildings in this zoning district shall be submitted
with the following information:201
(1) A complete set of calculations (i.e., averages of heights, setbacks,
etc.) used to determine and demonstrate compliance with all
applicable standards set forth in the dimensional requirements for
this district.
(2) A schematic architectural drawing of the principal building's front
facade.
A. Signs as required by Article XVII.
200. Editor's Note: The table of dimensional requirements for this district is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
201. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-61
1:687
§ 410-62. Zoning overlays.
If located within or affected by the following zoning overlay districts,
development or uses shall meet the requirements of the applicable overlay
provisions in accordance with:
B. Parking and loading as required by Article XVIII.
C. Access and traffic control as required by Article XVIII.
D. Landscaping, screening and buffering as required by Article XIX.
E. Storage as required by Article XIX.
A. Article XIV, Airport Overlay;
B. Article XV, Flood Damage and Control Standards; and
C. Article XVI, Historic District Overlay.
§ 410-61 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-62
1:688
ARTICLE XIII
PI Public Institutional District
§ 410-63. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is primarily intended to maintain the larger
areas of public and institutional uses and facilities existing within the City.
This district accommodates for wide range of uses and facilities owned,
operated, and associated with Lock Haven University and provides for
other compatible public, service, and institutional-type uses and facilities,
including schools, hospitals, cemeteries, parks, schools, places of worship,
and other supportive services that, due to the large grouping or intensive
nature of such uses and facilities, may not otherwise be compatible in other
districts or neighboring properties and uses.
§ 410-64. Permitted uses. [Amended 12-13-2010 by Ord. No. 870;
7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 955]
Only the following uses are permitted within this district, provided that
in addition to the supplemental regulations for specific uses established
in Article XX, all applicable general use provisions in Article XIX and
elsewhere in this chapter are met. Uses permitted by special exception are
subject to the approval by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to a public
hearing set forth with the provisions of Article XXIII of this chapter. Uses
permitted by conditional use are subject to the approval by the City Council
pursuant to a public hearing set forth with the provisions of Article XXII of
this chapter.
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Nonresidential
Boarding house § 410-124A(9) X
Cemetery § 410-124A(11) X
Communications
antenna
§ 410-124A(13) X
Communications
tower and
equipment building
§ 410-124A(13) X
Correctional facility § 410-124A(16) X
Criminal housing
facility
§ 410-124A(61) X
Emergency services
facility
X
Essential service
installations
X
§ 410-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-64
1:689
Permitted
Use
Supplemental
Regulations By Right
Special
Exception
Conditional
Use
Forestry § 410-124A(19) X
Halfway house § 410-124A(21) X
Hospital § 410-124A(24) X
Libraries X
Licensed group
residence
§ 410-124A(32) X
Nursing homes § 410-124A(38) X
Office, medical X
Parking compound § 410-124A(40) X
Parks, playgrounds
and other
noncommercial
recreational uses
§ 410-124A(41) X
Personal care center § 410-124A(42) X
Personal care home § 410-124A(42) X
Place of assembly § 410-124A(43) X
Place of worship § 410-124A(44) X
Post office X
Public building § 410-124A(45) X
Public/private works
facility
§ 410-124A(46) X
Research and
development
X
School, public and
private
§ 410-124A(52) X
Theater X
University/college § 410-124A(57) X
University housing § 410-124A(58) X
Accessory
Accessory uses and
structures
customarily
incidental to a
permitted principal
use
X
§ 410-64 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-65
1:690
§ 410-65. Dimensional requirements.
§ 410-66. Design standards.
In addition to other applicable sections of Article XIX, General Regulations,
all development or uses permitted within this district shall also comply with
the following design standards, as applicable:
§ 410-67. Zoning overlays.
If located within or affected by the following zoning overlay districts,
development or uses shall meet the requirements of the applicable overlay
provisions in accordance with:
A. Unless further specified in the supplemental regulations for specific
uses established in Article XX and all applicable general use provisions
in Article XIX and elsewhere in this chapter are met, all new permitted
uses and structures (and additions/expansions to existing structures as
specified in Subsection B) within this district shall comply with the table
of lot and building dimensional requirements.202
B. Applications for zoning permits construction of new principal buildings
or additions/expansions to existing principal buildings. In addition to
the information required in § 410-145 of this chapter, applications for
the construction of new principal buildings or additions/expansions to
existing principal buildings in this zoning district shall be submitted
with the following information:203
(1) A complete set of calculations (i.e., averages of heights, setbacks,
etc.) used to determine and demonstrate compliance with all
applicable standards set forth in the dimensional requirements for
this district.
(2) A schematic architectural drawing of the principal building's front
facade.
A. Signs as required by Article XVII.
B. Parking and loading as required by Article XVIII.
C. Access and traffic control as required by Article XVIII.
D. Landscaping, screening and buffering as required by Article XIX.
E. Storage as required by Article XIX.
A. Article XIV, Airport Overlay;
B. Article XV, Flood Damage and Control Standards; and
202. Editor's Note: The table of dimensional requirements for this district is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
203. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-67
1:691
C. Article XVI, Historic District Overlay.
§ 410-67 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-67
1:692
ARTICLE XIV
AO Airport Overlay
§ 410-68. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Lock Haven
Airport Overlay."
§ 410-69. Declaration of policy.
§ 410-70. Airport surface zones.
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created
and established certain zones within the Airport Overlay Zone which include
all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces,
horizontal surfaces and conical surfaces as they apply to the William T.
Piper Airport. Such zones are shown on the William T. Piper Airport Height
Limitation and Zoning District Map prepared by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation, and dated 1989, and the
City of Lock Haven, Clinton County, Pennsylvania Airport Overlay Map,204
which are attached to this chapter and made a part hereof. An area located
A. This article is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by the
Airport Zoning Act, 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5911 et seq.
B. It is hereby found that an obstruction has the potential for endangering
the lives and property of users of the William T. Piper Airport and
property or occupants of land in its vicinity; that an obstruction may
affect existing and future instrument approach minimums of the
William T. Piper Airport; and that an obstruction may reduce the size of
areas available for the landing, takeoff and maneuvering of aircraft,
thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of the William T. Piper
Airport and the public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared:
(1) That the creation or establishment of an obstruction has the
potential of being a public nuisance and may injure the region
served by the William T. Piper Airport.
(2) That it is necessary in the interest of the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare that the creation or establishment of
obstructions that are a hazard to air navigation be prevented.
(3) That the prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished,
to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power
without compensation.
C. It is further declared that the prevention of the creation or
establishment of hazards to air navigation, the elimination, removal,
alteration or mitigation of hazards to air navigation or the marking and
lighting of obstructions are public purposes for which a political
subdivision may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or
interests in land.
§ 410-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-70
1:693
in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone
with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby
established and defined as follows:
§ 410-71. Airport Surface Zone height limitations.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be erected,
altered or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone
created by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height limit
herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are
hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows:
A. Larger-Than-Utility Runway Visual Approach Surface Zone. Established
beneath the visual approach surface. The inner edge of this zone
coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide.
The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,500 feet
at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its
center line is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
B. Transitional Surface Zones. Established beneath the transitional
surfaces adjacent to each runway and approach surface as indicated on
the Height Limitation and Zoning District Map.
C. Horizontal Surface Zone. Established beneath the horizontal surface,
150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which
is constructed by swinging arcs of five-thousand-foot radii from the
center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and
connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs.
The horizontal surface zone does not include the approach surface and
transitional surface zones.
D. Conical Surface Zone. Established beneath the conical surface. The
Conical Surface Zone commences at the periphery of the horizontal
surface and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000
feet.
A. Utility Runway Visual Approach Surface Zone. Slopes 20 feet outward
for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same evaluation
as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000
feet along the extended runway center line.
B. Transitional Surface Zones. Slopes seven feet outward for each foot
upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and the approach surface and extending to a height of
150 feet above the airport elevation, which is 555 feet above mean sea
level. In addition to the foregoing, when an airport has a precision
instrument runway approach zone, there are established height limits
sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides
of and at the same elevation as the approach surface and extending to
204. Editor's Note: The Airport Overlay Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 410-70 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-71
1:694
§ 410-72. Airport zoning requirements.
where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision
instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone,
there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each
foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as
the approach surface and extending a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet
measured at ninety-degree angles to the extended runway center line.
C. Horizontal Surface Zone. Established at 150 feet above the established
airport elevation or at a height of 705 feet above mean sea level.
D. Conical Surface Zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the periphery of the horizontal surface and at 150 feet
above the established airport elevation and extending to a height of 350
feet above the established airport elevation or at a height of 905 feet
above mean sea level.
E. Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure or
growth of any tree to a height up to 50 feet above the surface of the
land.
A. Reasonableness. All airport zoning regulations adopted under this
article shall be reasonable; none shall impose any requirement or
restriction unless it is reasonably necessary to effectuate the purpose of
this chapter. In determining what regulations it may adopt, the City
shall consider, among other factors, the character of the flying
operations expected to be conducted at the airport, the nature of the
terrain within the airport hazard area, the character of the
neighborhood and the uses to which the property to be zoned is put and
adaptable.
B. Use restrictions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter,
no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this
chapter in such a manner as to create electrical interference with
navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and
aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights
and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair
visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards or
otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff or
maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
C. Nonconforming uses.
(1) Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this
chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or
other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming
to the regulations as of the effective date of this chapter, or
otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming
use, except as provided in § 410-73 (relating to permits and
§ 410-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-72
1:695
§ 410-73. Permits and variances.
variances). Nothing contained herein shall require any change in
the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the
construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective
date of this chapter, and is diligently executed.
(2) Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding subsection of
this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or
tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and
maintenance thereon or nearby of such markers and lights as shall
be deemed necessary by the City of Lock Haven to indicate to the
operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of
such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be
installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the City of
Lock Haven.
A. Future uses.
(1) Except as specifically provided in Subsection A(1)(a) through (c),
below, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no
structure shall be erected or otherwise established and no tree
shall be planted in any zone hereby created unless a permit
therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application
for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is
desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined,
whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the
regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the
affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter shall be granted
unless a variance has been approved in accordance with
Subsection D below.
(a) In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and
conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground,
except when, because of terrain, land contour or topographic
features, such tree or structure would extend above the height
limits prescribed for such zones.
(b) In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a
horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of
the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground,
except when, because of terrain, land contour or topographic
features, such tree or structure would extend above the height
limit prescribed for such approach zones.
(c) In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones
beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zones, no permit shall
be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of
§ 410-72 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-73
1:696
vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or
structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic
feature, would extend above the height limit prescribed for
such transition zones.
(2) Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, or
alteration of any structure or growth of any tree in excess of any of
the height limits established by this chapter, except that no permit
is required to make maintenance repairs to or to replace parts of
existing structures which do not enlarge or increase the height of
an existing structure.
B. Existing uses. Before any nonconforming structure may be replaced,
substantially altered or rebuilt, or tree allowed to grow higher or
replanted, a permit must be secured from the City authorizing the
replacement or change. No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming
use, structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than
it was on the effective date of this chapter or any amendment thereto or
than it is when the application for a permit is made.
C. Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the Zoning
Officer determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been
abandoned or more than 80% torn down, physically deteriorated or
decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or
tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from this
chapter.
D. Variance. Any person desiring to erect any structure or increase the
height of any structure, or permit the growth of any object of natural
growth or otherwise use his property in violation of airport zoning
regulations, may apply to the Zoning Hearing Board for a variance from
the zoning regulations in question. A variance shall only be granted
after the requirements of set forth in Article XXIII of this chapter are
satisfied. A variance may be allowed where a literal application or
enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship, and the relief granted would not be contrary to
the public interest but would do substantial justice and would be in
accordance with the spirit of the regulations and this chapter. Any
variance may be granted subject to any reasonable conditions that the
Zoning Hearing Board may deem necessary to effectuate the purposes
of this chapter. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a
determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect
of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe,
efficient use of navigable airspace. Additionally, no application for
variance to the requirements of this chapter may be considered by the
Zoning Hearing Board unless a copy of the application has been
furnished to the airport manager (or person of equivalent description)
for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the airport
manager (or person of equivalent description) does not respond to the
§ 410-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-73
1:697
§ 410-74. Enforcement; notice.
§ 410-75. Appeals.
application within 15 days after receipt, the Zoning Hearing Board may
act without such input to grant or deny said application.
E. Hazard marking and lighting. In granting any permit or variance under
this section, the Board shall, if it deems the action advisable to
effectuate the purpose of this chapter and reasonable under the
circumstances, so condition the permit or variance as to require the
owner of the structure or object of natural growth in question to permit
the City, at its own expense, or require the person or persons
requesting the permit or variance to install, operate and maintain
thereon such markers and lights as may be required by guidelines or
regulations adopted by the FAA.
A. Local enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to
administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applicants
for permits and variances shall be made to the Zoning Officer upon a
form published for that purpose. Applications required by this chapter
to be submitted to the Zoning Officer shall be promptly considered and
granted or denied. Application for action by the Zoning Hearing Board
shall be forthwith transmitted by the Zoning Officer.
B. Notice to department. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a
municipality or board which decides to grant a permit or variance
under this chapter shall notify the Department of Transportation of its
decision. This notice shall be in writing and shall be sent so as to reach
the department at least 10 days before the date upon which the
decision is to issue.
A. Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved or taxpayer affected by any
decision of the City may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board as
provided by law.
B. Reasonable time requirement. All appeals hereunder must be taken
within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the Zoning Hearing
Board. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give
public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the
same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear
in person or by agent or by attorney.
C. Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed from unless the City certifies to the Board, after
the notice of appeal has been filed within, that, by reason of the facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would, in its opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by order of the Board or notice to the City.
§ 410-73 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-75
1:698
§ 410-76. Acquisition of air rights.
In any case in which it is desired to remove, lower or otherwise terminate
a nonconforming structure or use, or the approach protection necessary
cannot, because of constitutional limitations, be provided by airport zoning
regulations or it appears advisable that the necessary approach protection
be provided by acquisition of property rights, rather than by airport zoning
regulations, the City may acquire by purchase, grant or condemnation, in
the manner provided by the law under which municipalities are authorized
to acquire real property for public purposes, such air right, aviation
easement or other estate or interest in the property or nonconforming
structure or use in question as may be necessary to effectuate the purpose
of this chapter. In the case of the purchase of any property or any easement
or estate, or interest therein, or the acquisition thereof by the power of
eminent domain, the municipality making the purchase of exercising the
power shall, in addition to the damages for the taking, injury or destruction
of property, also pay the cost of the removal and relocation of any structure
or any public utility which is required to be moved to a new location.
§ 410-77. Effect on other provisions.
In the event of conflict between any airport zoning regulations adopted
under this chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same area,
whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees and
the use of land or any other matter, and whether the other regulations were
adopted by the municipality which adopted the airport zoning regulations
or be some other municipality or otherwise, the more stringent limitation or
requirement shall govern and prevail.
§ 410-78. Judicial review.
Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the Zoning
Hearing Board may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas as provided by
law. In cases where applicable law does not provide an appeal from a
municipality to a Board, a person or taxpayer may appeal from a decision of
a municipality or joint airport zoning board, as provided by law for similar
zoning proceedings.
§ 410-79. Interpretation of language and captions.
D. Power to reverse, affirm or modify orders. The Zoning Hearing Board
may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm,
in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement,
decision or determination as may be appropriate under the
circumstances.
A. Use of language. Words of any gender used in this chapter shall be held
and construed to include any other gender, and words in the singular
§ 410-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-79
1:699
§ 410-80. Violations and penalties.
§ 410-81. Adoption and amendment.
shall be used to include the plural, unless the context otherwise
requires.
B. Use of captions. The captions or headings of sections in this chapter are
inserted for convenience only, and shall not be considered in construing
the provision herein if any question of intent should arise.
A. Any person, or partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of any zoning ordinance
enacted under this act or prior enabling laws shall, upon being found
liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by a
municipality, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by a municipality as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the municipality may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the
Magisterial District Judge, determining that there has been a violation,
further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating this article to have believed that
there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to
have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date
of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge, and
thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees
collected for the violation of zoning ordinances shall be paid over to the
municipality whose ordinance has been violated.
B. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine finding a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the municipality the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
A. Notice and hearing. No airport zoning regulation shall be adopted,
amended or changed except by action of the City after a public hearing
in relation thereto at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an
opportunity to be heard. The notice shall be published once each week
for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality or municipalities affected. The notice shall state the time
and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be
considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than
§ 410-79 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-81
1:700
§ 410-82. Maximum allowable height.
The following figures and formulas have been prepared for determining
the maximum allowable heights of objects within the airport's vicinity. The
formulas are used in conjunction with the figure; whereas a formula is
assigned a number, that formula corresponds with a point location of the
same number on the figure. By using the formula and following the steps
outlined below, the maximum allowable height at a point location can be
determined.
30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven days
from the date of the hearing.
B. Effective date. Whereas, the immediate operation of the provisions of
this chapter is necessary for the preservation of the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare, an emergency is hereby declared to
exist, and this chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage by the municipality and publication and posting as required by
Subsection A above.
A. Locate the point (object) in question on the figure (sample point
locations identified by numbers are given in various coded airport
zones).
B. Apply the formula having the same number as the chosen point location
to calculate the maximum allowable height for an object at that point
[some formulas will have letter variables (A, B, C, etc.) which are shown
on the figure].
Visual and Utility Nonprecision Runway Zones
Allowable Height Formulas
Location Zone Formula
1. Horizontal Surface Allowable height = established airport
elevation (555 feet) + (150 feet) - (ground
elevation)
2. Conical Surface Allowable height = (555 feet) + (150 feet)
+ (A ÷ 20) - (ground elevation)
3. Primary Surface Allowable height = (555 feet) - (ground
elevation)
4. Transitional Surface Allowable height = (elevation of the
primary surface along the runway center
line perpendicular to the location point) +
(B + 7) - (ground elevation)
5. Transitional Surface Allowable height = (elevation of the
approach surface along the runway center
line perpendicular to the location point) +
(E ÷ 7) - (ground elevation)
§ 410-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-82
1:701
Visual and Utility Nonprecision Runway Zones
Allowable Height Formulas
Location Zone Formula
6. Approach Surface Allowable height = (runway end elevation)
+ (c - 200 ÷ 20) - (ground elevation)
§ 410-82 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-82
1:702
ARTICLE XV
Flood Damage Control Standards Overlay
§ 410-83. Purpose.
A. Declaration of specific intent. The purpose of intent of these provisions
are to prevent the following: loss of property and life, the creation of
health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and
governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure
of public funds for flood protection and relief and the impairment of the
tax base by:
(1) Regulating uses, activities and developments which, acting along
or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities and
development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights,
velocities and/or frequencies.
(2) Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and development
from locating within areas subject to flooding.
(3) Requiring all those uses, activities and developments that do occur
in flood-prone areas to be protected and/or floodproofed against
flooding and flood damage.
(4) Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are
unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards.
B. Applicability. These provisions shall apply to lands within the
jurisdiction of the City of Lock Haven shown on the official Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) of the City of Lock Haven as being located
within the boundaries of the Floodplain District.
C. Compliance. No parcel of land shall hereafter be used and no structure
shall be located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged or
structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms and
provisions of this chapter and any other applicable ordinances and
regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
D. Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Building Code Officer
shall review the application for the permit to determine if all other
necessary government permits required by state and federal laws have
been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);205 the Pennsylvania Dam
Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);206 the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);207 and
the U.S. Clean Water Act, § 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be
issued until this determination has been made.
205. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
206. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
207. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 410-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-83
1:703
E. Interpretation of district boundaries. Where interpretation is needed
concerning the exact location of any boundary of or regulatory
elevation within the Floodplain District, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
make the necessary determination. In making such determinations, the
Planning Commission shall review each case under the advisement of
the City Engineer, City Planner and Code Enforcement Officer, and shall
report its findings to the Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days of
receipt thereof. The persons questioning or contesting the district
boundary or regulatory elevation shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to present his case to the Zoning Hearing Board and to
submit technical evidence. The Zoning Hearing Board shall render a
written decision within 45 days after the last hearing before the Board.
F. Repealer and savings clause. All ordinances or parts of ordinances
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed. It
is the intent that this shall establish complete and exclusive floodplain
management rules and regulations pertaining to construction,
alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy and
location and maintenance of buildings and structures and other
development in the Floodplain District. Nothing contained in this
chapter shall be construed to repeal any local or special law which is
not contrary to this chapter.
G. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
(1) The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this
chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods
may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by
man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings
restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside
the floodplain districts, or that land uses permitted with such
districts will be free from flooding or flood damages.
(2) This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Lock
Haven or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decisions lawfully made hereunder.
H. Partial invalidity and severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph,
sentence, clause, or phrase of this article should be declared invalid for
any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining
portion of this article, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for
this purpose, the provisions of this article are hereby declared to be
severable.
I. Abrogation and greater restrictions for floodplain areas. This article
supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in effect in
identified floodplain areas. However, any other article provisions shall
remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are
§ 410-83 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-83
1:704
§ 410-84. Establishment of Floodplain District.
more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions
of this article, the more restrictive shall apply.
A. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of the City of Lock
Haven, subject to the one-hundred-year flood, which is identified as
Zone A (Area of Special Flood Hazard) in the Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) dated September 29, 2008, and the accompanying maps, or the
most recent revision thereof as issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, including all digital data developed as part of the
Flood Insurance Study.
B. The Floodplain District shall be an overlay to the existing underlying
districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map and, as such, the
provisions for the Floodplain District shall serve as a supplement to the
underlying district provisions. All uses, activities and development
occurring within any floodplain district shall be undertaken only in
strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with all other
applicable codes and ordinances. Where there happens to be any
conflict between the provisions or regulations of the Floodplain District,
the more restrictive provisions and/or those pertaining to the
Floodplain District shall apply.
C. The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific
areas:
(1) FW (Floodway Area). The areas identified as "Floodway" in the AE
Zone in the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the FEMA. The
term shall also include floodway areas which have been identified
in other available studies or sources of information for those
floodplain areas where no floodway has been identified in the Flood
Insurance Study.
(2) FF (Flood-Fringe Area). The remaining portions of the onehundred-
year floodplain in those areas identified as an AE Zone in
the Flood Insurance study, where a floodway has been delineated.
The basis for the outermost boundary of this area shall be the onehundred-
year flood elevations as shown in the flood profiles
contained in the Flood Insurance Study.
(3) FA (General Floodplain Area). The areas identified as Zone A in the
FIS for which no one-hundred-year flood elevations have been
provided. When available, information from other federal, state,
and other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the onehundred-
year elevation, as well as a floodway area, if possible.
When no other information is available, the one-hundred-year
elevation shall be determined by using a point on the boundary of
the identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site
in question.
§ 410-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-84
1:705
In lieu of the above, the City may require the applicant to determine the
elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic
and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers
or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical
methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by City officials.
§ 410-85. Flood damage control standards.
In order to prevent excessive damage to buildings and structures due to
conditions of flooding, the following restrictions shall apply to all new
construction and substantial improvements and other development
occurring in the designated Floodplain District. Said restrictions are
intended to supplement the applicable building code, electrical code,
plumbing code, building maintenance code and this chapter of the City
of Lock Haven; and to the extent these are more restrictive, they shall
supersede said codes and ordinances.
A. Residential structures. Within any identified floodplain area, any new
construction or substantial improvement of a residential structure shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least one foot
above the regulatory flood elevation.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) Within any identified floodplain area, any new construction or
substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least one foot
above the regulatory flood elevation or be designed and
constructed so that the space enclosed by such structure shall
remain either completely or essentially dry during any flood up to
that height.
(2) Any nonresidential structure or any part thereof, having a lowest
floor which is not elevated to at least one foot above the onehundred-
year flood elevation, shall be floodproofed in a completely
or essentially dry manner in accordance with the W1 or W2 space
classification standards contained in the publication entitled
"Floodproofing Regulations" published by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992, or with some other
equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such
floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect which states that the
proposed design and methods of construction are in conformance
with the above-referenced standard.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) is
prohibited.
§ 410-84 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-85
1:706
(2) Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (including
basement) which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle,
building access or incidental storage in an area other than a
basement shall be designed and constructed to allow for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "partially
enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Fill. If fill is used to raise the finished surface of the lowest floor one foot
above the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood:
(1) The top of the fill shall extend 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points.
(2) Fill shall consist of soil or small materials only. Sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted. Fill shall be compacted to provide the
necessary permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring or
settling.
(3) Fill slopes shall be not steeper than one vertical to two horizontal,
unless substantiating data justifying steeper slopes, are submitted
to and approved by the City Code Enforcement Officer or the City
Engineer.
(4) Fill shall be used only to the extent to which it does not adversely
affect adjacent properties.
E. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be constructed and placed on the lot so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of flood water as determined
by the City Engineer.
F. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted practices to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement, thus reducing and decreasing the possibility of the
blockage of bridge openings and other restricted sections of the
watercourse.
§ 410-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-85
1:707
(2) All air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks located at or below the
first floor level shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation.
G. Floors, walls, and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used below an elevation of one foot above the
regulatory flood elevation shall be installed to accommodate a
lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring
grain, without incurring structural damage to the building.
(2) All finished flooring below an elevation of one foot above the
regulatory flood elevation shall be made of materials which are
stable and resistant to water damage resulting from submersion.
(3) Plywood used below an elevation of one foot above the regulatory
flood elevation shall be an "exterior" or "marine" grade and of
water-resistant or waterproof variety.
(4) Basement ceilings below an elevation of one foot above the
regulatory flood elevation shall have sufficient wet strength and be
so installed as to survive inundation.
(5) Window frames, door frames and door jambs used at or below the
lowest floor level shall be made of metal.
H. Electrical systems.
(1) All electrical water heaters, electrical furnace, electrical air
conditioners and ventilation systems and other electrical
installations, except electrical meters, shall be permitted only at
elevations of one foot or more above the level of the one-hundredyear
flood. Electrical meters shall be installed in a location which
provides the highest elevation consistent with reasonable
readability; however, in no case shall meters be installed at less
than six feet above the ground level. All meters installed shall be
resistant to flood damage and be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage.
(2) No electrical distribution panels shall be allowed at an elevation
less than three feet above the level of the one-hundred-year flood.
(3) Electrical circuits serving areas below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be separate circuits and shall be dropped from
above.
(4) Underground electrical wires shall be permitted to buildings and
establishments within the floodplain only if said electrical wires
and the installation thereof meet the requirements of the utility
company serving said buildings or establishments.
I. Plumbing.
§ 410-85 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-85
1:708
(1) Water heaters, furnaces and other mechanical equipment shall be
permitted only at elevations of one foot or more above the level of
the one-hundred-year flood.
(2) No part of any on-site sewage disposal system shall be constructed
within the Floodplain District.
(3) Water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to preclude the infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the
event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Adhesives used below an elevation of one foot above the regulatory
flood elevation shall have a bonding strength that is unaffected by
inundation.
(2) Door and all wood trim used below an elevation of one foot above
the regulatory flood elevation shall be sealed with a waterproof
paint or similar product.
(3) Paints or other finishes used below an elevation of one foot above
the regulatory flood elevation shall be sealed with a waterproof
paint or similar product.
K. Storage. No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, shall
be stored below an elevation of one foot above the one-hundred-year
flood unless they are properly anchored and/or floodproofed to preclude
their causing damage to life and property.
L. Manufactured homes.
(1) Within any FW (floodway area), manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
(2) Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured
homes and any improvements thereto shall be:
(a) Placed on a permanent foundation.
(b) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
1 1/2 feet or more above the elevation of the one-hundred-year
flood.
(c) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
M. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall insure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
§ 410-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-86
1:709
§ 410-86. Hazardous materials and substances.
A. The Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development administrative regulations implementing Act 166,208 the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development,
Strategic Planning and Operations Office, have listed the following
materials and substances as dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzine.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides.
(18)Radioactive substances.
B. Any property that will be used for the production and storage of any of
the above hazardous materials or substances when located in identified
flood-prone areas or which will be used for any activity requiring the
maintenance of a supply (including any amount of radioactive
substances of more than 550 gallons or other comparable volume) of
any such materials or substances on the premises shall be:
(1) Elevated or floodproofed to remain dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet
above the one-hundred-year flood.
208. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 410-86 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-86
1:710
§ 410-87. Administration and enforcement.
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a one-hundred-year flood.
(3) Prohibited if located in an identified floodway area.
C. In addition, the City may attach whatever additional conditions and
safeguards it may deem necessary and reasonable in order to
implement the purposes of this chapter and to protect the general
health, safety and welfare of the public.
A. Permits, information and certification. To insure that the
aforementioned flood damage controls are being employed in all new
construction within the Floodplain District, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall provide the applicant with the location of the proposed
construction with respect to the district limits and the water surface
elevation of the one-hundred-year flood at the proposed construction
site. Building permits shall be required before any new construction,
reconstruction, expansion, alteration, renovation or extension of a
building or structure or any other development activity proposed to
take place in the Floodplain District.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall require the following specific
information to accompany all applications for a building permit:
(a) The accurate location and elevation of the one-hundred-year
floodplain and floodway.
(b) The elevation, in relation to the datum referenced on the
effective maps, of the lowest floor, including basements.
(c) The elevation, in relation to the datum referenced on the
effective maps, to which all structures and utilities will be
floodproofed or elevated.
(d) A plan which details size of structure, finished ground
elevation, lowest floor elevation, level to which the structure is
floodproofed, hydrostatic flood load on walls and floors, types
of walls and floor construction, material and finishes, power
source and elevations, water supply, sanitary facilities and all
floodproofing measures.
(e) Where floodproofing is proposed to be utilized for a particular
structure, the zoning permit application shall be accompanied
by a document certified by a licensed professional engineer
registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or a licensed
professional architect registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania certifying that the floodproofing methods
proposed when required by this chapter and as enumerated in
§ 410-85 are adequate to withstand the flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors
§ 410-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-87
1:711
associated with the base one-hundred-year flood. Copies of
such certificates shall be maintained in the Office of the Code
Enforcement Officer.
B. Altered or relocated watercourse. When an applicant is proposing to
alter or relocate a watercourse, a riverine situation within the City of
Lock Haven, the Code Enforcement Officer shall require the notification
be given to all adjacent communities and the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Dams, Waterways and
Wetlands, and also to Department of Community and Economic
Development (DCED), Strategic Planning and Operations office. Copies
of such notifications shall be submitted to the Federal Insurance
Administration. Such watercourse alteration or relocation shall not
impede the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse involved.
C. Review by the County Conservation District. A copy of all plans for
development of the Floodplain District over one acre in size to be
considered for approval shall be submitted by the Building Official to
the Clinton County Conservation District for review and comment prior
to the issuance of a permit. The recommendation of the Soil
Conservation District may be incorporated into the plan to provide for
protection against predictable hazards.
D. Review of application by other. A copy of all plans and applications for
new construction in the identified flood-prone areas to be considered
for approval may be submitted by the Code Enforcement Officer to any
other appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning
Commission, City Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
E. Nonconformities. A structure or use of a structure or premises which
lawfully existed at the time of the enactment of these provisions may be
continued, subject to the following conditions: the modification,
alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a
conformity (structure and/or use), to an extent of amount of 50% or
more of the market value shall be considered a substantial
improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the
provisions of this and any other applicable ordinance. No expansion or
enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within the
floodway area that would cause any increase in the elevation of the onehundred-
year flood.
F. Variances.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize, upon appeal, in specific
cases, such variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be
contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a
literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in
unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this chapter shall be
observed and substantial justice done. Any variances issued under
the terms of this article are for floodplain management purposes
only, and any such variances shall not be construed as modification
§ 410-87 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-87
1:712
of flood insurance premium rates. The Board may grant a variance,
provided the following findings are made where relevant in a given
case:
(a) The variance, if authorized within the designated floodway, will
not cause any increase in flood levels of the one-hundred-year
regulatory flood.
(b) That the variance, if authorized, shall be generally limited to a
lot size less than 1/2 contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the one-hundred-year
flood level.
(c) That there is a showing of good and sufficient cause, a
determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant, a determination that the
granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of
the public or conflict with other City ordinances.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, shall represent the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(e) Except for a possible modification of the freeboard
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated by special permit and to § 410-86, Hazardous
materials and substances.
(2) The Zoning Hearing Board, upon receipt of the application for a
variance to provisions of this chapter, shall notify the applicant in
writing that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
one-hundred-year flood level will result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such construction below the one-hundred-year flood level
increases risks to life and property.
(3) The Zoning Hearing Board shall maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance, notification
records and report such variance issued in the City's annual report
to the Federal Insurance Administration.
G. Enforcement. All notices, hearing, appeals, findings and orders and
penalties in connection with the enforcement of violations of this
chapter shall be administered under terms of the BOCA Basic Building
Code,209 establishing a code Board of Appeals.
209. Editor's Note: See Ch. 212, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 410-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-88
1:713
§ 410-88. Activities requiring special permits.
A. General. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Department of
Community and Economic Development's administrative regulations
implementing Act 166, the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management
Act,210 the following obstructions and activities are prohibited if located
entirely or partially within an identified flood-prone area unless a
special permit is issued.
(1) Hospitals (public or private).
(2) Nursing homes (public or private).
(3) Jails or prisons.
(4) New mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions and
substantial improvements thereto.
B. Special permit application requirement. Application for a special permit
shall consist of at least five copies of the following items:
(1) A written request, including a completed application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale and date.
(b) A map, which may be drawn at a smaller scale, of the general
area of the municipality, which provides enough information to
enable a person who is unfamiliar with the municipality to
accurately determine the location of the site or property
involved.
(c) Topography based upon the datum referenced on the effective
maps, showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of
two feet.
(d) All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of
the site expressed in acres or square feet.
(e) The location of all existing streets, drives and other
accessways, with information concerning widths, pavement
types and construction, and elevations.
(f) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural
and man-made features affecting or affected by the proposed
activity or development.
210. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 410-88 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-88
1:714
(g) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and
spot elevations concerning the one-hundred-year flood
elevations and information concerning the flow of water,
including direction and velocities.
(h) A general plan of the entire site accurately showing the
location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities and any
other improvements.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing
the following:
(a) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floodplains, sections and exterior building elevations,
as appropriate.
(b) The proposed finished floor elevations of any proposed
building.
(c) Complete information concerning the hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic forces and pressures that will exist during the
course of a one-hundred-year flood, including impact loads.
(d) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures.
(e) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives and
vehicular accessways, including existing and proposed grades.
(f) Profile drawing for all proposed streets, drives and vehicular
accessways, including existing and proposed grades.
(g) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems and other utilities and facilities.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he
represents.
(b) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect
or landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
adequately designed to protect against damage from the onehundred-
year flood.
(c) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect or other qualified person which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the
development during the course of a one-hundred-year flood,
§ 410-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-88
1:715
including a statement concerning the effects such pollution
may have on human life.
(d) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect, which contains a complete
and accurate description of the effects the proposed
development will have on one-hundred-year flood elevations
and flows.
(e) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete
and accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose
buoyant materials or debris that may possibly exist or be
located on the site below the one-hundred-year flood elevation
and the effects such material and debris may have on onehundred-
year flood elevations and flows.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Dams, Waterways and
Wetlands Planning Module for Land Development.
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
(h) Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to,
permits for any activity regulated by the Department of
Environmental Protection under § 302 of Act 1978-166.211
(i) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which
the site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of
a one-hundred-year flood.
C. Review of application for special permit. Upon receipt of an application
for a special permit by the City, the following procedures shall apply:
(1) Within three working days following receipt of the application, all
accompanying documentation shall be forwarded to the County
Planning Commission by registered or certified mail for its review
and recommendations. (The City may send any comments it may
have concerning the application to the City and the Pennsylvania
Department of Community and Economic Development, Strategic
Planning and Operations Office. Copies of the application shall also
be forwarded to the City Planning Commission and City Engineer
for review and comments.
(2) If any application is received that is incomplete, the City shall
notify the applicant in writing, stating in what respects the
application is deficient.
211. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.302.
§ 410-88 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-88
1:716
(3) When an application is approved, the City shall file written notice of
such approval, together with the application and all pertinent
information, with the Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development, Strategic Planning and Operations Office,
within five working days after approval by registered or certified
mail.
(4) A special permit shall be issued for activities to be undertaken in
connection with that proposed in the approved application. But no
work shall commence within 30 days after the notice has been
received by the Department.
(5) If the Department notifies the City and the applicant, in writing,
that the application is disapproved within the thirty-day period
mentioned in § 410-83, the special permit shall not become
effective.
(6) Review by the Department will be limited to checking for
compliance with the requirements of the Act and this chapter.
(7) If the special permit is disapproved by the Department, it shall
notify the City and applicant, in writing, by registered or certified
mail, of its reasons for disapproval.
D. Special technical requirements.
(1) In addition to the requirements of this section, the following
minimum requirements shall also apply. If there is any conflict
between any of the following requirements and those in this
section, or in any other code, ordinance or regulation, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
(2) No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can
be determined that the structure or activity will be located,
constructed and maintained in a manner which will:
(a) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and
any occupants. At a minimum, all new structures shall be
designed, located and constructed so that:
[1] The structure will survive inundation by waters of the onehundred-
year flood without any lateral movement or
damage to either the structure itself, or to any of its
equipment or contents below the one-hundred-year flood
elevation.
[2] The first floor elevation will be at least 1 1/2 feet above the
one-hundred-year flood elevation.
[3] The occupants of the structure can remain inside for any
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any
time during the one-hundred-year flood.
§ 410-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-88
1:717
(b) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property. All
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical concepts,
studies analysis, computations, etc., shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the
City and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development, Strategic and Planning Office.
(c) In approving any application for a special permit, the City may
attach whatever additional conditions and safeguards it may
deem necessary and reasonable in order to implement the
purposes of this chapter and to protect the general health,
safety and welfare of the public.
§ 410-88 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-88
1:718
ARTICLE XVI
Historic District Overlay
§ 410-89. Purpose.
The purpose of this overlay district is primarily intended to:
§ 410-90. Applicability.
A. To promote the retention of community character through preservation
of the local heritage by recognition and protection of historic and
cultural resources;
B. To establish a clear process by which proposed changes affecting
historic resources are reviewed;
C. To mitigate the negative effects of proposed changes affecting historic
resources;
D. To encourage the continued use of historic resources and facilitate their
appropriate rehabilitation and adaptive reuse;
E. To encourage the preservation of historic settings and landscapes;
F. To discourage the demolition of historic resources;
G. To encourage pleasing and harmonious relationships between old and
new buildings and structures that will maintain and strengthen the
architectural character of the historic district; and
H. To implement the following sections of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code: Section 603(g)(2), which states that "zoning ordinances
shall provide for protection of natural and historic features and
resources"; Section 604(1), which states that "the provisions of zoning
ordinances shall be designed to promote protect and facilitate any or all
of the following: . . . preservation of the natural, scenic and historic
values . . . ."; and Section 605(2)(vi), whereby uses and structures at or
near places having unique historical, architectural or patriotic interest
or value may be regulated.212
A. Boundaries. The Historic District Overlay shall be an overlay district
that overlaps and supplements underlying zoning districts. The Historic
District Overlay shall include each lot within the Water Street Historic
District containing a historic resource as shown on the Historic
Resource Map.
(1) All of the provisions of the applicable underlying zoning districts
shall continue to apply in addition to the provisions of this article.
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the Historic
District and the underlying zoning district, the provision that is
most restrictive shall apply.
212. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10603(g)(2), 10604(1) and 10605(2)(vi), respectively.
§ 410-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-90
1:719
(2) Should the boundaries of the Water Street Historic District be
revised as a result of legislative or administrative actions or judicial
decision, the underlying zoning requirements shall continue to be
applicable.
(3) Historic resource map.
(a) Identification.
[1] The City of Lock Haven, Clinton County, Pennsylvania
Historic Resources Map, adopted as part of this chapter,
shows all lots within the Water Street Historic District of
the City that contain a building:
[a] Listed in the National Register of Historic Places,
individually or as a contributing resource in a National
Register Historic District;
[b] Eligible to be listed in the National Register of
Historic Places, individually or as a contributing
building in a National Register Historic District; or
[c] Identified as having local historical and/or
architectural significance.
[2] All lots containing historic resources shall be shown on an
official Historic Resource Map. Such map shall be
maintained at the office of the City Zoning Officer.213
[3] Buildings shall be identified on the Historic Resource Map
as follows:
[a] Class I: denotes historic resources listed in or
determined eligible to be individually listed in the
National Register of Historic Places.
[b] Class II: denotes historic resources that contribute to
an existing or eligible National Register Historic
District.
[c] Class III: denotes all other buildings that are not
historic resources because they are:
[i] Less than 50 years old; or
[ii] More than 50 years old, but not eligible for listing
on the National Register individually, or as a
contributing building within the historic district.
(b) Compliance.
213. Editor's Note: Said map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 410-90 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-90
1:720
[1] A change to any Class I, II or III buildings shall occur only
when in compliance with the terms of this article and other
applicable regulations of this chapter, except as provided
herein this Subsection A(3)(b)[2] below.
[2] With the exception of § 410-91E relating to demolition by
neglect, all other provision of § 410-91 shall not apply to
Class III buildings.
(c) Revisions. The Historic Resource Map may be revised from
time to time by amendment of this chapter by the Lock Haven
City Council pursuant to Article XXII of this chapter.
B. Covenants and easements. It is not intended by this article to repeal,
abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions.
C. Historic District Advisory Committee.
(1) Establishment and membership.
(a) The Historic District Advisory Committee shall consist of nine
members, who shall be appointed by the City Council. Eight of
the members designated hereinbelow shall be voting members.
The remaining one member shall be designated an ex officio
member, who may participate in review and discussions, but
may not vote on any proposal. The membership of the Advisory
Committee shall include:
[1] Four property owners within the Historic District who
have an interest in history, archeology or historic
preservation;
[2] City Planning Commission Member;
[3] City Building Code Enforcement Officer;
[4] Representative from the Clinton County Historical Society;
[5] City Council member; and
[6] City Planner (ex officio, nonvoting).
(b) Each Advisory Committee member shall serve for a term of
three years, which shall be so fixed that no more than three
terms shall expire each year. The Advisory Committee shall
notify the City Council of any vacancies in the Advisory
Committee, and the City Council shall act within 90 days to fill
those vacancies. Appointments to fill vacancies for unexpired
terms shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term.
(2) Functions and duties. In accordance with the purposes of this
article, the Advisory Committee shall have the following functions
and duties:
§ 410-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-90
1:721
§ 410-91. Demolition of buildings.
(a) Maintain a system for the survey and inventory and
photographic documentation of historic buildings, sites,
structures, objects and districts in the City of Lock Haven.
(b) Conduct research on and nominate significant resources to the
National Register of Historic Places and any other appropriate
lists or programs.
(c) Advise the Zoning Officer and City Council on the issuance of
demolition permits for historic resources, as set forth herein
this article.
(d) Review and comment on subdivision or land development
applications which affect historic resources, in accordance
with the requirements and procedures of Chapter 352,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the City of
Lock Haven, Clinton County, Pennsylvania.
(e) Make recommendations to the City Council concerning
revisions, updates or corrections to the Historic Resources
Map.
(f) Maintain an updated list which clearly identifies buildings,
sites, structures, objects and districts and their respective
classifications on the Historic Resources Map.
(g) Advise the City Council or Zoning Hearing Board on all
requests for conditional uses or variances affecting historic
resources.
(h) Review applications for new construction of principal buildings
in the historic district to ensure the new building is consistent
and compatible with the scale and basic design elements of
adjacent and surrounding buildings and with distinguishing
site design elements of the district.
(i) Review applications for the rehabilitation, enlargement or
alteration of historic resources for compliance with the
Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for Rehabilitation and
Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings," as required
herein this article.
(j) Photographically document ongoing changes to the physical
development patterns and landscapes throughout the City.
(k) Perform any other lawful activities which shall be deemed
necessary to further the purposes of this article.
A. General requirements. A Class I or Class II building shall not be
demolished, removed or otherwise relocated unless a conditional use
approval has been granted under this article. With the exception of
§ 410-90 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-91
1:722
§ 410-91E, relating to demolition by neglect, all other provision of this
§ 410-91 shall not apply to Class III buildings.
B. Application procedures. An applicant for a conditional use to demolish a
Class I or Class II building shall submit, in accordance with Article XXII
relating to conditional use standards, a completed application to the
Zoning Officer, who shall forward a copy of the application to the
Historic District Advisory Committee and Planning Commission for
review and recommendation in the time frames provided for in this
article and Article XXII of this chapter. In addition to the requirements
in Article XXII regarding permit applications of this chapter, the
application shall include the following:
(1) Classification of the building for which the permit is being sought
on the Historic Resource Map (i.e., Class I or Class II);
(2) A report from a structural engineer describing the structural
condition of the building proposed to be demolished, removed or
relocated;
(3) A report from the Code Enforcement Officer indicating the
building's compliance with the City's property maintenance
code;214
(4) Documentation of all efforts to sell the property in the preceding
three years;
(5) Recent interior and exterior, digital images or hardcopy
photographs (both in color) of the building proposed for demolition,
removal or relocation;
(6) Proposed disposition of materials;
(7) Timeline for implementation of proposed use for the property;
(8) Date of purchase, purchase price and ownership history of the
property;
(9) Assessed value of the land and improvements thereon;
(10) Certified property appraisal;
(11) For depreciable properties, a pro forma financial statement
prepared by an accountant or broker of record;
(12) Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole
proprietorship, for-profit or nonprofit corporation, limited
partnership, joint venture, or other.
C. The applicant shall provide credible evidence that:
214. Editor's Note: See Ch. 307, Property Maintenance.
§ 410-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-91
1:723
(1) The demolition, removal or relocation of the building in question
will not adversely affect the historic significance or architectural
integrity of neighboring historic buildings or the historic character
of the neighborhood or community;
(2) There is no feasibility to continue the current use;
(3) Other uses permitted within the underlying zoning district, either
as permitted uses, special exception uses, or conditional uses, have
been denied or are not feasible due to constraints on the building
proposed to be demolished, removed or relocated from the
property;
(4) Adaptive reuse opportunities do not exist due to constraints related
to the building proposed to be demolished, removed or relocated or
the lot on which it is located;
(5) The proposed new building, structure or use of the property will
not adversely affect the historic character or architectural integrity
of the neighboring historic properties, the neighborhood, or the
community;
(6) The building proposed to be demolished, removed or relocated,
permitted uses and adaptive reuse potential does not provide a
reasonable rate of return based on a reasonable initial investment;
(7) The applicant has not contributed to the existing conditions, either
through neglect or prior renovation, conversion, alteration or
similar physical action.
D. A permit for the proposed demolition, removal or relocation of any
Class I or Class II building shall not be issued prior to and where
applicable:
(1) The recording of an approved subdivision or land development plan
for the property where the demolition, removal or relocation is
proposed; and
(2) Issuance of any necessary zoning approvals.
E. Demolition by neglect.
(1) No owner or person with interest in real property upon which a
building is situated in the Historic District Overlay shall permit the
property to fall into a state of disrepair so as to result in the
deterioration of any exterior architectural feature which would
produce a detrimental effect upon the character of the historic
district as a whole, neighboring properties, or the life and
character of the property itself.
(2) Buildings and historic resources situated in the Historic District
Overlay shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound, and
reasonably protected against decay, deterioration and vandalism,
§ 410-91 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-91
1:724
§ 410-92. New building construction.
and no building or historic resource shall be permitted to be
demolished by neglect. Examples of such deterioration
contributing to demolition by neglect include:
(a) Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports.
(b) Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members.
(c) Deterioration of exterior chimneys.
(d) Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar.
(e) Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, or
foundations, including broken windows or doors.
(f) Deterioration of any features so as to create a hazardous
condition.
(3) Unoccupied buildings and structures shall be properly sealed,
fenced off, and utilities turned off for safety, at the owner's expense,
in accordance with the provisions of the City's building and/or
property maintenance code,215 and the National Park Service
Preservation Brief # 31 should be used as a resource.
(4) The interior and exterior of the building shall be inspected no less
than annually by the Zoning Officer, Building Codes Officer, and the
owner or person with interest in real property or designated agent
to determine maintenance requirements.
(5) Emergency exception. If, in the interest of public health or safety,
or due to exigent circumstances beyond the control of the property
owner or his agent, and immediate demolition permit is required,
the Zoning Officer may issue such permit in accordance with the
City's building and/or property maintenance code, without the
review of the project by the Historic District Advisory Committee
and approval of a conditional use by the City Council.
A. General requirements. No permits for new principal buildings shall be
issued by the Zoning Officer prior to review and recommendation by the
Historic District Advisory Committee to the Zoning Officer in the time
frame provided for in this article.
B. New construction of principal buildings in the historic district will be
permitted if it complies with the lot and building dimensional
requirements and design standards of the underlying zoning district
ensuring the new building is consistent and compatible with the scale
and basic design elements of adjacent and surrounding buildings and
with distinguishing side design elements of the district. The intent is
215. Editor's Note: See Ch. 212, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 307, Property
Maintenance.
§ 410-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-92
1:725
not to require or encourage new buildings to look like old buildings,
but to assure pleasing and harmonious relationships between old and
new that will maintain and strengthen the architectural character of the
historic district. The following design elements will be considered:
(1) Building height. Shall comply with the underlying zoning district.
(2) Elevation proportion. The relationship between the height and
width of the front elevation of a new building should be within 10%
of the average proportions of adjacent buildings.
(3) Proportion of openings. The relationship of height to width of
windows and doors of a building should be within 10% of the
proportions of windows and doors of adjacent buildings.
(4) Rhythm of solids and voids. The rhythm of solids to voids in the
front facade of a building should be similar to adjacent buildings.
(5) Horizontal lines. Basement sill lines and header and sill lines of a
building should follow the horizontal lines of adjacent buildings.
(6) Spacing of buildings on street. Setbacks and side yards of new
buildings should be similar to those on adjacent parcels.
(7) Roofs. The shape, style, and material should be compatible with
materials commonly used within the historic district.
(8) Building materials. Building materials should be compatible with
materials commonly used within the historic district.
(9) Color. The predominant color of a building and the color of its trim
should be compatible with the colors of surrounding buildings.
(10) Architectural details. The use of specific architectural elements
and details such as porches, dormers, cornices, brackets, quoins,
balustrades and the like may be used to strengthen the relationship
of new construction to the existing architecture of the district.
However, such detailing is not sufficient to assure appropriateness
if the structure is no related to its surroundings in terms of
massing, rhythm and proportions.
C. Application procedures. Applications for any proposed new
construction of principal buildings shall comply with the provisions in
this article in addition to the provisions of Article XXII regarding
permits/applications. The completed application shall be submitted to
the Zoning Officer and shall include:
(1) A written description indicating how the proposed new
construction meets the design standards listed above;
(2) A site plan at a scale designated by the Zoning Officer;
(3) Schematic architectural drawings of the proposed construction;
and
§ 410-92 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-92
1:726
§ 410-93. Alterations, additions, reconstruction and rehabilitation.
(4) Materials list and disposition of existing materials.
A. General requirements.
(1) No permits for alterations, additions, reconstruction or
rehabilitation, visible from a public street, involving Class I, II or III
buildings, shall be issued by the Zoning Officer prior to review and
recommendations by the Historic District Advisory Committee to
the Zoning Officer in the time frame provided for in this article.
(2) No permit/review shall be required for repairs or maintenance of
any building, structure or grounds, provided such repairs do not
change the use or otherwise violate the provisions of this article.
Additionally, no permit/review shall be required for exterior
painting or other material changes to buildings, nor any work
completed on the interior including any changes, modifications,
alterations, painting, etc.
(3) For purposes of this section, "alteration," as applied to a building or
structure, means a change or rearrangement in the structural parts
or in the means of egress; or an enlargement, whether by extending
on a side or by increasing in height or depth; or the moving from
one location or position to another. The definition of terms not
specifically defined this article or Article II of this chapter, shall be
the definition contained in the City of Lock Haven Building Code.216
B. Standards for alterations, additions, reconstruction and rehabilitation.
Any proposed alteration, addition, reconstruction or rehabilitation of a
historic property shall be in substantial compliance with the Secretary
of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with
Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring and
Reconstructing Historic Buildings published by the U.S. Department of
the Interior, National Park Service. These 10 standards are reprinted
(with modifications noted in parentheses) in their entirety below:
(1) A property will be used as it was historically or be given a new use
that requires minimal change to its distinctive materials, features,
spaces and spatial relationships.
(2) The historic character of a property (adjacent properties and
neighborhood) will be retained and preserved. The removal of
distinctive materials or alteration of features, spaces and spatial
relationships that characterize a property will be avoided.
(3) Each property will be recognized as a physical record of its time,
place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical
development, such as adding conjectural features or elements from
other historic properties, will not be undertaken.
216. Editor's Note: See Ch. 212, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 410-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-93
1:727
(4) Changes to a property that have acquired historic significance in
their own right will be retained and preserved.
(5) Distinctive materials, features, finishes, and construction
techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a
property will be preserved.
(6) Deteriorated historic features will be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement
of a distinctive feature, the new feature will match the old in
design, color, texture, and, where possible, materials. Replacement
of missing features will be substantiated by documentary and
physical evidence.
(7) Chemical or physical treatments, if appropriate, will be undertaken
using the gentlest means possible. Treatments that cause damage
to historic materials will not be used.
(8) Archeological resources will be protected and preserved in place. If
such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures will be
undertaken.
(9) New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction
will not destroy historic materials, features, and spatial
relationships that characterize the property. The new work shall be
differentiated from the old and will be compatible with the historic
materials, features, size, scale and proportion, and massing to
protect the integrity of the property and its environment.
(10)New additions and adjacent or related new construction will be
undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the
essential form and integrity of the historic property and its
environment would be unimpaired.
C. Application procedures. Applications for any proposed alteration,
addition, reconstruction or rehabilitation of a Class I, II and III
buildings shall comply with the provisions in this article in addition to
the provisions of Article XXII regarding permits/applications. The
completed application shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer and shall
include awritten description of the proposed alteration, addition,
reconstruction or rehabilitation; and, where applicable:
(1) A site plan at a scale designated by the Zoning Officer;
(2) Schematic architectural drawings of the proposed construction or
alterations;
(3) Materials list and disposition of existing materials.
D. Administrative review. Permits for the activities listed hereinbelow may
be issued by the Zoning Officer without review by the Historic District
Advisory Committee. The Zoning Officer shall provide a record of all
§ 410-93 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-93
1:728
§ 410-94. Historic District Advisory Committee review and
recommendations.
administrative approvals to the Historic District Advisory Committee
for their information:
(1) In-kind replacements.
(2) Replacement of slate roofs with slate look-alike products. The color
selected should be one that most closely matches the slate to be
replaced.
(3) Pointing or repointing of masonry.
A. Completed applications must be submitted to the Zoning Officer to be
placed on the agenda for review at a meeting of the Historic District
Advisory Committee. Said meeting shall be held within 30 days of
receipt of the completed application.
B. Applicant notification. The applicant shall be notified of the date, time
and place at which the Historic District Advisory Committee shall meet
to review the application by the Zoning Officer. The applicant is
encouraged to attend to explain the application.
C. Criteria for deliberation. The Historic District Advisory Committee shall
use the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Historic Properties
with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitation, Restoring and
Reconstruction Historic Buildings and the design elements set forth in
§ 410-92B of this chapter. Any proposed work requiring a permit shall
be in substantial compliance with said applicable guidelines and
standards.
D. Within 15 business days of the meeting, the Historic District Advisory
Committee shall submit their written recommendation to the Zoning
Officer to:
(1) Approve the permit;
(2) Deny the permit; or
(3) Approve the permit, subject to specified changes and/or conditions,
to bring the proposed activity into compliance.
E. The Historic District Advisory Committee's recommendations shall be
in writing and shall include findings of fact related to the specific
proposal and shall set forth the reasons for the recommendation for
approval, with or without conditions, or for denial.
F. The Zoning Officer shall review the recommendations of the Historic
District Advisory Committee and shall take action upon the permit
application in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the
Municipalities Planning Code217 and within the time limits of this
chapter and applicable statutes.
§ 410-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-94
1:729
217. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-94 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-94
1:730
ARTICLE XVII
Signs
[Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 986]
§ 410-95. Application.
Signs may be erected and maintained only in compliance with this chapter
and any and all regulations of the City of Lock Haven relating in any
way to the erection, location, size, height, use, number, lighting, operation,
alteration or maintenance of signs.
§ 410-96. General intent.
The sign regulations, controls and provisions set forth in this article are
made in accordance with an overall plan and program for the public safety,
area development, preservation of property values and the general welfare
of the City of Lock Haven and are intended to aid in traffic control and
traffic safety; preserve and protect property values, lessen congestion of
land and air space; provide against undue concentrations of signs which
distract and endanger traffic safety and traffic flow; establish reasonable
standards for commercial and other advertising through the use of signs in
order to maintain and encourage business activity and area development;
avoid uncontrolled proliferation of signs; recognize the rights of the public
in roads, streets, highways; preserve the wholesome and attractive
character of the City of Lock Haven and to recognize that the general
welfare includes a community plan that shall be beautiful as well as healthy,
spacious as well as clean and well balanced in its growth and development.
§ 410-97. Signs permitted in all zoning districts (unless where
otherwise restricted).
Signs listed in this § 410-97 of this chapter are permitted in all zoning
districts and shall not require permits and shall not be counted when
calculating the number of signs on a premises. Such signs must conform
with the general regulations for signs enumerated hereafter.
A. Signs placed on premises where construction, repair, or renovation is in
progress which shall not exceed 12 square feet in sign area. Such signs
shall be removed within 10 days after final inspection.
B. Signs indicating the occurrence of an event which is limited in duration.
The sign area shall not exceed 32 square feet with no more than two
signs per premises. Such signs shall be removed at the completion of
the event.
C. Government signs or signs erected under the direction of a
governmental body such as traffic signs, safety signs, approved kiosk or
trash receptacle signs and public area identification signs.
D. Traffic, pedestrian or property functional on-premises signs such as
parking, no parking, entrance, exit, telephone, rest rooms, etc., when
§ 410-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-97
1:731
§ 410-98. Prohibited signs.
The following signs shall not be permitted, erected or maintained in any
district:
§ 410-99. Signs requiring approval of a special exception.
The following signs may be permitted in Commercial and Industrial Districts
with approval of a special exception and must adhere to the general and
specific sign regulations of §§ 410-100 and 410-101 of this chapter:
the sign area is less than five square feet and bearing no commercial
advertising. For sight distance situations, these signs shall be erected
to a height either less than three feet or greater than eight feet from
ground grade.
A. Any sign or sign structure which constitutes a hazard to public safety or
health by interfering with the clear sight triangle as defined in Article
XIX of this chapter.
B. Signs which by reason of size, location, content, coloring or manner of
illumination obstruct the vision of drivers or obstruct or detract from
the visibility or effectiveness of any traffic sign or control device. Signs
which contain or are an imitation of an official traffic signal.
C. Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a fire escape,
door, window or other required exitway.
D. Signs incorporating misleading or confusing words to traffic. Such
words, symbols, or phrases shall include "Stop," "Look," "Danger," etc.,
or hide from view any traffic street signal or sign.
E. Signs painted on, attached to or supported by a tree, stone, cliff or other
natural object.
F. String lights or bare bulb illumination of signs other than temporary
holiday decorations. New and used car lots are exempt from this
regulation.
G. Search lights, banners, streamers or balloons except for events
pursuant to the requirements of § 410-97C. Automobile sales lots shall
be exempt from the forty-five-day time period on banners and
streamers, provided they are maintained in a safe condition.
H. No loud, indecent, or obscene advertising matter shall be displayed in
any manner.
A. Flashing signs. Signs which flash, have moving illumination or which
vary in intensity or which vary in color except for digital time and
temperature devices and variable message boards.
B. Portable signs (larger than eight square feet). Signs constructed on a
movable or portable base, sled, trailer vehicles or devices of any type
§ 410-97 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-99
1:732
§ 410-100. Signs in Commercial, Industrial and Public Institutional
Zoning Districts.
where the principal use of the base, sled, trailer vehicle or device is
for the purpose of displaying a sign which is capable of being moved or
transported from one location to another.
C. Off-premises signs. Signs which are related to a business, use or
product not on the property or in a structure on the property. Except as
otherwise provided herein, such signs are limited to a maximum sign
area of 32 square feet; must be either freestanding or wall type; and
only one is permitted for every 60 feet of lot frontage; provided,
however, every lot with less than sixty-foot frontage shall be allowed
one sign. Off-premises signs located on buildings and above the first
floor shall be permitted a sign area of 55 square feet. In the Industrial
District, the sign area shall not exceed 672 square feet.
D. Signs which have any visible moving part, visible revolving parts or
visible mechanical movement.
A. No more than five signs may be erected or maintained on any premises,
except a premises on a corner lot may have one additional sign. Signs
permitted in all districts shall not be counted in calculating the total.
Premises having a public entrance at the rear or side may have an
additional business identification sign for each entrance with sign area
to be limited to one square foot per lineal foot of rear or side building
dimension, but not to exceed a maximum of 32 square feet per sign.
Each awning used as a sign shall be considered one sign and shall be
included when calculating the total number of business signs, but not in
the total square footage for sign area.
B. The total sign area of all business signs per premises (excluding signs
for rear or side entrances) shall not exceed two square feet per front
lineal foot of the main frontage of the premises. A premises which is
totally located within another building shall be permitted a total of 32
square feet of exterior sign area. No premises, however, shall be limited
to less than 32 square feet of total sign area. For corner buildings, the
front dimension shall be that towards the street with the greater rightof-
way, unless obviously otherwise. If the rights-of-way are equal, the
premises owner shall determine the front. In no case shall the total sign
area per premises exceed 200 square feet.
C. The total business sign area per premises with no building on the
property shall not exceed one square foot per front lineal foot of the lot.
No premises, however, shall be limited to less than 32 square feet of
total sign area. For corner lots, the front dimension shall be towards the
street with the greater right-of-way, unless obviously otherwise. If the
rights-of-way are equal, the premises owner shall determine the front.
In no case shall the total sign area per premises exceed 200 square feet.
§ 410-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-100
1:733
§ 410-101. Signs in all zoning districts.
D. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, signs for both onand
off-premises businesses shall be permitted in the Industrial District
and in an area south of East Walnut Street, within 100 feet of the rightof-
way line of Paul Mack Boulevard (S.R. 58 Spur G/S.R. 120); provided
that the maximum permitted sign area of any wall sign or the total of all
signs on a free standing structure shall not exceed 672 square feet with
no single dimension exceeding 46 feet, with the minimum distance
between signs being 500 feet.
A. Family day-care signs, home occupation signs and bed-and-breakfast
signs:
(1) Limited to two per premises, except that corner premises or
premises with public entrances on two or more public ways may
erect three signs.
(2) Nonilluminated.
(3) Each sign shall be limited to a maximum sign area of six square
feet.
(4) No sign shall be larger than six feet in height.
B. Specific sign regulations for residential zoning districts. Unless
otherwise specified herein this chapter:
(1) Limited to two per premises, except that corner premises or
premises with public entrances on two or more public ways may
erect three signs as detailed in § 410-97B.
(2) In no case shall the total sign area per premises exceed 20 square
feet.
(3) Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of six feet.
(4) The use of flashing, pulsating, and moving lights shall be
prohibited.
(5) The use of backlit and internally lit signs shall be prohibited.
(6) The use of external lighting for signs shall be designed to prevent
glare to adjoining properties by employing hooded, shielded, or
screened fixtures that confine glare to the sign or site.
(7) The use of external lighting for signs shall be extinguished at the
time of closing such operation until the time of opening.
C. Signs for businesses in other than Residential, Commercial and
Industrial Zoning Districts.
(1) The total sign area per premises shall not exceed one square foot
per front lineal foot of the main building on the premises.
§ 410-100 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-101
1:734
§ 410-102. Specific sign regulations for Commercial, Industrial and
Public Institutional Zoning Districts.
(2) In no case shall the total sign area per premises exceed 100 square
feet.
(3) Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 10 feet.
A. Projecting signs.
(1) No projecting sign shall extend into the public right-of-way, except
in those instances where the right-of-way extends to the building
face or within five feet of the building face, in which case the sign
may extend up to five feet from the building faces.
(2) Signs up to and including eight square feet shall be at least eight
feet above grade. Signs nine feet to 12 square feet shall be at least
10 feet above grade.
(3) A sign area shall not exceed 12 square feet and the vertical
dimension shall not be greater than six feet.
(4) Only one projecting sign per premises, except that corner premises
or premises with public entrances on two or more public ways may
erect an additional projecting sign toward each public way.
B. Wall signs.
(1) No wall sign shall extend above the top of the wall upon which it is
placed.
(2) No part thereof shall project more than 12 inches from the wall
upon which it is placed.
(3) No part thereof shall extend beyond the left and right extremities of
the wall to which it is attached.
C. Freestanding signs.
(1) Every part thereof shall be located entirely behind the property line
and shall not project over public right-of-way or other adjoining
lands.
(2) The sign area shall be limited to a maximum of 55 square feet, and
a single dimension shall not exceed 11 feet.
(3) No premises shall contain more than one freestanding sign, except
that corner premises or premises with a public entrance to two or
more public ways may erect an additional freestanding sign for and
toward each public way.
D. Roof signs.
§ 410-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-102
1:735
(1) Prior to installation, an engineer's or architect's certification must
be provided to insure installation will comply with local building
codes and standard installation practices. Thereafter, an annual
certification by an engineer or architect shall be submitted stating
that the sign still satisfies all local code requirements.
(2) Illuminated roof signs must be UL-approved.
(3) All roof signs must be constructed to withstand the pressures as
calculated in the following table:
Effective Velocity Pressures for Ordinary Buildings and
Structures
Basic Wind Speed
(mph)
Height
(feet) 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130
Less
than
30
10 10 10 10 13 16 20 23 27
30 to
40
10 10 11 14 17 21 27 31 36
40 to
75
10 10 12 15 19 24 29 34 40
75 to
125
10 12 17 22 28 34 41 49 58
175
to
225
10 14 18 24 31 38 46 54 64
225
to
275
10 15 20 26 33 41 49 59 69
275
to
325
11 16 21 28 35 43 52 62 77
325
to
375
11 16 22 29 37 45 55 65 77
375
to
425
12 17 23 31 39 48 58 69 81
425
to
475
12 18 24 32 40 50 60 72 84
§ 410-102 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-102
1:736
§ 410-103. Permits and fees.
Effective Velocity Pressures for Ordinary Buildings and
Structures
Basic Wind Speed
(mph)
Height
(feet) 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130
475
to
525
13 18 25 33 42 51 62 74 87
527
to
575
13 19 26 34 43 53 64 76 90
575
to
625
14 20 27 35 44 55 66 79 92
625
to
675
14 20 28 36 46 57 69 82 96
675
to
725
14 21 28 37 47 58 70 83 98
725
to
775
15 21 29 38 48 59 72 86 100
775
to
825
15 22 30 39 49 61 73 87 102
(4) One roof sign shall be permitted for every 200 feet of building
frontage; provided, however, that every building with less than 200
feet of frontage shall be allowed one roof sign.
E. The use of external lighting for signs shall be extinguished at the time
of closing such operation until the time of opening. Portable signs are
allowed in private entrances or on private property. Such sign shall be
limited to two per premises and shall be limited to eight square feet and
may also be located on public sidewalks. Portable signs larger than
eight square feet are allowed for special events by written approval of
the Zoning Officer. Such use is allowed for a period of two weeks and no
more than four times per year.
A. All signs, except those enumerated in § 410-97, Signs permitted in all
zoning districts, require a zoning permit in accordance with Article XXII
§ 410-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-103
1:737
§ 410-104. (Reserved)
of this chapter. Issuance by the Zoning Officer can only be made when
such sign complies in every respect with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
B. An application for a sign permit shall be made on a form provided by the
Zoning Officer. Any additional relevant information and material may
also be required by the Zoning Officer.
C. Permits are valid indefinitely unless the sign is structurally altered,
moved or replaced. A new permit is required prior to any structural
alteration, movement or replacement, and its issuance by a Zoning
Officer can only be made when such signs comply in every respect with
all applicable provisions of this chapter.
D. Exceptions to permits are as follows:
(1) Replacing copy or advertising message on an approved sign such
as a billboard, theater marquee or similar approved sign device
which is specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy. This
provision does not apply to painted lettering, symbols, etc., which
utilizes a building for the sign surface. Any such sign shall be
considered a new sign and requires a permit.
(2) Maintenance, including cleaning and normal repair, unless a
structural change is made.
(3) Signs in existence when this chapter was adopted, unless they are
structurally altered, moved, replaced or painted.
§ 410-103 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-104
1:738
ARTICLE XVIII
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Access
§ 410-105. General regulations.
A. Required off-street parking, loading and unloading facilities shall be
provided in accordance with the specifications in this article in all
zoning districts, except that because of its developed nature and the
location of alleys, on-street and public parking, off-street parking,
loading, and unloading requirements shall not apply in the CBD Zoning
District. The facilities required herein shall be available throughout the
hours of operation of the particular business or use for which such
facilities are provided. As used herein, the term "parking space"
includes either covered garage space or uncovered parking lot space
located off or beyond the public right-of-way.
B. Design and location:
(1) Size of parking spaces. Every parking space shall consist of not less
than 171 square feet of usable area, exclusive of interior aisles,
driveways, maneuvering areas, and access drives, and shall
measure not less than nine feet in width and 19 feet in length.
Minimum length for parallel parking 0° shall be 22 feet.
(2) Access. The width of all aisles providing direct access to individual
parking stalls shall be in accordance with the requirements set
forth below. The minimum width of access aisles shall conform with
the following requirements:
Aisle Width
Parking Angle
(degrees)
One-Way Traffic
(feet)
Two-Way Traffic
(feet)
0° parallel parking 12 20
30° 12 20
45° 13.5 20
60° 18.5 20
90° perpendicular
parking
24 24
(3) Location.
(a) Off-street parking shall not be permitted in required front
yards or in front of principal buildings in the CBD Zoning
District, and shall only be permitted in required front yards or
in front of principal single-family and two-family dwellings in
residential zoning districts when located on paved driveways.
Otherwise, off-street parking is permitted in required front
yards and in front of principal buildings in all nonresidential
§ 410-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-105
1:739
zoning districts, provided required screening and buffering
standards of Article XIX of this chapter are met.
(b) Additional parking provisions for CBD Zoning District for both
principal and accessory parking.
[1] No new access drives or driveways shall be permitted
along East Main Street between Jay Street and Mill Street.
[2] Off-street surface parking lots shall not be located on
corner lots, on or adjacent to the intersection of two
streets.
[3] Off-street surface parking lot access drives and/or
driveways shall not extend more than 70 feet in width
along any street frontage.
[4] Off-street surface parking lots abutting public street
rights-of-way, including alleys, shall be provided with a
continuous, street-fronting, three-and-one-half-foot-high
masonry wall or a perimeter planting at least five feet in
depth measured from all sides of the parking area towards
the property/street line with a mix of high- and low-level
screening in accordance with Article XIX of this chapter.
Wall breaks for driveways shall be not more than 24 feet in
width.
(c) Every required parking space shall be designed so that each
motor vehicle may proceed to and from the parking space
provided for it without requiring the moving of any other
vehicle, except for spaces serving single-family or two-family
dwellings.
(d) All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide
sufficient backup area for the end parking spaces of the
parking area. This shall include designing the end spaces to
prevent backing up into an aisle, other than the one on which
the end space directly accesses.
(e) Except for single-family or two-family dwellings with its access
onto a local street right-of-way or parking court, no parking
area shall be designed to require or encourage parked vehicles
to back into a public street right-of-way, other than an alley, in
order to leave a parking space.
(f) Except in the residential and CBD zoning districts or as
provided in § 410-106B of this chapter pertaining to shared
parking, parking spaces may be located on a lot other than that
containing the principal building or use with the approval as a
special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board. Such spaces
shall be readily accessible to the building or use served, be
§ 410-105 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-105
1:740
located in the same zoning district as the principal building or
use, and conform to the following requirements:
[1] Required parking spaces shall be located within 150 feet
of the principal building or use when located on the same
side of the street.
[2] Required parking spaces shall be located within 500 feet
of the principal building or use when linked to a public
sidewalk when located on the same side of the street.
[3] The distances specified herein shall be measured from the
nearest point of the parking lot to the nearest point of the
principal building or use that the parking lot is required to
serve.
[4] The applicant for a zoning permit or use certificate shall
submit, with his application, a legal document approved by
the City that subjects such parcels of land to parking uses
in connection with the principal use to which it is
accessory, guaranteeing the spaces are provided during all
of the years the use is in operation. Prior to the issuance of
a zoning permit, the Zoning Officer shall cause such legal
documents to be recorded in the office of the Clinton
County Recorder of Deeds.
[5] All other requirements of this Article XVIII and this
chapter, including screening and buffering, shall be met.
(4) A garage or carport may be located wholly or partly inside the walls
of the principal building or attached to the outer walls. If separated
from the principal building, the garage shall conform to all
accessory building requirements. The garage may be constructed
under a yard or court. The space above an underground garage
shall be deemed to be part of the open space of the lot on which it is
located.
(5) Setback, buffer and screening.
(a) All parking spaces, interior aisles, driveways, maneuvering
areas, and access drives shall be located at least five feet from
any buildings located on the lot. The five-foot corridor thus
established between the parking area and building shall be for
the purpose of providing a pedestrian access walkway.
(b) All parking spaces, interior isles, driveways, maneuvering
areas, and access drives for multifamily residential and
nonresidential uses shall be at least five feet from any exterior
lot line, except where buffer yards are required, in which case,
such parking spaces may not encroach on the buffer yard area.
§ 410-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-105
1:741
(c) No off-street parking area shall be located within a public
right-of-way.
(d) In addition to buffering and screening in accordance with
Article XIX of this chapter, screening must be provided as a
view-restrictive screen of any parking area of five or more
spaces, and adjacent residential use or zoning district, public
right-of-way, and any on-premises building to screen first floor
windows of said building from the parking area.
(6) Parking lot landscaping.
(a) One deciduous tree shall be required for every 15 new offstreet
parking spaces.
(b) If a lot will include 30 or more new parking spaces, landscaped
islands shall be provided within automobile parking areas.
Otherwise, the trees may be planted around the parking area.
(c) Trees required by this section shall meet the following
standards:
[1] Type of trees permitted. Required trees shall be chosen
from the following list of approved tree species native to or
appropriate for Central Pennsylvania, unless the applicant
proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that
another type of tree would shade paved areas, be resistant
to disease, road salt and air pollution and be attractive.
Botanic Name Common Name
Acer platanoides Norway maple
Celtis occidentalis Common hackberry
Fraxinus Pennsylvania Green ash
Ginkgo biloba fastigiata Maiden hair tree (male
only)
Gleditsia triacanthos Honeylocust
Liquidambar styraciflua Sweet gum
Quercus All species of oaks
Sophora japonica Scholar tree/pagoda tree
Ulmus hybrids Homestead or Sapporo
autumn gold
Ulmus parvifolia Chinese or lacebark elm
Zelkova serrata Zelkova
[2] Quality of trees. Required trees shall be of symmetrical
growth and free of insect pests and disease.
§ 410-105 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-105
1:742
[3] Minimum size. The trunk diameter (measured at a height
of six inches above the finished grade level) shall be a
minimum of two inches or greater.
[4] Planting and maintenance. Required trees shall be:
[a] Planted in conformance with good landscaping
practices, with adequate unpaved surface around
each for water and air; and
[b] Properly protected by curbs, curb stops, distance or
other devices from damage from vehicles.
(7) Surfacing and marking. Any new or enlarged commercial,
industrial, or residential off-street parking area shall be graded for
proper drainage and shall be surfaced so as to provide a durable
and dustless surface, such as concrete or bituminous concrete
surface, and shall be so arranged as to provide for orderly and safe
parking and storage of vehicles. The first 10 feet of private property
from the public right-of-way shall be surfaced with concrete or
bituminous concrete. All such paved parking spaces shall be
marked with paint, provided with wheel stops/bumpers, or other
methods so as to indicate their location. Alternative pavement
sections may be considered if properly designed and then approved
by the City Engineer.
(8) Lighting. All on-site outdoor lighting of off-street parking areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties and
public right-of-way by employing hooded, shielded, or screened
fixtures that confine glare to the site, rather than the area around
it.
(9) Off-street parking interconnections for parking lots with
nonresidential and multifamily residential uses.
(a) Where nonresidential and/or multifamily residential parking
lots abut another nonresidential and/or multifamily residential
parking lot, they shall be interconnected via internal vehicular
connections to one another or connection via a rear alley.
(b) Each nonresidential and/or multifamily residential parking lot
shall provide cross-access easements for its parking areas and
access drives guaranteeing access to abutting nonresidential
and/or multifamily residential parking lots. Interconnections
shall be logically placed and easily identifiable to ensure
convenient traffic flow.
(10) There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress to all
parking and loading spaces designed to be used by employees,
customers, delivery services, sales people and/or the general
public.
§ 410-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-105
1:743
§ 410-106. Parking reductions.
Except for uses in the residential and CBD zoning districts, this section
is a means to meet the minimum off-street parking requirement for uses
by alternative means other than providing on-site, off-street parking, in
accordance with the following provisions:
(11) Handicap parking spaces shall be provided as required by state
law.
A. The use has on-street parking, at a ratio of one parking space for each
22 feet of existing lot frontage uninterrupted (not within five feet of a
fire hydrant, curb cut for a sidewalk, driveway or access drive) and
directly in front of the building.
B. The use is utilizing shared parking in accordance with the following:
(1) Users of shared parking facilities shall be required to show shared
parking is reasonably close in proximity to each use in accordance
with the following standards:
(a) Less than 100 feet. For people with disabilities, deliveries, and
loading, emergency services, fast-food service type restaurant,
and convenience store.
(b) Less than 600 feet. For residents, grocery stores, business and
professional services and medical/dental clinics, hospitals.
(c) Less than 1,000 feet. For general retail sales and services, sitdown
service type restaurant, taverns/bars, employees, social/
fraternal organizations/lodges, places of worship, schools,
municipal uses, parks.
(2) If parking is to be shared by uses located on two or more lots, an
agreement in a form acceptable to the City must be presented
assuring use of the required parking spaces until or unless the
required parking spaces are located on the same lot as the use they
serve.
(3) The minimum amount of shared parking required to be calculated
according to the following:
(a) Calculate the minimum amount of off-street parking required
for each use as if it were a separate use.
(b) To determine the peak parking requirements, multiply the
minimum parking required for each proposed use by the
corresponding percentage in the table below for each of the six
time periods:
§ 410-105 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-106
1:744
Monday through Friday Saturday and Sunday
Uses
8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m. to
Midnight
Midnight
to 8:00
a.m.
8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m. to
Midnight
Midnight
to 8:00
a.m.
Residential 60% 100% 100% 80% 100% 100%
Office 100% 10% 5% 5% 5% 5%
Retail sales/
services
90% 80% 5% 100% 60% 5%
Hotel 70% 100% 100% 70% 100% 100%
Restaurant 70% 100% 10% 70% 100% 20%
Theater/
place of
assembly
40% 80% 10% 80% 100% 10%
Entertainment
(include
social/
fraternal)
40% 100% 10% 80% 100% 50%
Public/
institutional/
school (nonplace
of
worship)
100% 40% 5% 10% 10% 5%
Places of
worship
20% 40% 5% 100% 50% 5%
(c) Calculate the column total for each of the six time periods.
(d) The column total (time period) with the highest value shall be
the minimum parking requirement.
C. The use is utilizing overflow parking reservation in accordance with the
following: overflow parking reservation, which shall include areas of
required parking facilities that may remain unpaved, leveled and
stabilized in a grass condition, but that also may be constructed with
other pervious surfaces acceptable to the City, so as to provide for
overflow parking for other, seasonal or event peak times, shall be
permitted, subject to the following:
(1) The applicant shall submit a plan showing all required parking
spaces, interior driveways, maneuvering areas, access drives, and
buffer areas, designed in strict conformance with all other
requirements of Article XVIII and this chapter, and:
(a) All those parking related improvements and facilities that are
to be constructed.
§ 410-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-106
1:745
§ 410-107. Parking facilities required. [Amended 10-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 863; 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880; 7-11-2016 by Ord. No.
955; 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 986]
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided to lessen congestion in the
streets. Except as provided in § 410-106B, pertaining to shared parking,
and § 410-105, regarding the CBD Zoning District, any structure or building
hereafter erected, converted or enlarged for any of the following permitted
uses, or if there is any change or expansion in use of the premises, offstreet
parking shall be provided with not less than the minimum required
spaces, as set forth in the following table. Any use or building involving
a combination of several uses shall provide the total number of spaces
required for each individual use. Said spaces shall be readily accessible to
the uses served thereby. Fractional numbers greater than or equal to 1/2 of
parking spaces shall be increased to the next whole number.
Permitted Use Minimum Parking Requirements
Adult-related uses 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor
area, plus (1 space) per each employee on
the largest shift
Aircraft assembly and
rehabilitation
1 space per 750 square feet of gross floor
area
Aircraft maintenance and
storage hangar
1 space per 4 hangar bays, plus 1 space
per employee on the largest shift
Aircraft sales 1 space per 15 motor-powered and nonmotor-
powered aircraft, plus 1 space per
employee
(b) All overflow parking reservation spaces which shall be
delineated on the plan and designated as "reserved for future
use," required to meet the minimum number of required
parking spaces but otherwise not to be constructed in full
compliance with the requirements of the chapter.
(2) Overflow parking reservation spaces shall not exceed 20% or more
of the minimum required parking spaces.
(3) All areas designated as overflow parking reservation shall not
count toward any open space or yard requirements.
(4) The applicant shall enter into an agreement with the City agreeing
to design and construct all parking related improvements,
including all related stormwater management improvements,
which have not been previously constructed within six months of
notification from the City. Such agreement shall be in a form
acceptable to the City.
§ 410-106 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-107
1:746
Permitted Use Minimum Parking Requirements
Airport Required spaces shall be provided in
accordance with this schedule for
applicable airport-related uses
Airport office 1 per 400 square feet of gross floor area
Airport parking N/A
Airport runway/taxiway N/A
Airport service facility 1 space per employee on the largest shift
Airport terminal 1 space per 5,000 square feet of gross floor
area, plus 1 space per employee on the
largest shirt
Airport traffic control facility 1 space per facility
Animal hospital/veterinarian
clinic
1 space for every 15 animals based on
maximum animal capacity, plus 6 spaces
per veterinarian
Automobile service station 2 spaces for each 1 service bay area, plus 1
space for each 1 fuel pump, plus 1 space
for each employee on the largest shift.
Required off-street parking may be
provided at gasoline pumps at a ratio of
not more than 2 spaces per each pump (1
on each side) and not more than 1 space
per each indoor service bay area
Automobile, heavy equipment
and similar motor vehicle
rental and sales
1 space per 15 vehicles or units of heavy
equipment, plus 1 space per employee
Automotive vehicle repair
center
2 spaces for each 1 service bay area, plus 1
space for each employee on the largest
shift. Required off-street parking may be
provided at gasoline pumps at a ratio of
not more than 2 spaces per each pump (1
on each side) and not more than 1 space
per each indoor service bay area
Automotive wrecking, junk,
scrap storage and sales
establishments
1 space per 1/2 acre, plus 1 space per
employee
Bank 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor
area, plus 1 space per employee on the
largest shift
Bed-and-breakfast 2 parking spaces for the principal
residence plus 1 parking space for each
bedroom available as a temporary abiding
place
§ 410-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-107
1:747
Permitted Use Minimum Parking Requirements
Boarding houses 1 1/2 spaces per guest/sleeping room, plus
1 space per employee
Business service 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor
area
Car wash 1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor
area of office space, plus additional spaces
as set forth in Article XX
Cemetery 1 space per employee
Coffee house 1 space for each 150 square feet of gross
floor area, excluding kitchen and storage
areas
Commercial recreation,
indoor
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor
area, plus 1 space for each employee on
the largest shift
Commercial recreation,
outdoor
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor
area, plus 1 space for each employee on
the largest shift; or if completely outside of
a structure/building, 1 space per each 3
users at maximum capacity or utilization,
plus 1 space for each employee on the
largest shift
Communication antenna 1 space per each employee on the largest
shift
Communication tower 1 space per each employee on the largest
shift, but in no case less than 2 total
spaces
Contractor's yard 1 space per 750 square feet of gross floor
area of office space/administrative space,
plus 1 per employee on the largest shift
Convenience store, general 1 space per 100 square feet of retail sale
and display floor area
Convenience store,
neighborhood
1 space per 175 square feet of retail sale
and display floor area
Correctional facility 1 space per each 10 cells, plus 1 space for
each employee on the largest shift
Crafts or artisan studio 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor
area, plus (1 space) per each employee on
the largest shift
Criminal housing facility 1 space for every employee on the largest
shift and 1 space for every resident; an
additional 1 space for every 4 beds will be
required for visitors
§ 410-107 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-107
1:748
Permitted Use Minimum Parking Requirements
Day care, commercial 1 per 6 children enrolled, plus 1 space per
employee on the largest shift
Day care, family 2 parking spaces for the principal
residence, plus 1 parking space for every
nonresident employee and 2 parking
spaces for patron use
Dwelling, multifamily 3 spaces per each dwelling unit
Dwelling, residential
conversion for multiple
dwellings
3 spaces per each dwelling unit
Dwelling, single-family
attached
2 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, single-family
detached
2 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, single-family
semidetached
2 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, two-family 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, two-family
conversions
2 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, upper floor
apartment dwelling units
above permitted
nonresidential use
2 parking spaces per dwelling unit, except
in the Central Business District
Emergency services 1 space for each 400 square feet of gross
floor area, plus 1 space per stored vehicle
Food service 1 space per 750 square feet of gross floor
area
Forestry 1 space per employee on the largest shift
Funeral homes 1 space per 4 seats in viewing areas, plus 1
space per each employee, plus 1 space per
each piece mobile equipment, such as
hearses and automobiles
Golf course 4 spaces per hole, plus 1 space per
employee on the largest shift, plus 1/2 of
the spaces normally required for accessory
uses listed elsewhere within this schedule
Halfway house 1 space for every employee on the largest
shift and 1 space for every resident; an
additional 1 space for every 4 beds will be
required for visitors
§ 410-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-107
1:749
Permitted Use Minimum Parking Requirements
Health and fitness clubs 1 space per 125 square feet of gross floor
area, plus 1 space per employee on the
largest shift
Home improvement center,
lumber, or building materials
sales facility
1 space per 300 square feet of indoor gross
floor area, plus 1 space per 500 square feet
of outdoor gross floor area accessible to
the public, plus 1 space per employee on
the largest shift
Home occupation 2 parking spaces for the principal
residence, plus 1 parking space for every
nonresident employee and 2 parking
spaces for patron use
Hospital 1 space per 3 beds, plus 1 space for each
employee on the largest shift
Hotel 1 space per guest sleeping room, plus 1
space per each employee on largest shift,
plus 3/4 of the spaces normally required
for accessory uses listed elsewhere within
this schedule
Industrial, general 1 space for every 800 square feet of total
floor area, plus 1 space for every 25
employees
Industrial, light 1 space for every 800 square feet of total
floor area, plus 1 space for every 25
employees
Kennel, commercial 1 space for every 15 animals based on
maximum animal capacity, plus (1 space)
per employee
Landscaping center/nursery 1 space per 1,000 square feet of retail
sales area
Laundromat 1 space per each 3 washing machines
Library 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor
area, plus 1 space for each employee on
the largest shift
Licensed group home 1 space per 2 beds, plus 1 space for each
employee on the largest shift
Licensed group residence 1 space per resident based on maximum
occupancy, plus 1 space for guest parking
for each 4 residents based on maximum
occupancy
Massage therapy 1 space per 200 feet of gross floor area
§ 410-107 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-107
1:750
Permitted Use Minimum Parking Requirements
Mini-storage/self-storage
facility
1 space per 25 units, plus 1 space for each
employee
Mobile home park See Article XX
Motel 1 space per guest sleeping room, plus 1
space per each employee on largest shift,
plus 3/4 of the spaces normally required
for accessory uses listed elsewhere within
this schedule
Neighborhood retail/service
(other than convenience
store, neighborhood)
3/4 of the spaces normally required for
permitted principal uses for neighborhood
retail/service in Articles II and XX of this
chapter, as listed elsewhere within this
schedule
Nursing home 1 space per 5 beds, plus 1 space for each
employee on the largest shift
Office, business 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor
area
Office/clinic, medical 5 spaces for each 1 doctor or dentist, plus
1 space per employee
Other commercial/office
buildings and uses
1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor,
plus 1 space per employee
Parking compound 1 space for each employee on the largest
shift
Parks, playgrounds and
playfields
5 spaces per 1 acre or portion thereof
Personal care center 1 space for every employee on the largest
shift and 1 space for every resident; an
additional 1 space for every 4 beds will be
required for visitors
Personal care home 1 space per 5 beds, plus 1 space for each
employee on the largest shift
Personal service business 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor
area
Place of assembly 1 space per 3 seats based on maximum
seating capacity, or 1 space per 250 square
feet of gross floor area, whichever is larger
Place of worship 1 space per 3 seats based on maximum
seating capacity, or 1 space per 250 square
feet of gross floor area, whichever is larger
§ 410-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-107
1:751
Permitted Use Minimum Parking Requirements
Post office 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor
of public area, plus 1 space per employee
on largest shift
Private club rooms, lodges,
and social halls
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor
area, plus 1 space for each employee on
the largest shift
Public/private works facility 1 space for each 400 square feet of gross
floor area, plus 1 space per stored vehicle
Public building 1 space for each employee on the largest
shift, plus 1 space per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Rail yard 1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area of office space, plus 1 space per
employee on the largest shift
Recycling collection point,
public
1 space per container for each type of
material stored
Research and development 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor
area
Restaurant 1 space per 50 square feet of floor area
available to the public, plus 1 space per
each employee on the largest shift
Retail business 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor
area, plus 1 space per each employee on
the largest shift
School, commercial 1 space per 2 students enrolled, plus 1
space per employee on the largest shift
Schools, private and public
(elementary and middle
school)
1 space for each 30 students enrolled, plus
1 space per employee, plus 1 space for
each 30 seats for auditorium, gymnasium,
or multipurpose room
Shopping center 200 square feet of gross floor area
Tavern/bar 1 space per 50 square feet of floor area
available to the public, plus 1 space per
each employee on the largest shift
Theater 1 space per 3 seats based on maximum
seating capacity, or 1 space per 250 square
feet of gross floor area, whichever is larger
Treatment center 1 space for every employee on the largest
shift and 1 space for every resident; an
additional 1 space for every 4 beds will be
required for visitors
§ 410-107 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-107
1:752
Permitted Use Minimum Parking Requirements
Truck repair/service center 2 spaces for each 1 service bay area, plus 1
space for each 1 fuel pump, plus 1 space
for each employee on the largest shift.
Required off-street parking may be
provided at gasoline pumps at a ratio of
not more than 2 spaces per each pump (1
on each side) and not more than 1 space
per each indoor service bay area.
Truck stop/travel plaza 1 space for every 75 square feet of floor
area available to the public in a restaurant/
café, plus 1 space for every employee on
the largest shift. In addition, 1 space for
every 125 square feet of retail sale and
display area for a convenience store within
the premises.
Truck terminal 1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area of the building up to 20,000 square
feet, plus 1 space for each 2,000 square
feet gross floor area of the building up
between 20,000 square feet and 40,000
square feet, plus 1 space for each 3,000
square feet gross floor area of the building
in excess of 40,000 square feet. In addition
to the off-street parking requirements and
when there are 10 or more loading berths
provided, trailer parking spaces shall be
provided at 1 trailer parking space for
each 4 loading berths.
University housing 1 space per 2 occupants, plus 1 guest
space for every 10 dwelling units, plus 1
space for each employee on the largest
shift of the on-site management
§ 410-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-107
1:753
Permitted Use Minimum Parking Requirements
University/college 1 parking space for every students enrolled
excluding students housed on campus, plus
1 space for every employee, plus 1 space
for every 10 seats in an auditorium,
gymnasium and stadium, plus 1 space for
every 2 occupants in a dormitory or
university housing, plus 1 guest space for
every 10 dwelling units, plus 1 space for
each employee on the largest shift of the
on-site management if not provided by an
employee of the university or foundation.
Property owned by the college or
university that is not contiguous with main
campus must provide parking on the site
that is not contiguous with the main
campus as follows: 1 parking space for
every five classroom seats and 1 parking
space for every 200 square feet of floor
area for office space provided.
Warehousing and wholesale
trade establishments
1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area of the building up to 20,000 square
feet, plus (1 space) for each 2,000 square
feet gross floor area of the building up
between 20,000 square feet and 40,000
square feet, plus (1 space) for each 3,000
square feet gross floor area of the building
in excess of 40,000 square feet. In addition
to the off-street parking requirements and
when there are 10 or more loading berths
provided, trailer parking spaces shall be
provided at 1 trailer parking space for
each 4 loading berths.
§ 410-108. Prohibited uses of a parking lot.
Off-street parking lots are for the sole purposes of accommodating the
passenger vehicles of persons associated with the use that requires them.
Parking lots shall not be used for the following:
A. The sale, display or storage of automobiles or other merchandise;
B. Parking/storage of vehicles accessory to the use;
C. Performing services (including services to vehicles);
D. Loading and unloading purposes, except during hours when business
operations are suspended;
§ 410-107 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-108
1:754
§ 410-109. Off-street loading and unloading space requirements.
Off-street loading berths, open or enclosed, are permitted accessory to any
use (except single- or two-family residences and uses within the CBD Zoning
District), subject to the following minimum provisions:
E. Temporary storage units and trash/waste disposal (e.g., pallets,
cardboard); or
F. Recreational vehicle parking (when vehicles not in store).
A. Accessory off-street loading berths for any use requiring receipt or
distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise shall be provided in
accordance with the table below. Any land which is developed as a unit
under single ownership and control shall be considered a single lot for
the purpose of these minimum loading requirements.
Use
One Berth for
Each
One Additional Berth for
Each
For a public library,
museum or similar
quasi-public
institution or
governmental/public
building, hospital,
nursing home,
institution for
children or the aged
or school
10,000 square
feet of floor area
Additional 25,000 square
feet or fraction thereof
For buildings with
professional,
governmental or
business offices or
laboratory
establishments
10,000 to 25,000
square feet of
floor area
Additional 25,000 square
feet or fraction thereof up
to 100,000 square feet, plus
an additional berth for each
additional 50,000 square
feet or fraction thereof over
100,000 square feet
For buildings with
offices and retail sales
and service
establishments
8,000 to 25,000
square feet of
floor area
Additional 25,000 square
feet of floor area or fraction
thereof so used
For funeral homes Use (shall be at
least 10 feet
wide, 20 feet
long and 14 feet
high)
For hotels and motels For each 25,000
square feet of
floor area
§ 410-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-109
1:755
Use
One Berth for
Each
One Additional Berth for
Each
For manufacturing,
wholesale and storage
uses
For 5,000 to
10,000 square
feet of floor area
in such use
Additional 20,000 square
feet of floor area or fraction
thereof so used
B. Size of spaces. Each required loading berth shall be at least 10 feet
wide, 35 feet long, and 15 feet high, and for warehouse buildings or
buildings accommodating tractor trailer, the minimum off-street
loading/unloading space size shall be increased to 12 feet wide and 70
feet long, except as required in Subsection E.
C. Location and access.
(1) Unobstructed access, at least 10 feet wide, to and from a street
shall be provided. Such access may be combined with access to a
parking lot. All permitted or required loading berths shall be on the
same lot as the use to which they are accessory. No entrance or exit
for any off-street parking area shall be located within 35 feet of any
street intersection. No off-street loading berth shall be located in
any front yard. Required off-street parking space shall not be used
for loading and unloading purposes, except during hours when
business operations are suspended.
(2) All areas for the loading and unloading of vehicles and for the
servicing of establishments or shops shall have adequate and
unobstructed access from a street, access drive, service driveway
or alley and shall be so arranged that they may be used without
blocking or otherwise interfering with the use of automobile
accessways, parking facilities, fire lanes or sidewalks.
(3) All loading and unloading areas shall be designed so vehicles using
the loading and unloading spaces are not required to aback into a
public street, other than an alley.
(4) Screening and buffering shall be provided in accordance with
Article XIX of this chapter.
D. Surfacing. All open off-street loading/unloading spaces shall be
improved with a compacted base, surfaced with bituminous concrete or
cement concrete pavement of adequate thickness to support the weight
of a fully loaded vehicle.
E. The Zoning Hearing Board may waive or reduce unloading
requirements in certain situations, such as proof that the business is of
such a nature that deliveries are infrequent or during off hours or made
by vehicles smaller than tractor trailers.
§ 410-109 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-110
1:756
§ 410-110. Maintenance of off-street parking and loading areas.
Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private off-street parking
or loading area shall be maintained in good condition free of hazards
and deterioration. All pavement areas, sidewalks, curbs, drainage facilities,
lighting, bumpers, guardrails, markings, signs, bicycle parking devices,
landscaping and other improvements shall be maintained in workable, safe
and good condition.
§ 410-111. Access to lots, off-street parking, and loading areas.
In addition to any requirements in Chapter 352, Subdivision and Land
Development, and Chapter 346, Street and Sidewalks, and PennDOT
standards regarding access to lots via access drives, driveways, and curb
cuts in all new driveways, access drives and curb cuts shall comply with the
following provisions. Access to and from all off-street parking, loading and
vehicle service areas along public rights-of-way shall consist of well-defined
separate or common entrances and exits and shall comply with the following
provisions:
A. Access.
(1) Lot access shall be provided to the street of lesser classification
when there is more than one street classification involved; this
provision specifically includes alleys.
(2) Lot access shall generally be provided at the rear of lots for lots
abutting alleys.
(3) Lot access shall generally not be taken from the front of the
property for lots abutting alleys.
(4) New curb cuts shall generally be prohibited along a public street
(other than an alley) for lots abutting alleys.
(5) No new access drives or driveways shall be permitted along East
Main Street, between Jay Street and Mill Street.
B. Residential driveway regulations. All single-family and two-family
dwelling driveways shall conform to the following:
(1) The number of driveways may not exceed two per lot on a street
frontage.
(2) Driveways shall be a minimum of 10 feet, and shall not exceed 20
feet at the right-of-way line, excluding driveway radii.
(3) Driveways must be located in safe relationship to sight distance
and barriers to vision. The drive may not exceed a slope of 4%
within 50 feet of the street right-of-way line. Where a drive enters a
bank through a cut, the shoulders of the cut may not exceed 50% in
slope within 25 feet of the point the drive intersects the right-ofway.
§ 410-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-111
1:757
(4) A clear sight triangle in conformance with this chapter shall be
provided for driveways.
C. Multifamily residential and nonresidential access drive requirements.
(1) Number per lot. Except as specified elsewhere, the number of
access drives intersecting with each street shall not exceed two per
lot or street frontage.
(2) Setbacks. All access drives shall be set back at least:
(a) Thirty five feet from any other access drive or driveway located
upon the same lot.
(b) Five feet from any side and/or rear property lines; however,
this setback shall be excluded along the property line when a
parking interconnections in accordance with § 410-105A for
joint parking lot if shared by adjoining uses.
(c) Thirty-five feet from the nearest curbline of any intersecting
public street or highway.
(d) Access drive width. Access drives shall provide a twelve-footwide
cartway for each lane of travel. However, in no case shall
any access drive cartway be less than 18 feet wide.
Number of
Lanes
Direction of
Travel
Required Access Drive
Width
(feet)
1 1-way 12*
2 1-way or 2-way 24*
3 1-way or 2-way 12 per lane*
NOTE:
* Unless a different standard is required by PennDOT for
an entrance to a state road, or the applicant proves to
the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that a wider width is
needed for tractor-trailer trucks.
D. Driveway/access drive angle.
(1) Two-way operation. Driveways used for two-way operation shall
intersect the road at an angle to as near 90° as site conditions will
permit and in no case will be less than 60°.
(2) One-way operation. Driveways used by vehicles in one direction of
travel (right turn only) shall not form an angle smaller than 45°
with a road, unless acceleration and deceleration lanes are
provided.
§ 410-111 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-111
1:758
E. In no case shall there be unrestricted access along a public street,
except single-family and two-family residential uses of four or less offstreet
parking spaces along alleys.
F. Where a new curb cut for driveway or access drive accessing public
streets (other than alleys) is permitted in residential and CBD Zoning
Districts, it shall not exceed 24 feet in width for two-way traffic.
G. Permits. Any driveway or access drive intersecting with a state-owned
road shall require the obtainment of Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Highway Occupancy Permit as set forth in the
Pennsylvania Code, Title 67, Transportation, Chapter 441, Access to
and Occupancy of Highways by Driveways and Local Roads, as
amended, prior to obtaining approval for a building/zoning permit.
Additionally, any driveway or access drive intersecting with a Cityowned
road shall require the obtainment of driveway/curb cut permit
prior to obtaining approval for a building/zoning permit.
§ 410-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-111
1:759

ARTICLE XIX
General Regulations
§ 410-112. Applicability.
§ 410-113. Additional principal buildings and uses.
A. In addition to the general provisions for principal, accessory and/or
temporary uses within a particular zoning district established in
Articles IV through XIII of this chapter, and the additional specific
provisions for uses established in the Article XX and elsewhere in this
chapter, this article sets forth the general standards and regulations
that shall be applied generally to all uses in the City. These general use
standards and regulations must be satisfied prior to approval of any
application for a zoning permit, occupancy permit, temporary permit,
special exception and/or conditional use. The applicant shall be
required to demonstrate compliance with these standards and
regulations and must furnish whatever evidence is necessary to
demonstrate such compliance.
B. All principal, accessory and/or temporary uses identified subsequently
herein this article must comply with the general provisions for uses
within a particular zoning district in which the use is to be located,
unless different standards are established herein the subsequent
sections of Articles IV through XIII and XX of this chapter; in any case,
the more restrictive of the general and specific provisions shall apply.
A. Residential uses. Individual lots or subdivided parcels 1 1/4 acres or
less in size shall have no principal building or buildings in addition to
the principal building and use on the same lot used for living purposes.
For parcels greater than 1 1/4 acres in size, one additional building on
the same lot for living purposes shall be permitted; however, there must
be a minimum of 35 feet between buildings.
B. Mobile home park, condominium residential development, and/or
multifamily/apartment development. These types of uses may include
more than one principal building per lot, provided all other
requirements of this and other applicable City ordinances, including
Chapter 352, Subdivision and Land Development, are met.
C. Condominiums. A condominium form of ownership of individual
dwelling units, with a legally binding homeowners' association, may be
established if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Codes
Officer, based upon review by the City Solicitor, that there will be
appropriate legal mechanisms in place and compliance with applicable
state law.
D. Nonresidential uses. Where a lot or tract is used for a nonresidential
purpose, more than one principal building and/or use may be located
upon the lot or tract, but only when such building and/or use conform to
all open space and yard requirements around the lot for the zoning
§ 410-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-113
1:761
§ 410-114. Required lot frontage.
For each proposed new lot, all land developments and all principal buildings
shall be sited on a lot which complies with the required lot width for the
use in the applicable zoning district and which directly abuts one of the
following:
§ 410-115. Yards.
district in which the lot or tract is located, as though each building and/
or use were on an individual lot. In addition, such proposals shall gain
approval for a land development plan under Chapter 352, Subdivision
and Land Development.
A. A public street including an "alley";
B. A street proposed to be dedicated to the City by the subdivision plan
which created or creates such lot;
C. A private street or access drive which meets all of the requirements of
Chapter 352, Subdivision and Land Development, and/or any applicable
City construction and materials specifications; or
D. In the case of single-family attached dwellings, mobile home parks, and/
or multifamily/apartments, this requirement may be sufficed, if each
dwelling unit is provided with vehicle access onto a private parking
area which then has access onto a public or private street meeting City
standards.
A. All required yard areas provided under this chapter shall be
unobstructed by any building or structure, shall be planted with grass,
sod, or other vegetative cover, excepting in cases where walks, access
drives, off-street parking lots, patios, or other types of surfaces are
permitted. All required yards shall be maintained and kept free of all
debris and rubbish, except for permitted accessory buildings and
structures in the rear and side yards and fences.
B. The following may project into the required yards as established in this
chapter:
(1) Handicapped ramps and landings.
(2) Steps and stoops not exceeding 25 square feet.
(3) Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways
and balconies opening upon fire towers, chimneys and flues into
the rear yard and side yard not exceeding 3 1/2 feet in width and
placed so as not to obstruct light or ventilation.
(4) Sills, eaves, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features not
exceeding two feet in depth.
(5) Canopies not exceeding five feet projecting into the yard.
§ 410-113 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-115
1:762
(6) Cellarways and Bilco® doors.
(7) Essential services and other minor public utility structures.
(8) Parts of ornamentation or decoration, including flagpoles and
lighting.
(9) Fences, walls, retaining walls, and hedges in the front yard in any
residential and CBD zoning districts shall not exceed 3 1/2 feet in
height and eight feet in other zoning districts.
(10) Driveways, sidewalks and access drives.
(11) Decks and unenclosed porches without enclosed habitable
foundations shall be permitted to project into front and side yards
not more than three feet and into required rear yard no more than
20 feet, so long as a minimum of five feet remain between the
structure and the lot line.
C. The required front yard established may be adjusted in the following
cases for all zoning districts, with the exception of the residential and
the CBD zoning districts:
(1) Where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street between
two intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have not
observed a front yard, as described above, then:
(a) Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is
within 100 feet of existing buildings on both sides, the
minimum front yard shall be a line drawn between the two
closest front cornices of the adjacent structures on the two
sides.
(b) When a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is
within 100 feet of an existing building on one side only, such
building may be erected as close to the street as the existing
adjacent building.
D. No portion of any open stairs or stair towers may be constructed on the
front facade of a building above the first floor, nor may any open stairs
or stair towers project beyond the front facade of a building.
E. Off-street parking shall not be permitted in required front yards or in
front of principal buildings in the CBD Zoning District, and shall only
permitted in required front yards or in front of principal single-family
and two-family dwellings in residential districts when located on paved
driveways. Otherwise, off-street parking is permitted in required front
yards and in front of principal buildings in all nonresidential zoning
districts, provided required screening and buffering standards of
§ 410-116 of this chapter are met.
F. Irregular lots. Where any main wall of a structure located on any
irregularly shaped lot does not parallel the lot line which the wall faces,
§ 410-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-115
1:763
§ 410-116. Required buffering and screening.
the yard or minimum distance to the lot line at every point shall be at
least equal to the minimum dimension required for the yard or distance
to the lot line.
G. Corner lots. Front yards are required on both street frontages for yards
abutting street rights-of-way. For the purposes of determining side and
rear yards, one yard shall be deemed to be a rear yard, with the other
deemed a side yard.
A. Buffer yards. Unless otherwise required by this chapter, where any of
the following are proposed: nonresidential use; multifamily residential
use; off-street parking area of five or more spaces; off-street loading
area; or outdoor storage and/or sales area; which abut an existing
single- or two-family residential use permitted by right, special
exception, or conditional use (excluding nonconforming uses), a buffer
strip at least 10 feet wide shall be provided and maintained along the
entire length of the property line (including any side or rear property
line) which separates the above-mentioned uses from an existing singleor
two-family residential use permitted by right, special exception, or
conditional use (excluding nonconforming uses).
(1) Permitted uses in a buffer yard include screening (including
vegetation and fencing), stormwater management facilities,
underground utility facilities and easements, signs (in accordance
with Article XVII of this chapter), and sidewalks/pedestrianways,
driveways and access drives shall be permitted to cross required
buffer yards. Buildings, structures, outdoor storage and/or sales of
vehicles, equipment, materials, trash and waste disposal facilities,
and off-street loading and off-street parking shall not be permitted
in a required buffer yard.
(2) Buffer yards may coincide as part of any required building setback
and/or yard area.
(3) Buffer yards shall not be located in any portion of a public right-ofway
or proposed right-of-way.
(4) Buffer yard areas shall be planted, mulched, and maintained with a
vegetative material, including grass or other living ground cover on
all portions of the buffer yard not occupied by other landscape
material, including required screen plantings.
(5) Buffer yards shall be maintained and kept free of all debris and
rubbish.
B. Screening. Unless otherwise required by the chapter, screening shall be
provided in all required buffer yards as specified in this section of this
chapter and where any nonresidential use or nonresidential zoning
district abuts a residential zoning district and/or use, in accordance
with the following:
§ 410-115 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-116
1:764
§ 410-117. Trash and waste disposal.
In addition to complying with Chapter 340, Solid Waste, regarding trash and
waste disposal facilities/areas (specifically dumpsters, recycling collection
containers, compactors, bailers, etc.) for all uses, excluding single- and twofamily
residential dwellings, shall comply with the following provisions:
(1) A planted visual barrier and/or landscape screen shall be provided.
This screen shall be composed of a combination of shrubs, hedges,
deciduous and coniferous trees, all selected to provide a viewrestrictive
screen, arranged to form both a low-level and a highlevel
screen. The high-level screen shall consist of trees planted
with specimens of at least four feet in height, and planted at
intervals which will provide an overlapping foliage screen at
maturity with a minimum mature height of 15 feet. The low-level
screen shall consist of shrubs or hedges planted at an initial height
of not less than two feet and spaced at intervals of not less than five
feet. The low-level screen shall be placed in alternating rows to
produce a more effective barrier. All plants not surviving two
growing seasons after planting shall be replaced. The screen
plantings shall be so placed that at maturity it will be no closer than
three feet from any ultimate street right-of-way or property line.
(2) Fences and walls, and earth mounds, or any combination thereof,
may be included with living plant material to provide a viewrestrictive
screen. Fences and walls will, however, have to be
maintained at a minimum height of four feet and a maximum height
of six feet, unless otherwise specified in this chapter. Fences and
walls shall not be constructed of corrugated metal, corrugated
fiberglass or sheet metal.
(3) A clear sight triangle shall be maintained at all street intersections
and at all points where vehicular accessways intersect public
streets.
(4) The screening shall be broken only at points of vehicular or
pedestrian access.
A. All trash and waste disposal areas shall be completely enclosed, and the
lid shall be kept in place.
B. No trash and waste disposal areas shall be located in any front yard
area or in front of the principal building.
C. Required screening, consisting of a combination of fencing or walls at
least six feet with a maximum of eight feet high and living vegetative
material as set forth in § 410-116B of this chapter, shall be provided on
three sides. Additionally, any fence and/or walls provided as part of
required screening shall be provided with a self-latching door or gate.
§ 410-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-118
1:765
§ 410-118. Clear sight triangle (except in Central Business
District).
In order to prevent the creation of a traffic hazard by limiting visibility at a
street intersection, no structure, building, earthen bank or vegetation shall
be allowed on a corner lot or at a point of entry on a public road above the
height of 2 1/2 feet measured from the center line grades of the intersecting
streets; and within the area bounded by the street lot lines of such corner
lots and a line joining points on these street lot lines measured as follows:
§ 410-119. Height regulation exceptions.
§ 410-120. General outdoor storage and stockpiling.
No lot or premises shall be used as an outdoor, unenclosed storage or
stockpile area for junk automobiles, appliances or the storage or collection
of any other similar-type miscellaneous items in residential or the CBD
Zoning Districts. Additionally, any permitted outdoor storage of junk
automobiles, appliances or the storage or collection of any other
miscellaneous items, unless specifically permitted as a junkyard in
accordance with Article XX of this chapter, shall not occur in the required
front yard. Also, no lot or premises shall be used as a garbage dump or
a dead animal rendering plant, nor may manure, rubbish or miscellaneous
A. Thirty feet along right-of-way line of the public right-of-way other than
alleys.
B. Fifteen feet along right-of-way line of an alley.
A. When permitted in any zoning district other than a residential zoning
district, all public, semipublic or public services buildings, hospitals,
public institutions or schools may be erected to a height not exceeding
60 feet, and places of worship may be erected to a height not exceeding
65 feet if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot
for each additional two feet of building height above the height limit
otherwise provided in the zoning district in which the building is
located.
B. Special industrial structures such as cooling towers, elevator
bulkheads, fire towers, tanks, water towers, and all other towers which
require a greater height than provided in the zoning district may be
erected to a greater height than permitted, providing:
(1) The structure shall not occupy more than 25% of the lot area.
(2) The yard requirements of the district in which the structure is
erected shall be increased by one foot for each foot of height over
the maximum height permitted.
C. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to flagpoles,
church spires, belfries, chimneys and residential antennas. [Amended
5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
§ 410-118 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-120
1:766
refuse be stored in an unenclosed fashion within any zoning district. All
organic rubbish or storage shall be contained in enclosed, airtight,
verminproof containers.
§ 410-121. Nuisance elements.
§ 410-122. Standards to be enforced.
A. Definition of elements. No land or building in any zoning district which
shall be used or occupied for any purpose shall be operated in such
manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious or noxious fire,
explosive or other hazard, noise or vibration, smoke, dust, dirt or other
form of air pollution, electrical or other disturbance, glare or other
substance, condition or element in such amount as to adversely affect
the surrounding area or premises (referred to herein as "dangerous or
objectionable elements"); provided, that any use permitted by this
chapter may be undertaken and maintained in any zoning district if it
conforms to the regulations of the subsection limiting dangerous and
objectionable elements at the specified point or points of the
determination of their existence.
B. Locations where determinations are to be made for enforcement of
performance standards. The determination of the existence of any
dangerous and objectionable elements shall be made at:
(1) The point or points where such elements shall be most apparent for
fire and explosion hazards, for radioactivity and electrical
disturbances, for smoke and other forms of air pollution.
(2) The property lines of the use creating such elements for noise, for
vibration, for glare and for odors.
A. Radioactivity or electrical disturbance. No activities shall be permitted
which emit dangerous radioactivity or electrical disturbance adversely
affecting the operation of any equipment other than that of the creator
of such disturbance.
B. Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted which is detectable without
instruments at the points of measurement specified in § 410-121B of
this chapter.
C. Glare. All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by employing
hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine glare to the site, and
security lighting should be directed toward the building, rather than
the area around it, so as to not be visible at the points of measurement
specified in § 410-121B of this chapter. Additionally, no direct or skyreflected
glare from high-temperature processes, such as combustion
or welding or otherwise, so as to be visible at the points of
measurement specified in § 410-121B of this chapter. This restriction
§ 410-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-122
1:767
shall not apply to signs otherwise permitted by the provisions of this
chapter.
D. Other forms of air pollution. No emission of fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors,
gases and other forms of air pollution shall be permitted which can
cause any damage to health, to animals, vegetation or other forms of
property, or which can cause any excessive soiling.
§ 410-122 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-122
1:768
ARTICLE XX
Supplemental Regulations
§ 410-123. Applicability.
§ 410-124. Additional supplemental standards and requirements for
specific principal uses.
A. In addition to the general provisions for principal, accessory and/or
temporary uses within a particular zoning district established in
Articles IV through XIII of this chapter, and the additional general
provisions for uses established in Article XIX and elsewhere in this
chapter, this article sets forth the specific standards and supplemental
regulations that shall be applied to each principal, accessory and/or
temporary use identified herein. These specific use standards and
supplemental regulations must be satisfied prior to approval of any
application for a zoning permit, occupancy permit, temporary permit,
special exception and/or conditional use. The applicant shall be
required to demonstrate compliance with these standards and
regulations and must furnish whatever evidence is necessary to
demonstrate such compliance.
B. All principal, accessory and/or temporary uses identified subsequently
herein this article, must comply with the general provisions for uses
within a particular zoning district in which the use is to be located,
unless different standards are established herein the subsequent
sections of Articles IV through XIII of this chapter; in any case, the more
restrictive of the general and specific provisions shall apply.
C. For the purposes of this article, any required setbacks shall be
measured from the boundary line of the site for which the zoning
permit, occupancy permit, temporary permit, special exception and/or
conditional use is requested, regardless of whether or not this line
corresponds to a property line or a lease line.
D. For uses allowed within a specific zoning district as conditional uses
and/or special exceptions, see also the procedures and standards in
Articles XXII and XXIII, as applicable, of this chapter.
A. Each of the following uses shall meet all of the following requirements
for that use:
(1) Adult-related uses. Adult-related uses are permitted, subject to the
following criteria:
(a) No portion of a building occupied by an adult-related use shall
be permitted to be located within 1,000 lineal feet of any other
building occupied by an adult-related use.
(b) No portion of a building occupied by an adult-related use shall
be located within 250 lineal feet of any residential zoning
district boundary or any existing residential use.
§ 410-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:769
(c) No portion of a building occupied by an adult-related use shall
be located within 1,000 lineal feet of any property which
contains any one or more of the following specified land uses
where minors may congregate:
[1] Commercial recreation facility, indoor/outdoor;
[2] Day-care facility primarily for children;
[3] Library;
[4] Park, playground, playfield;
[5] Place of worship/assembly;
[6] School, private/public;
[7] Swimming pool, public; or
[8] Other lands, buildings, and uses where minors are
permitted to congregate.
(d) No materials, merchandise, or film offered for sale, rent, lease,
loan, or for view upon the premises shall be exhibited or
displayed outside of a building or structure.
(e) Any building or structure used and occupied as an adultrelated
establishment shall be windowless, or have an opaque
covering over all windows or doors of any area in which
materials, merchandise, or film are exhibited or displayed, and
no sale materials, merchandise, or film shall be visible from
outside of the building or structure.
(f) All signs shall comply with Article XVII of this chapter. No sign
shall be erected upon the premises pictorially depicting or
giving a visual representation of the type of materials,
merchandise or film offered therein.
(g) Each entrance to the premises shall be posted with a notice
specifying that persons under the age of 18 years are not
permitted to enter therein and warning all other persons that
they may be offended upon entry.
(h) No adult-related use may change to another adult-related use,
except upon approval of an additional conditional use.
(i) The use shall not create an enticement for minors because of
its proximity to nearby uses where minors may congregate.
(j) No unlawful sexual activity or conduct shall be permitted.
(k) No more than one adult-related use may be located within one
building or shopping center.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:770
(l) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(m) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(n) All adult-related uses shall comply with all other applicable
federal, state, and City regulations.
(2) Airports. Airports are permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(a) All facilities shall be designed and operated in strict
compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and
regulations.
(b) The applicant shall furnish evidence of the obtainment of a
license from the PennDOT Bureau of Aviation and Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) (if applicable) prior to the
approval of the application.
(c) No part of the takeoff/landing strip and/or pad shall be located
nearer than 300 lineal feet from any property line.
(3) Animal hospital/veterinary clinics. Animal hospital/veterinary
clinics are permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(a) Minimum lot area. Unless animals are kept inside at all times,
each site shall contain at least one acre; otherwise, the
minimum lot area requirement of the applicable zoning district
shall apply.
(b) All structures where animals are kept shall be completely
enclosed and soundproofed in a manner to prevent sound and
odor from traveling outside, such as solid-core doors, soundabsorbent
ceilings and forced-air ventilation.
(c) All structures where animals are kept that are not completely
enclosed, and also including any outdoor animal pens, stalls,
and runways, shall be located within the rear yard. These
outside and unenclosed facilities shall be a minimum of 50
lineal feet from all property lines, and 150 lineal feet any
residential zoning district boundary or any existing residential
use.
(d) Within the CBD Zoning District, all activities shall be
performed within a completely enclosed building.
(e) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:771
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(f) Where outdoor animal pens, stalls, or runways are permitted,
animals shall be permitted to exercise outside daily between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
(g) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(h) The applicant shall furnish evidence of effective means of
animal and veterinary waste collection and disposal that shall
be implemented.
(4) Automated banking facility. Automated banking facilities are
permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(a) Within the CBD Zoning District, drive-through facilities shall
be prohibited.
(b) Trash receptacles shall be provided and routinely emptied to
present the scattering of litter, and the applicant shall furnish
and implement a working plan for the cleanup of litter and
debris.
(c) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(d) All automated teller machines shall be located, or contain
convenient parking spaces, so that the movement of vehicles
will not be hampered by those cars belonging to persons using
the automated teller machines.
(e) Where practicable, all drive-through window lanes shall be
separated from the parking lot's interior driveways.
(f) Where practicable, all drive-through window facilities and
lanes shall be located on a building wall facing away from an
adjoining property within a residential zoning district or any
existing adjacent residential use.
(g) Where practicable, all drive-through window facilities and
lanes shall be located on a building wall facing away from a
public street, except alleys.
(h) Sufficient stacking lanes shall be provided associated with
drive-through windows, to prevent vehicle backups on
adjoining streets. A minimum one-hundred-foot-long on-site
stacking area for the vehicles shall be provided on the site. No
vehicle will be allowed to stack or form on public streets.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:772
Furthermore, each drive-through lane shall have on-site
directional signs, indicator lights or pavement markings
identifying the direction of travel and lane status (i.e., open
versus closed).
(i) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter for drive-through facilities.
(5) Automobile, heavy equipment and similar motor vehicle rental and
sales. Automobile, heavy equipment and similar motor vehicle
rental and sales are permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(a) The subject property shall front on an arterial or collector road
as provided in the most recent version of the City of Lock
Haven Comprehensive Plan.
(b) Automobile, heavy equipment and similar motor vehicle
display and inventory shall not occupy any part of the existing
or future street right-of-way or required off-street parking
areas.
(c) Automobile, heavy equipment and similar motor vehicle
display and inventory shall not be permitted to be parked on or
occupy sidewalk areas.
(d) Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards
on adjacent streets. No entrance or exit shall be located closer
than 35 lineal feet to an existing street intersection.
(e) Automobile, heavy equipment and similar motor vehicle
display and inventory areas shall be graded for proper
drainage and shall be surfaced so as to provide a durable and
dustless surface, such as concrete or bituminous concrete
surface.
(f) Automobile, heavy equipment and similar motor vehicle
display and inventory shall be aligned and displayed in an
orderly fashion so that circulation for firesafety can be
maintained at all times.
(g) Where automobile, heavy equipment and similar motor vehicle
display and inventory areas abut a street right-of-way and
public sidewalk area, a perimeter landscape strip, a minimum
of five feet wide, with grass or other living ground cover, shall
be planted, mulched and maintained on all portions of the
perimeter landscape strip, and shall be provided and protected
by permanent curbing.
(h) All authorized accessory activities (i.e., minor incidental
repairs, state inspections, oil changes and lubrications, tuneups,
and similar activities) except automobile, heavy
equipment and similar motor vehicle display and inventory
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:773
area, shall be performed within a completely enclosed
building.
(i) All ventilation equipment outlets associated with the
authorized accessory service/repair work area(s), including
service bay doors, shall not be oriented directly toward any
adjoining property within a residential zoning district or any
existing adjacent residential use.
(j) The demolition or junking of automobile, heavy equipment and
similar motor vehicles is prohibited.
(k) The storage automobile, heavy equipment and similar motor
vehicle on the property without current registration is
prohibited.
(l) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(m) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(6) Automotive wrecking, junk, scrap storage and sales
establishments. Automotive wrecking, junk, scrap storage and
sales establishments are permitted, subject to the following
criteria:
(a) Minimum lot area shall be five acres.
(b) All junk shall be at least 100 lineal feet from any adjoining lot,
and no junk, scrap, machinery or equipment of any kind shall
be stored in front of the principal building.
(c) No junk, scrap, machinery or equipment of any kind shall be
stored in front, side, or rear yard setback areas. All unpaved
yard setback areas shall be covered with grass or similar
vegetative material.
(d) All junk, scrap, machinery and equipment shall be at least 200
lineal feet from any public street, adjoining property within a
residential zoning district or any existing adjacent residential
use.
(e) All completely enclosed buildings used to store junk shall be
set back at least 50 lineal feet from all property lines.
(f) All materials and activities not within completely enclosed
buildings shall be surrounded by a fence or wall at least six feet
but not more than eight feet in height. Such fence shall be
completely sight-obscuring and maintained in good condition.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:774
Any gate in a fence shall be similarly constructed and
maintained and shall be kept securely locked at all times when
the establishment is not in operation.
(g) All paper, cloth and rags and other fibers, and activities
involving the same other than loading and unloading, shall be
within fully enclosed building.
(h) All junk shall be stored or arranged so as to permit access by
firefighting equipment and to prevent the accumulation of
water, and with no junk piled to a height greater than 10 feet.
(i) No material may be stored or stacked so that it is visible from
abutting properties or adjoining street rights-of-way.
(j) No material shall be placed in any establishment in such a
manner that it is capable of being transferred off the premises
by wind, water or other natural causes.
(k) No material shall be burned or incinerated at any time.
(l) No automotive wrecking, junk, scrap storage and sales
establishments shall be located on land with a slope in excess
of 5%.
(m) All vehicles within the automotive wrecking, junk, scrap
storage and sales establishments shall be completely drained
of fuel, lubricants, battery fluid, transmission fluid, brake
fluids, coolants, and air-conditioning fluids.
(n) All additional federal and state laws shall be satisfied.
(o) All yard setback areas shall at all times be clean, vacant and
well maintained.
(p) The establishment shall at all times be maintained in such a
manner as to prevent:
[1] Any menace to public health and safety;
[2] Offensive or obnoxious odors;
[3] The breeding, harboring or infestation of rats and other
rodents and vermin; and
[4] Violation of any health or sanitary law, ordinance, or
regulation of the City of Lock Haven or the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
(q) Every structure erected upon the lot after the effective date of
this chapter shall be of fireproof construction, with the
exception of fences.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:775
(r) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(s) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(7) Automotive service station. Automotive service stations are
permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(a) The subject property shall front on an arterial or collector road
as provided in the most recent version of the City of Lock
Haven Comprehensive Plan.
(b) No street entrance or exit for vehicles and no portion or
equipment of an automotive service station shall be located
within 150 lineal feet of any property which contains any one
or more of the following specified land uses where minors may
congregate:
[1] Commercial recreation facility, indoor/outdoor;
[2] Day-care facility primarily for children;
[3] Library;
[4] Park, playground, playfield;
[5] Place of worship/assembly;
[6] School, private/public;
[7] Swimming pool, public; or
[8] Other lands, buildings, and uses where minors congregate.
(c) All structures (including gasoline pump islands; fuel, oil, and
lubrication storage facilities and outdoor storage areas for
vehicles, but not permitted signs) shall be set back at least 30
lineal feet from any street right-of-way or property line.
(d) Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards
on adjacent streets. No entrance or exit shall be located closer
than 25 lineal feet to an existing street intersection.
(e) All ventilation equipment outlets associated with the service/
repair work area(s), including service bay doors, shall not be
oriented directly toward any adjoining property within a
residential zoning district or any existing adjacent residential
use. Additionally, ventilation equipment associated with fuel
storage tanks shall be set back 100 lineal feet from an
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:776
adjoining property within a residential zoning district or any
existing adjacent residential use.
(f) All authorized activities (i.e., minor incidental repairs, state
inspections, oil changes and lubrications, tune-ups, and
storage of all automobile parts, and similar activities), except
those normally required to be performed at the fuel and air
pumps, shall be performed within a completely enclosed
building.
(g) The outdoor storage of vehicles shall not be permitted in front
of the principal service building. No more than three vehicles
may be stored per service bay.
(h) No stored vehicle shall occupy any part of the existing or
future street right-of-way or required off-street parking areas.
(i) No stored vehicle shall be permitted to be parked on sidewalk
areas.
(j) All areas designed for the outdoor storage of vehicles shall be
graded for proper drainage and shall be surfaced so as to
provide a durable and dustless surface, such as concrete or
bituminous concrete surface.
(k) No vehicle shall be stored upon the site for more than one
month.
(l) No vehicle shall be stored upon the site without current
registration.
(m) Fuel delivery shall not impede traffic-flow patterns.
(n) All reasonable provisions shall be made to prevent or minimize
noise, odor, and vibration, light or electrical interference
adjoining property within a residential zoning district or any
existing adjacent residential use in accordance with Article XIX
of this chapter.
(o) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(p) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(q) The applicant shall furnish evidence that the disposal of
materials will be accomplished in a manner that complies with
state and federal regulations.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:777
(r) All applicable approvals of both state and federal agencies
must be obtained.
(8) Automotive vehicle repair center. Automotive vehicle repair
centers are permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(a) The subject property shall front on an arterial or collector road
as provided in the most recent version of the City of Lock
Haven Comprehensive Plan.
(b) No street entrance or exit for vehicles shall be located within
150 lineal feet of any property which contains any one or more
of the following specified land uses where minors may
congregate:
[1] Commercial recreation facility, indoor/outdoor;
[2] Day-care facility primarily for children;
[3] Library;
[4] Park, playground, playfield;
[5] Place of worship/assembly;
[6] School, private/public;
[7] Swimming pool, public; or
[8] Other lands, buildings, and uses where minors congregate.
(c) All structures, excluding including permitted signs, shall be set
back at least 30 lineal feet from any street right-of-way or
property line.
(d) Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards
on adjacent streets. No entrance or exit shall be located closer
than 35 lineal feet to an existing street intersection.
(e) All ventilation equipment outlets associated with the service/
repair work area(s), including service bay doors, shall not be
oriented directly toward any adjoining property within a
residential zoning district or any existing adjacent residential
use. Additionally, ventilation equipment associated with fuel
storage tanks shall be set back 100 lineal feet from an
adjoining property within a residential zoning district or any
existing adjacent residential use.
(f) All authorized activities (i.e., major and minor mechanical
work, servicing and repairs, and similar activities) shall be
performed within a completely enclosed building.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:778
(g) The outdoor storage of vehicles shall not be permitted in front
of the principal service building. No more than three vehicles
may be stored per service bay.
(h) No stored vehicle shall occupy any part of the existing or
future street right-of-way or required off-street parking areas.
(i) No stored vehicle shall be permitted to be parked on sidewalk
areas.
(j) All areas designed for the outdoor storage of vehicles shall be
graded for proper drainage and shall be surfaced so as to
provide a durable and dustless surface, such as concrete or
bituminous concrete surface.
(k) No vehicle shall be stored upon the site for more than one
month.
(l) No vehicle shall be stored upon the site without current
registration.
(m) All reasonable provisions shall be made to prevent or minimize
noise, odor, and vibration, light or electrical interference
adjoining property within a residential zoning district or any
existing adjacent residential use in accordance with Article XIX
of this chapter.
(n) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(o) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(p) The applicant shall furnish evidence that the disposal of
materials will be accomplished in a manner that complies with
state and federal regulations.
(q) All applicable approvals of both state and federal agencies
must be obtained.
(9) Boarding house. Boarding houses are permitted, subject to the
following criteria:
(a) In residential districts, any permitted boarding house use shall
maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is
compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood.
No modifications to the external appearance of the building
(except fire escapes) which would alter its residential
character shall be permitted.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:779
(b) Building height and setbacks shall be consistent with
surrounding development in the neighborhood.
(c) Fire escapes, where required, shall be located in the rear of the
building and shall not be located on any wall facing a street
right-of-way, excluding alleys.
(d) All guest rooms available for boarding shall be located within
the principal building.
(e) All guest rooms shall contain a minimum of 90 square feet of
habitable floor area per person, exclusive of common areas.
(f) Accommodations shall be limited to no more than five guest
rooms for rent, accommodating not more than 10 tenants/
guests in a residential zoning district; and 10 guest rooms for
rent, accommodating not more than 20 tenants/guests in other
zoning districts.
(g) All guest rooms shall be limited to two persons each.
(h) Meals for compensation shall be provided only to registered
tenants of the boarding house. No cooking facilities shall be
provided or permitted in the individual guest rooms.
(i) All off-street parking shall comply with Article XVIII of this
chapter, shall not be located in front of the principal building,
and shall be set back a minimum of 10 lineal feet and be
screened from adjoining property within a residential zoning
district or any existing adjacent residential use.
(j) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(k) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(l) All uses must comply with City building, health, housing,
rental, safety, property and other applicable code
requirements.
(m) All uses must comply with Pennsylvania Department of Labor
and Industry requirements.
(10) Car wash. Car washes are permitted, subject to the following
criteria:
(a) The subject property shall front on an arterial or collector road
as provided in the most recent version of the City of Lock
Haven Comprehensive Plan.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:780
(b) No car wash use shall be located within 200 lineal feet of any
residential zoning district boundary or any existing residential
use.
(c) Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards
on adjacent streets. On-lot traffic circulation channels and
parking areas shall be clearly marked.
(d) Provide separate entrance and exit facilities with paved
driveways. Minimum width of access drives and stacking lanes
for waiting cars shall be provided in accordance with Article
XVIII of this chapter.
(e) No entrance or exit shall be located closer than 35 lineal feet to
an existing street intersection.
(f) No street entrance or exit for vehicles shall be located within
150 lineal feet of any property which contains any one or more
of the following specified land uses where minors may
congregate:
[1] Commercial recreation facility, indoor/outdoor;
[2] Day-care facility primarily for children;
[3] Library;
[4] Park, playground, playfield;
[5] Place of worship/assembly;
[6] School, private/public;
[7] Swimming pool, public; or
[8] Other lands, buildings, and uses where minors congregate.
(g) All uses must provide sufficient off-street parking, standing,
and stacking for waiting motor vehicles. The parking, standing,
and stacking area shall be situated on the property outside the
washing facilities and be of sufficient size to accommodate at
least 1/3 the hourly capacity (or hourly turnover) of the car
wash plus a reserve of 20% of the hourly capacity to
accommodate peak-demand periods. "Hourly capacity," in all
instances, shall mean the greatest number possible of motor
vehicle washes that can be provided in one hour.
(h) Provide an area of at least 800 square feet beyond the exit end
of the washing building to be used for hand-finishing
operations of the washing process.
(i) All structures housing washing apparatuses shall be set back
25 lineal feet from any street right-of-way, any rear property
line, and any side property line.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:781
(j) All vacuuming equipment facilities shall be located at least 50
lineal feet from adjoining property within a residential zoning
district or any existing adjacent residential use.
(k) The applicant shall provide evidence that adequate measures
will be in place to prevent pollutants from being washed into
the groundwater or waterways. Any chemicals that may be
hazardous to aquatic life shall be stored within an area that
will completely contain any leaks or spills.
(l) Gray water recycling is mandatory.
(m) Water from the car wash operation shall not flow onto
sidewalks or streets in such a manner as could cause ice
hazards.
(n) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(o) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(p) Trash receptacles shall be provided and routinely emptied to
present the scattering of litter, and the applicant shall furnish
and implement a working plan for the cleanup of litter and
debris.
(q) The applicant shall provide a site plan prepared by either a
registered surveyor or a professional engineer of the proposed
car wash operation showing the location of entrances and
exits, the building housing the washing equipment, the parking
areas for waiting vehicles and employees, the distance to
nearest street intersection, property lines and required
setback side yard and rear yard lines, plus type of screening to
be used.
(11) Cemeteries. Cemeteries are permitted, subject to the following
criteria:
(a) The minimum lot area shall be five acres.
(b) The total impervious coverage shall not exceed 10% of the lot
area.
(c) All burial plots and all structures shall be located at least 30
lineal feet from any property or street right-of-way line.
(d) No burial plot shall be permitted in any floodplain or floodfringe
area.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:782
(e) The applicant shall file a site plan with the City to demonstrate
the design and layout of the proposed cemetery or cemetery
expansion specifically illustrating the proposed drainage plan,
the internal circulation plan, and the location of accessory
building(s).
(f) The owner(s) and operator(s) of a cemetery shall incorporate
best managements practices as outlined in the Pennsylvania
Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing Areas
to minimize negative impacts of erosion, siltation and surface
water and groundwater contamination.
(g) At no time shall a corpse be exposed or visible from a public
right-of-way or adjacent property.
(h) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(i) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(j) Any escrow account provided for by state or federal law shall
be established in favor of the City.
(k) Shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable state laws.
(12) Club rooms, club grounds, or meeting halls, private. Private club
rooms, club grounds and meeting halls are permitted, subject to
the following criteria:
(a) All outdoor recreation/activity areas shall be set back at least
50 lineal feet from any adjoining property within a residential
zoning district or any existing adjacent residential use.
(b) Hours of operation and activities must be appropriately
scheduled to protect the existing neighborhood from
detrimental noise, disturbance, and interruption.
(c) The owner(s) and operator(s) shall be responsible for the
conduct and safety of the members and their guests.
(d) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(e) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:783
(13)Wireless communications facilities. [Amended 8-1-2016 by Ord.
No. 957218]
(a) General and specific requirements for communications
antennas.
[1] The following regulations shall apply to all
communications antennas, except those operated by a
federally licensed amateur radio status operator:
[a] Standard of care. All communications antennas shall
be designed, constructed, operated, maintained,
repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance
with all current applicable technical, safety and
safety-related codes, including but not limited to the
most recent editions of the Pennsylvania Uniform
Commercial Code, American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) Code, and National Electrical Code.
Any communications antennas shall at all times be
kept and maintained in good condition, order and
repair by qualified maintenance and construction
personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life
of any person or any property in the City.
[b] Permitted by right. Communications antennas are
permitted by right in all zoning districts, except the
Historical Overlay District, so long as they comply
with all of the terms and conditions of this section. In
order to gain permission to site and/or construct a
communications antenna in the City, the applicant
must apply for a zoning permit from the City.
218. Editor's Note: Sections I and V of this ordinance provided the following: Purpose and
findings of fact. The purpose of this ordinance is to establish uniform standards for the
siting, design, permitting, maintenance, and use of wireless communications facilities in
Lock Haven City (referred to herein as the "City"). While the City recognizes the
importance of wireless communications facilities in providing high-quality
communications service to its residents and businesses, the City also recognizes that it
has an obligation to protect public safety and to minimize the adverse visual effects of
such facilities through the standards set forth in the following provisions. By enacting
these provisions, the City intends to: Accommodate the need for wireless communications
facilities while regulating their location and number so as to ensure the provision of
necessary services; Provide for the managed development of wireless communications
facilities in a manner that enhances the benefits of wireless communication and
accommodates the needs of both City residents and wireless carriers in accordance with
federal and state laws and regulations; Establish procedures for the design, siting,
construction, installation, maintenance and removal of both communications towers and
communications antennas in the City, including facilities both inside and outside the
public rights-of-way; Address new wireless technologies, including but not limited to
distributed antenna systems, data collection units, and other wireless communications
facilities; Minimize the adverse visual effects and the number of such facilities through
proper design, siting, screening, material, color and finish, and by requiring that
competing providers of wireless communications services co-locate their communications
antenna and related facilities on existing towers; Promote the health, safety and welfare
of the City's residents. Police powers. The City, by granting any permit or taking any other
action pursuant to this chapter, does not waive, reduce, lessen or impair the lawful police
powers vested in the City under applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:784
[c] Historic areas. No communications antenna may be
located upon any property, or on a building or
structure that is listed on either the National or
Pennsylvania Registers of Historic Places, within the
City's Historic Overlay District (either inside or
outside the public rights-of-way), or along Water
Street.
[d] Wind. All communications antennas structures shall
be designed to withstand the effects of wind gusts of
at least 100 miles per hour in addition to the standard
designed by the American National Standards
Institute as prepared by the engineering departments
of the Electronics Industry Association and
Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/
TIA-222, as amended).
[e] Aviation safety. Communications antennas shall
comply with all federal and state laws and regulations
concerning aviation safety.
[f] Public safety communications and other
communications services. Communications antennas
shall not interfere with public safety communications
or the reception of broadband, television, radio or
other communication services enjoyed by occupants of
nearby properties.
[g] Radio frequency emissions. A communications
antenna shall not, by itself or in conjunction with other
communications antennas and/or communications
towers, generate radio frequency emissions in excess
of the standards and regulations of the FCC, including
but not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering
Technology Bulletin 65 entitled, "Evaluating
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure
to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as
amended.
[h] Removal. In the event that use of a communications
antennas is discontinued, the owner shall provide
written notice to the City of its intent to discontinue
use and the date when the use shall be discontinued.
Unused or abandoned communications antennas or
portions of communications antennas shall be
removed as follows:
[i] All abandoned or unused communications
antennas and related equipment shall be removed
within two months of the cessation of operations
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:785
at the site unless a time extension is approved by
the City.
[ii] If the communications antenna or related
equipment is not removed within two months of
the cessation of operations at a site, or within any
longer period approved by the City, the
communications antenna and/or related
equipment may be removed by the City. As
security, the City reserves the right to the salvage
value of any removed communications antenna
and/or related equipment, if such communications
antenna and/or related equipment are not
removed by the owner within the specific time
frame enumerated in this chapter.
[i] Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a
communications antenna shall provide the City with a
certificate of insurance, naming the City as an
additional insured, and evidencing general liability
coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence
covering the communications antenna.
[j] Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a
communications antenna shall, at its sole cost and
expense, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
City, its elected and appointed officials, employees and
agents, at all times against any and all claims for
personal injury, including death, and property damage
arising in whole or in part from, caused by or
connected with any act or omission of the person, its
officers, agents, employees or contractors arising out
of, but not limited to, the construction, installation,
operation, maintenance or removal of the
communications antenna. Each person that owns or
operates a communications antenna shall defend any
actions or proceedings against the City in which it is
claimed that personal injury, including death, or
property damage was caused by the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of a
communications antenna. The obligation to indemnify,
hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries,
liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys' fees,
reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs
of indemnification.
[k] Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the
following maintenance requirements shall apply:
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:786
[i] The communications antenna shall be fully
automated and unattended on a daily basis and
shall be visited only for maintenance or
emergency repair.
[ii] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure
the upkeep of the facility in order to promote the
safety and security of the City's residents.
[iii] All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing
less than the best available technology for
preventing failures and accidents.
[l] Removal, replacement and modification.
[i] To the extent permitted by law, the removal and
replacement of communications antennas and/or
related equipment for the purpose of upgrading
or repairing the communications antenna is
permitted, so long as such repair or upgrade does
not substantially change the overall size of the
wireless support structure or the numbers of
communications antennas.
[ii] To the extent permitted by state law, any material
modification to a communications antenna shall
require notice to be provided to the City, and
possible supplemental permit approval to the
original permit or authorization.
[m] Timing of approval. [Added 4-1-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-01]
[i] The City shall act on an application for a
communications antenna within 90 calendar days
of receiving a completed application. The City
shall notify the WCF applicant, in writing, of its
decision.
[ii] The City shall act on an application for a
communications antenna that meets the definition
of a small wireless communications facility within
60 days of receiving an initial application. The
City shall notify the WCF applicant, in writing, of
its decision.
[2] The following regulations shall apply to co-located
communications antennas that fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act:
[a] Permit required. Communications antenna applicants
proposing the modification of an existing
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:787
communications tower shall obtain a building permit
from the City. In order to be considered for such
permit, the applicant must submit a permit application
to the City in accordance with applicable permit
policies and procedures.
[b] Timing of approval for applications that fall under the
WBCA. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a communications antenna is filed with
the City, the City shall notify the applicant in writing of
any information that may be required to complete
such application. Within 60 calendar days of receipt of
a complete application, the City shall make its final
decision on whether to approve the application and
shall advise the applicant in writing of such decision.
[c] Related equipment. Ground-mounted related
equipment greater than three cubic feet shall not be
located within 50 feet of a lot in residential use or
zoned residential.
[d] Permit fees. The City may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the City's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the
application for approval of a communications antenna
or $1,000, whichever is less.
[3] In addition to the regulations enumerated in Subsection
A(13)(a)[1], the following regulations shall apply to
communications antennas that do not fall under the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act:
[a] Prohibited on certain structures. No communications
antenna shall be located on single-family residences,
duplexes, or town homes.
[b] Retention of experts. The City may hire any
consultant(s) and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the
City in reviewing and evaluating the application for
approval of the communications antenna and, once
approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential
violations of the terms and conditions of these
communications antenna provisions. The applicant
and/or owner of the communications antenna shall
reimburse the City for all costs of the City's
consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and
consultation in connection with these activities.
[c] Permit fees. The City may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the City's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the
application for approval of a communications antenna,
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:788
as well as related inspection, monitoring and related
costs.
[d] Development regulations. Communications antennas
shall be co-located on existing wireless support
structures, subject to the following conditions:
[i] The total height of any wireless support structure
and mounted communications antenna shall not
exceed 20 feet above the maximum height
permitted in the underlying zoning district.
[ii] In accordance with industry standards, all
communications antenna applicants must submit
documentation to the City justifying the total
height of the communications antenna. Such
documentation shall be analyzed in the context of
such justification on an individual basis.
[iii] If the applicant proposes to locate the related
equipment in a separate building, the building
shall comply with the minimum requirements for
the applicable zoning district, and landscaping
shall be required to screen as much of the
equipment building as possible. An evergreen
screen shall surround the site. The evergreen
screen shall be a minimum height of six feet at
planting and shall not exceed 10 feet on center.
[e] A self-locking security fence with a maximum height of
eight feet shall surround any separate
communications equipment building. Vehicular access
to the communications equipment building shall not
interfere with the parking or vehicular circulations on
the site for the principal use.
[f] Noncommercial usage exemption. City residents
utilizing satellite dishes and antennas for the purpose
of maintaining television, phone, radio and/or internet
connections at their respective residences shall be
exempt from the regulations enumerated in this
section of the Zoning Ordinance. Amateur radio
operators are exempt from the regulations
enumerated in this chapter.
[g] Design regulations. Communications antennas shall
employ stealth technology and be treated to match the
wireless support structure in order to minimize
aesthetic impact. The application of the stealth
technology chosen by the applicant shall be subject to
the approval of the City.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:789
[h] Inspection. The City reserves the right to inspect any
communications antenna to ensure compliance with
the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and any other
provisions found within the City Code or state or
federal law. The City and/or its agents shall have the
authority to enter the property upon which a
communications antenna is located at any time, upon
reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such
compliance.
[4] Regulations applicable to all communications antennas
located in the public rights-of-way. In addition to the
regulations enumerated in Subsection A(13)(a)[1], the
following regulations shall apply to communications
antennas located in the public rights-of-way:
[a] Location. Communications antennas in the ROW shall
be co-located on existing poles, such as existing utility
poles or light poles. As a first priority, communications
antennas shall be located in alley rights-of-way. If a
communications antenna is proposed in a street rightof-
way, the WCF applicant shall show that location in
an alley right-of-way is not technically feasible.
[Amended 4-1-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
[b] Conditional use required. Any applicant proposing the
construction of a new communications antenna, or the
modification of an existing communications antenna,
shall first obtain conditional use authorization from
the City. New constructions, modifications, and
replacements that fall under the WBCA shall be not be
subject to the conditional use process. The conditional
use application shall demonstrate that the proposed
facility complies with all applicable provisions in the
Lock Haven City Zoning Ordinance.
[c] Design requirements:
[i] Communications antenna installations located
above the surface grade in the public ROW
including, but not limited to, those on streetlights
and utility poles, shall consist of equipment
components that are no more than six feet in
height and that are compatible in scale and
proportion to the structures upon which they are
mounted. All equipment shall be the smallest and
least visibly intrusive equipment feasible.
[ii] Communications antennas and related equipment
shall be treated by the communications antenna
owner or applicant to match the wireless support
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:790
structure and may be required to be painted, or
otherwise coated, to be visually compatible with
the support structure upon which they are
mounted.
[d] Time, place and manner. The City shall determine the
time, place and manner of construction, maintenance,
repair and/or removal of all communications antennas
in the ROW based on public safety, traffic
management, physical burden on the ROW, and
related considerations. For public utilities, the time,
place and manner requirements shall be consistent
with the police powers of the City and the
requirements of the Public Utility Code.219
[e] Equipment location. Communications antennas and
related equipment shall be located so as not to cause
any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards
to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined
by the City. In addition:
[i] Ground-mounted related equipment shall be
located between the sidewalk and the curb. For
reasons of safety and aesthetics, such equipment
shall neither protrude onto the curb, nor obstruct
the sidewalk.
[ii] Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot
be placed underground shall be screened, to the
fullest extent possible, through the use of
landscaping or other decorative features to the
satisfaction of the City.
[iii] Required electrical meter cabinets shall the
screened to blend in with the surrounding area to
the satisfaction of the City.
[iv] Any graffiti on any wireless support structures or
any related equipment shall be removed at the
sole expense of the owner.
[v] Any proposed underground vault related to
communications antennas shall be reviewed and
approved by the City.
[f] Relocation or removal of facilities. Within two months
following written notice from the City, or such longer
period as the City determines is reasonably necessary
219. Editor's Note: See 66 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:791
or such shorter period in the case of an emergency,
an owner of a communications antenna in the ROW
shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
communications antenna when the City, consistent
with its police powers and applicable Public Utility
Commission regulations, shall have determined that
such removal, relocation, change or alteration is
reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances:
[i] The construction, repair, maintenance or
installation of any City or other public
improvement in the right-of-way;
[ii] The operations of the City or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way;
[iii] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a
utility easement; or
[iv] An emergency as determined by the City.
[g] Reimbursement for ROW use. In addition to permit
fees as described in this section, every
communications antenna in the ROW is subject to the
City's right to fix annually a fair and reasonable fee to
be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such
compensation for ROW use shall be directly related to
the City's actual ROW management costs, including,
but not limited to, the costs of the administration and
performance of all reviewing, inspecting, permitting,
supervising and other ROW management activities by
the City. The owner of each communications antenna
shall pay an annual fee to the City to compensate the
City for the City's costs incurred in connection with
the activities described above. [Added 4-1-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-01]
(b) General and specific requirements for all communications
towers.
[1] The following regulations shall apply to all
communications towers, excluding any communications
tower that is owned and operated by a federally licensed
amateur radio status operator.
[a] Standard of care. Any communications towers shall be
designed, constructed, operated, maintained,
repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance
with all current applicable technical, safety and
safety-related codes, including but not limited to the
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:792
most recent editions of the Pennsylvania Uniform
Commercial Code, American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) Code, Electrical Code, as well as the
accepted and responsible workmanlike industry
practices of the National Association of Tower
Erectors. Any communications towers shall at all
times be kept and maintained in good condition, order
and repair by qualified maintenance and construction
personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life
of any person or any property in the City.
[b] Notice. Upon submission of an application for a
communications tower and the scheduling of the
mandatory public hearing in front of City Council, the
applicant shall mail notice to all owners of every
property within 500 feet of the proposed facility. The
applicant shall provide proof of the notification to the
City.
[c] Conditional use authorization required.
Communications towers are permitted by conditional
use in certain districts, at a height necessary to satisfy
their function in the applicant's wireless
communications system. No applicant shall have the
right under these regulations to erect a tower to the
maximum height specified in this section unless it
proves the necessity for such height. The applicant
shall demonstrate that the proposed communications
tower is the minimum height necessary for the service
area.
[i] Prior to City Council's consideration of a
conditional use application authorizing the
construction and installation of a communications
tower, it shall be incumbent upon the applicant for
such conditional use approval to prove to the
reasonable satisfaction of City Council that the
applicant cannot adequately extend or infill its
communications system by the use of equipment
such as redoes, repeaters, communications
antennas, and other similar equipment installed
on existing structures, such as utility poles or
their appurtenances and other available tall
structures. The applicant shall further
demonstrate that the proposed communications
tower must be located where it is proposed in
order to serve the applicant's service area and
that no other viable alternative location exists.
[ii] The conditional use application shall be
accompanied by a propagation study evidencing
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:793
the need for the proposed tower or other
communication facilities and equipment, a
description of the type and manufacturer of the
proposed transmission/radio equipment, the
frequency range (megahertz band) assigned to
the applicant, the power in watts at which the
applicant transmits, and any relevant related tests
conducted by the applicant in determining the
need for the proposed site and installation.
[iii] The conditional use application shall be
accompanied by documentation demonstrating
that the proposed communications tower
complies with all state and federal laws and
regulations concerning aviation safety.
[iv] Where the communications tower is located on a
property with another principal use, the applicant
shall present documentation to City Council that
the owner of the property has granted an
easement for the proposed communications tower
and that vehicular access will be provided to the
facility.
[v] The conditional use application shall be
accompanied by documentation demonstrating
that the proposed communications tower
complies with all applicable provisions in this
section.
[d] Engineer inspection. Prior to the City's issuance of a
permit authorizing construction and erection of a
communications tower, a structural engineer
registered in Pennsylvania shall issue to the City a
written certification of the proposed communications
tower's ability to meet the structural standards
offered by either the Electronic Industries Association
or the Telecommunication Industry Association and
certify the proper construction of the foundation and
the erection of the structure. This certification shall be
provided during the conditional use proceedings
before City Council, or at a minimum, be made as a
condition attached to any approval given such that the
certification be provided prior to issuance of any
building permits.
[e] Visual appearance. Communications towers shall
employ stealth technology. All communications towers
and related equipment shall be aesthetically and
architecturally compatible with the surrounding
environment and shall maximize the use of a like
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:794
facade to blend with the existing surroundings and
neighboring buildings to the greatest extent possible.
City Council shall consider whether its decision upon
the subject application will promote the harmonious
and orderly development of the zoning district
involved; encourage compatibility with the character
and type of development existing in the area; benefit
neighboring properties by preventing a negative
impact on the aesthetic character of the community;
preserve woodlands and trees existing at the site to
the greatest possible extent; and encourage sound
engineering and land development design and
construction principles, practices and techniques. Any
utilities extending to the communications tower shall
be placed underground.
[f] Co-location and siting. An application for a new
communications tower shall demonstrate that the
proposed communications tower cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved structure
or building, or on land owned by the City of lock
Haven. City Council may deny an application to
construct a new communications tower if the
applicant has not made a good faith effort to mount
the communications antenna on an existing structure.
The applicant shall demonstrate that it contacted the
owners of tall structures, buildings, and towers within
a 1/4 of a mile radius of the site proposed, sought
permission to install a communications antenna on
those structures, buildings, and towers and was
denied for one of the following reasons:
[i] The proposed antenna and Related Equipment
would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing building, structure or tower, and its
reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a
reasonable cost.
[ii] The proposed antenna and related equipment
would cause radio frequency interference with
other existing equipment for that existing
building, structure, or tower and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
[iii] Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do
not have adequate location, space, access, or
height to accommodate the proposed equipment
or to allow it to perform its intended function.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:795
[iv] A commercially reasonable agreement could not
be reached with the owner of such building,
structure, or tower.
[g] Permit required for modifications. To the extent
permissible under applicable state and federal law,
any applicant proposing the modification of an
existing communications tower which increases the
overall height of such wireless support structure, shall
first obtain a building permit from the City.
Nonroutine modifications shall be prohibited without
such permit.
[h] Gap in coverage. An applicant for a communications
tower must demonstrate that a significant gap in
wireless coverage or capacity exists in the applicable
area and that the type of communications tower being
proposed is the least intrusive means by which to fill
that gap in wireless coverage. The existence or
nonexistence of a gap in wireless coverage shall be a
factor in City Council's decision on an application for
approval of communications tower.
[i] Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all
communications towers, the WCF applicant shall
provide the City with a written commitment that it will
allow other service providers to co-locate
communications antennas on communications towers
where technically and economically feasible. The
owner of a communications tower shall not install any
additional communications antennas without
obtaining the prior written approval of the City.
[j] Wind. Any communications tower structures shall be
designed to withstand the effects of wind gusts of at
least 100 miles per hour in addition to the standard
designed by the American National Standards
Institute as prepared by the engineering departments
of the Electronics Industry Association and
Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/EIA/
TIA-222), as amended.
[k] Height. Any communications tower shall be designed
at the minimum functional height. In all zoning
districts, the maximum height of any new
communications tower shall be 175 feet.
Communications towers taller than utility poles shall
not be constructed in the flight paths of aircrafts
inbound or outbound from the Lock Haven Airport.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:796
[l] Related equipment. Either a one single-story wireless
communications equipment building not exceeding
250 square feet in area or up to five metal boxes
placed on a concrete pad not exceeding 10 feet by 20
feet in area housing the receiving and transmitting
equipment may be located on the site for each
unrelated company sharing space on the
communications tower.
[m] Public safety communications and other
communications services. No communications tower
shall interfere with public safety communications or
the reception of broadband, television, radio or other
communication services enjoyed by occupants of
nearby properties.
[n] Maintenance. The following maintenance
requirements shall apply:
[i] Any communications tower shall be fully
automated and unattended on a daily basis and
shall be visited only for maintenance or
emergency repair.
[ii] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure
the upkeep of the communications tower in order
to promote the safety and security of the City's
residents and utilize the best available technology
for preventing failures and accidents.
[o] Radio frequency emissions. A communications tower
shall not, by itself or in conjunction with other
communications towers or communications antennas,
generate radio frequency emissions in excess of the
standards and regulations of the FCC, including but
not limited to the FCC Office of Engineering
Technology Bulletin 65 entitled, "Evaluating
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure
to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as
amended.
[p] Historic buildings or districts. No communications
tower may be located upon any property, or on a
building or structure that is listed on either the
National or Pennsylvania Registers of Historic Places,
within the City's Historic Overlay District (either
inside or outside the public rights-of-way), or along
Water Street.
[q] Signs. All communications towers shall post a sign in a
readily visible location identifying the name and
phone number of a party to contact in the event of an
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:797
emergency. The only other signage permitted on the
communications tower shall be those required by the
FCC, or any other federal or state agency.
[r] Lighting. No communications tower shall be
artificially lighted, except as required by law. If
lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a
detailed plan for sufficient lighting, demonstrating as
unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is permissible
under state and federal regulations. Automatic
lighting is prohibited and all lighting must be
controlled manually by an on-site switch. The
applicant shall promptly report any outage or
malfunction of FAA-mandated lighting to the
appropriate governmental authorities and to the City
Manager.
[s] Noise. Communications towers shall be operated and
maintained so as not to produce noise in excess of
applicable noise standards under state law and the
City Code, except in emergency situations requiring
the use of a backup generator, where such noise
standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis only.
[t] Aviation safety. Communications towers shall comply
with all federal and state laws and regulations
concerning aviation safety.
[u] Retention of experts. The City may hire any consultant
and/or expert necessary to assist the City in reviewing
and evaluating the application for approval of the
communications tower and, once approved, in
reviewing and evaluating any potential violations of
the terms and conditions of these provisions. The
applicant and/or owner of the communications tower
shall reimburse the City for all costs of the City's
consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and
consultation in connection with these activities.
[v] Timing of approval. [Amended 4-1-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-01]
[i] Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a communications tower is filed
with the City, the City shall notify the applicant, in
writing, of any information that may be required
to complete such application. All applications for
communications towers shall be acted upon
within 150 days of the receipt of a fully completed
application for the approval of such
communications towers, and the City shall advise
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:798
the applicant, in writing, of its decision. If
additional information was requested by the City
to complete an application, the time required by
the applicant to provide the information shall not
be counted toward the 150-day review period.
[ii] If the proposed communications tower meets the
definition of a "small wireless communications
facility," the application shall be acted upon by the
City within 90 calendar days of the receipt of a
fully completed application for the approval of
such small wireless communications facility, and
the City shall advise the applicant, in writing, of
its decision.
[w] Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming communications
towers which are hereafter damaged or destroyed due
to any reason or cause may be repaired and restored
at their former location, but must otherwise comply
with the terms and conditions of this section.
[x] Removal. In the event that use of a communications
tower is planned to be discontinued, the owner shall
provide written notice to the City of its intent to
discontinue use and the date when the use shall be
discontinued. Unused or abandoned communications
towers or portions of communications towers shall be
removed as follows:
[i] All unused or abandoned communications towers
and related equipment shall be removed within
two months of the cessation of operations at the
site unless a time extension is approved by the
City.
[ii] If the communications tower and/or related
equipment is not removed within two months of
the cessation of operations at a site, or within any
longer period approved by the City, the
communications tower and related equipment
may be removed by the City and the cost of
removal assessed against the owner of the
communications tower. As security, the City
reserves the right to the salvage value of any
removed communications tower and/or related
equipment, if such communications tower and/or
related equipment are not removed by the owner
within the time frames enumerated in this
chapter.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:799
[iii] Any unused portions of communications towers,
including antennas, shall be removed within two
months of the time of cessation of operations. The
City must approve all replacements of portions of
a communications tower previously removed.
[y] Permit fees. The City may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the City's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the
application for approval of a communications tower, as
well as related inspection, monitoring, and related
costs.
[z] FCC license. Each person that owns or operates a
communications tower over 40 feet in height shall
submit a copy of its current FCC license, including the
name, address, and emergency telephone number for
the operator of the facility.
[aa] Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a
communications tower greater than 40 feet in height
shall provide the City with a certificate of insurance
naming the City as an additional insured, and
evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum
amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence and property
damage coverage in the minimum amount of
$5,000,000 per occurrence covering the
communications tower. Each person that owns or
operates a communications tower 40 feet or less in
height shall provide the City with a certificate of
insurance naming the City as an additional insured,
and evidencing general liability coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and
property damage coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per occurrence covering each
communications tower.
[bb] Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a
communications tower shall, at its sole cost and
expense, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
City, its elected and appointed officials, employees and
agents, at all times against any and all claims for
personal injury, including death, and property damage
arising in whole or in part from, caused by or
connected with any act or omission of the person, its
officers, agents, employees or contractors arising out
of, but not limited to, the construction, installation,
operation, maintenance or removal of the
communications tower. Each person that owns or
operates a communications tower shall defend any
actions or proceedings against the City in which it is
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:800
claimed that personal injury, including death, or
property damage was caused by the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the
communications tower. The obligation to indemnify,
hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries,
liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys' fees,
reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs
of indemnification.
[cc] Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for a
communications tower shall contain a seal and
signature of a professional structural engineer,
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
[dd] Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit
for the construction or placement of a
communications tower, the applicant shall provide to
the City financial security sufficient to guarantee the
construction of the communications tower. Said
financial security shall remain in place until the
communications tower is fully constructed. Should the
communications tower be abandoned by the owner
and/or operator, and not removed within two months
of such abandonment, the City shall have the authority
to remove the communications tower and sell all of its
pieces, as well as related equipment, used in the
operation of the communications tower, in order to
recover the cost of said removal.
[2] In addition to the regulations enumerated in Subsection
A(13)(b)[1], the following regulations shall apply to
communications towers located outside the public rightsof-
way:
[a] Development regulations.
[i] Communications towers shall not be located in, or
within 75 feet of an area in which all utilities are
located underground.
[ii] Communications towers shall not be located
within 250 lineal feet of any adjoining property
within a residential zoning district or any existing,
adjacent residential use.
[iii] Communications towers are permitted outside the
public rights-of-way, subject to the prohibitions
contained herein, in the following zoning districts:
[A] I Industrial District.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:801
[B] IPA Industrial Park Airport District (with
appropriate FAA approvals).
[C] PI Public Institutional District.
[iv] Sole use on a lot. A communications tower shall
be permitted as a sole use on a lot, provided that
the underlying lot meets the minimum size
specifications set forth in the City Zoning Code.
[v] Combined with another use. A communications
tower may be permitted on a property with an
existing use, or on a vacant parcel in combination
with another use, except residential, subject to
the following conditions:
[A] The existing use on the property may be any
permitted use in the applicable district, and
need not be affiliated with the
communications tower.
[B] Minimum lot area. The minimum lot shall
comply with the requirements for the
applicable zoning district and shall be the
area needed to accommodate the
communications tower and guy wires, the
equipment building, security fence, and
buffer planting if the proposed
communications towers is greater than 40
feet in height.
[C] Minimum setbacks. The minimum distance
between the base of a communications tower
and any adjoining property line or street
right-of-way line shall be equal to 100% of the
height of the communications tower. The
underlying lot must be large enough to
accommodate related equipment, stormwater
runoff mechanisms, and all other features
typically found within the immediate area of a
communications tower.
[b] Design regulations.
[i] The communications tower shall employ the most
current stealth technology available in an effort to
appropriately blend into the surrounding
environment and minimize aesthetic impact.
Application of the stealth technology chosen by
the applicant shall be subject to the approval of
City Council.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:802
[ii] To the extent permissible by law, any height
extensions to an existing communications tower
shall require prior approval of the City.
[iii] Any proposed communications tower shall be
designed structurally, electrically, and in all
respects, to accommodate both the applicant's
communications antennas and comparable
communications antennas, for the maximum
amount of future users based on the size of the
proposed communications tower.
[iv] Any communications tower over 40 feet in height
shall be equipped with an anticlimbing device, as
approved by the manufacturer.
[c] Surrounding environs.
[i] The applicant shall ensure that the existing
vegetation, trees and shrubs located within
proximity to the communications tower shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible.
[ii] The applicant shall submit a soil report to the City
complying with the standards of Appendix I:
Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222, as
amended, to document and verify the design
specifications of the foundation of the
communications tower, and anchors for guy wires,
if used.
[d] Fence/screen.
[i] A self-locking security fence with a maximum
height of eight feet shall completely surround any
communications tower greater than 40 feet in
height, as well as guy wires, or any building
housing related equipment.
[ii] The applicant shall comply with the requirements
for buffer yards and screening as required by
Article XIX of this chapter.
[e] Related equipment.
[i] Ground-mounted related equipment associated
to, or connected with, a communications tower
shall be placed underground or screened from
public view using stealth technologies, as
described herein.
[ii] All related equipment shall be architecturally
designed to blend into the environment in which it
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:803
is situated and shall meet the minimum setback
requirements of the underlying zoning district.
[f] Access road. An access road, turnaround space and
parking shall be provided to ensure adequate
emergency and service access to communications
towers. The access road shall be a dust-free allweather
surface for its entire length. Maximum use of
existing roads, whether public or private, shall be
made to the extent practicable. Road grades shall
closely follow natural contours to assure minimal
visual disturbance and minimize soil erosion. Where
applicable, the communications tower owner shall
present documentation to the City that the property
owner has granted an easement for the proposed
facility.
[g] Parking. For each communications tower greater than
40 feet in height, there shall be two off-street parking
spaces.
[h] Inspection. The City reserves the right to inspect any
communications tower to ensure compliance with the
Zoning Ordinance and any other provisions found
within the City Code or state or federal law. The City
and/or its agents shall have the authority to enter the
property upon which a communications tower is
located at any time, upon reasonable notice to the
operator, to ensure such compliance.
[3] In addition to the regulations enumerated in Subsection
A(13)(b)[1], the following regulations shall apply to
communications towers located in the public rights-ofway:
[a] Location and development standards.
[i] Communications towers in the ROW shall not
exceed a height comparable to the average height
of utility poles or electrical poles within a two
block radius of the proposed facility.
Communications towers are prohibited in areas in
which all utilities are located underground.
[ii] Communications towers shall not be located in
the front facade area of any structure.
[iii] Communications towers shall be permitted along
certain roads by conditional use throughout the
City, regardless of the underlying zoning district.
A listing of such roads is kept on file at the City
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:804
Zoning Office and is adopted via resolution of City
Council.
[iv] As a first priority, communications towers located
in the public ROW shall be located in alley rightsof-
way. If a communications tower is proposed in a
street right-of-way, the WCF applicant shall show
that location in an alley right-of-way is not
technically feasible. [Added 4-1-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-01]
[v] Communications towers in the ROW shall be
separated by a distance of 1,500 feet, unless the
WCF applicant shows to the satisfaction of the
City that such separation will materially inhibit
the WCF applicant's ability to provide wireless
service in the City. [Added 4-1-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-01]
[b] Time, place and manner. The City shall determine the
time, place and manner of construction, maintenance,
repair and/or removal of all communications towers in
the ROW based on public safety, traffic management,
physical burden on the ROW, and related
considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and
manner requirements shall be consistent with the
police powers of the City and the requirements of the
Public Utility Code.220
[c] Equipment location. Communications towers and
related equipment shall be located so as not to cause
any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards
to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined
by the City. In addition:
[i] Ground-mounted related equipment shall be
located between the sidewalk and the curb. For
reasons of safety and aesthetics, such equipment
shall neither protrude onto the curb, nor obstruct
the sidewalk.
[ii] Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot
be placed underground shall be screened, to the
fullest extent possible, through the use of
landscaping or other decorative features to the
satisfaction of City Council.
220. Editor's Note: See 66 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:805
[iii] Required electrical meter cabinets shall the
screened to blend in with the surrounding area to
the satisfaction of City Council.
[iv] Any graffiti on the tower or on any related
equipment shall be removed at the sole expense of
the owner.
[v] Any underground vaults related to
communications towers shall be reviewed and
approved by City Council.
[d] Design regulations.
[i] The communications tower shall employ the most
current stealth technology available in an effort to
appropriately blend into the surrounding
environment and minimize aesthetic impact. The
application of the stealth technology chosen by
the applicant shall be subject to the approval of
City Council.
[ii] Communications towers in the public ROW shall
not exceed a height comparable to the average
height of utility poles or electrical poles within a
two-block radius of the proposed facility.
[iii] To the extent permissible under state and federal
law, any height extensions to an existing
communications tower shall require prior
approval of the City, and shall not increase the
overall height of the communications towers to
more than 40 feet.
[iv] Any proposed communications towers shall be
designed structurally, electrically, and in all
respects to accommodate both the applicant's
communications antennas and comparable
communications antennas the maximum amount
of future users based on the size of the proposed
communications tower.
[e] Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days
following written notice from the City, or such longer
period as the City determines is reasonably necessary
or such shorter period in the case of an emergency, an
owner of a communications tower in the ROW shall, at
its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any
communications tower when the City, consistent with
its police powers and applicable Public Utility
Commission regulations, shall determine that such
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:806
removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably
necessary under the following circumstances:
[i] The construction, repair, maintenance or
installation of any City or other public
improvement in the right-of-way;
[ii] The operations of the City or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way;
[iii] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a
utility easement; or
[iv] An emergency as determined by the City.
[f] Reimbursement for ROW use. In addition to permit
fees as described in this section, every
communications tower in the ROW is subject to the
City's right to fix annually a fair and reasonable fee to
be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such
compensation for ROW use shall be directly related to
the City's actual ROW management costs including,
but not limited to, the costs of the administration and
performance of all reviewing, inspecting, permitting,
supervising and other ROW management activities by
the City. The owner of each communications tower
shall pay an annual fee to the City to compensate the
City for the City's costs incurred in connection with
the activities described above.
(14) Contractor's yard. Contractor's yards are permitted, subject to the
following criteria:
(a) The subject property shall front on an arterial or collector road
as provided in the most recent version of the City of Lock
Haven Comprehensive Plan.
(b) That portion of the lot intended or utilized for storage of
contractor's equipment or building materials shall be located
at least 25 lineal feet in any direction from any adjoining lot
line.
(c) Outdoor storage and inventory areas shall be aligned and
displayed in an orderly fashion so that circulation for firesafety
can be maintained at all times.
(d) All outdoor storage and inventory areas shall be completely
enclosed by surrounded by a fence or wall at least six feet but
not more than eight feet in height.
(e) A contractor's yard that adjoins a property within a residential
zoning district or any existing adjacent residential use shall not
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:807
begin mechanical operations until 7:00 a.m. and shall cease all
mechanical operations by 10:00 p.m.
(f) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(g) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(15) Convenience store, general. General convenience stores are
permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(a) The subject property shall front on an arterial or collector road
as provided in the most recent version of the City of Lock
Haven Comprehensive Plan.
(b) No street entrance or exit for vehicles and no portion or
equipment for fueling shall be located within 150 lineal feet of
any property which contains any one or more of the following
specified land uses where minors may congregate:
[1] Commercial recreation facility, indoor/outdoor;
[2] Day-care facility primarily for children;
[3] Library;
[4] Park, playground, playfield;
[5] Place of worship/assembly;
[6] School, private/public;
[7] Swimming pool, public; or
[8] Other lands, buildings, and uses where minors congregate.
(c) All structures (including gasoline pump islands; fuel, oil, and
lubrication storage facilities and outdoor storage areas for
vehicles, but not permitted signs) shall be set back at least 30
lineal feet from any street right-of-way or property line.
(d) Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards
on adjacent streets. No entrance or exit shall be located closer
than 35 lineal feet to an existing street intersection.
(e) All ventilation equipment outlets associated with the service/
repair work area(s), including service bay doors, shall not be
oriented directly toward any adjoining property within a
residential zoning district or any existing adjacent residential
use. Additionally, ventilation equipment associated with fuel
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:808
storage tanks shall be set back 100 lineal feet from an
adjoining property within a residential zoning district or any
existing adjacent residential use.
(f) All authorized activities, except those normally required to be
performed at the fuel and air pumps, shall be performed within
a completely enclosed building.
(g) Fuel delivery shall not impede traffic-flow patterns.
(h) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(i) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(j) The applicant shall furnish evidence that the disposal of
materials will be accomplished in a manner that complies with
state and federal regulations.
(k) All applicable approvals of both state and federal agencies
must be obtained.
(16) Correctional facilities. Correctional facility uses are permitted,
subject to the following criteria:
(a) The subject property shall front on an arterial or collector road
as provided in the most recent version of the City of Lock
Haven Comprehensive Plan.
(b) Minimum lot size shall be five acres.
(c) No correctional facility shall be located within 500 lineal feet of
any residential zoning district boundary or any existing
residential use.
(d) No correctional facility shall be located within 500 lineal feet of
any property which contains any one or more of the following
specified land uses:
[1] Day-care facility primarily for children;
[2] Hospital;
[3] Library;
[4] Nursing home;
[5] Park, playground, playfield;
[6] Place of worship/assembly;
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:809
[7] School, private/public;
[8] Swimming pool, public.
(e) If more than one building shall be contained on the parcel,
there must be a minimum of 35 lineal feet between buildings.
(f) A minimum of 30% of the total tract area shall be designated
and maintained as common open space. The landowner shall
be responsible for maintenance of the open space area.
(g) The correctional facility operator shall meet all state and
federal rules and regulations for correctional facilities. All
necessary licenses or permits issued by county, state or federal
agencies shall be provided by the applicant and required
licenses, certificates, or permits shall be a condition for
approval.
(h) The correctional facility shall submit a copy of its emergency
operations plan (EOP) to the local and county emergency
management agency coordinator. The EOP shall include
detailed information regarding solid, medical and hazardous
materials and waste handling, including a listing of all medical
and hazardous materials and wastes used and generated on
site and evidence indicating the disposal of all materials and
wastes will be accomplished in a manner that complies with
state and federal regulations.
(i) All reasonable provisions shall be made to prevent or minimize
noise, odor, and vibration, light or electrical interference
adjoining property within a residential zoning district or any
existing adjacent residential use in accordance with Article XIX
of this chapter.
(j) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(k) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(17) Day care, commercial. Commercial day cares are permitted,
subject to the following criteria:
(a) No portion of a day-care facility shall be located within 300
lineal feet from any potentially hazardous land use or activity
which could pose a threat to the safety of the children, staff, or
other occupants of the facility.
(b) Off-street parking areas shall not be used as outdoor play
areas. Outdoor play areas shall include secure fencing around
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:810
outdoor play areas. Outdoor play areas shall not be located
within the front yard and screening shall be in compliance with
Article XIX of this chapter, but vegetative materials located
within the outdoor play areas shall be of a non-harmful type
(poisonous, thorny, allergenic, etc.) All outdoor play areas must
provide a means of shade, such as a shade tree(s), pavilion(s),
etc.
(c) Outdoor play areas of a day-care center involving the care of
25 or more children at any one time shall be set back a
minimum of 25 lineal feet and be screened from adjoining
property within a residential zoning district or any existing
adjacent residential use.
(d) "Enrollment" shall be defined as the largest number of
students and/or children under day-care supervision at any one
time during a seven-day period.
(e) Primary passenger dropoff and pickup areas should be
provided on site and arranged so that the passengers do not
have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the site. At a
minimum, passenger dropoff and pickup areas shall be located
in a manner that minimizes detrimental traffic impacts (both
pedestrian and vehicular) on the surrounding neighborhood.
(f) Building height and setbacks shall be consistent with
surrounding development in the neighborhood.
(g) In residential districts, any permitted commercial day-care use
shall maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is
compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood.
No modifications to the external appearance of the building
(except fire escapes) which would alter its residential
character shall be permitted unless required by the Building
Code or applicable commonwealth agency.
(h) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(i) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(j) All commercial day-care facilities shall obtain and maintain the
proper licensure from the commonwealth.
(18) Farmer/flea market and roadside stands. Farmer/flea markets are
permitted, subject to the following criteria: [Amended 5-16-2011
by Ord. No. 880]
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:811
(a) The retail sales area shall be considered to be that of the
smallest rectangle or other regular geometric shape which
encompasses all display stands, booths, tables or stalls, plus
any adjoining aisles and/or walkways from which consumers
can inspect items for sale. The retail sales shall include all
indoor and/or outdoor areas as listed above.
(b) The retail sales area shall be set back at least 20 lineal feet
from all property lines, and shall be calculated as part of the
maximum permitted lot coverage, regardless of its surface
treatment.
(c) Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance
with Article XVIII of this chapter.
(d) All outdoor display and sales of merchandise shall begin no
earlier than 6:00 a.m., and be completed no later than official
sunset.
(e) No machinery, equipment, or materials shall be stored in the
required front, side, or rear yard setback areas.
(f) Any exterior microphone/speaker system shall be oriented,
arranged and/or screened to prevent any objectionable noise
impact on adjoining properties.
(g) Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided
amid any outdoor retail sales area. Such trash receptacles shall
be routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter
and debris. All applications shall include a description of a
working plan for the cleanup of litter.
(h) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(i) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(19) Forestry. Forestry or commercial timber harvesting, excluding the
cutting of trees for the personal use of the landowner or for precommercial
timber stand improvement, is permitted, subject to the
following criteria:
(a) Timber harvesting shall be set back a minimum of 100 lineal
feet from any property line.
(b) Timber harvesting shall be set back a minimum of 150 lineal
feet from adjoining property within a residential zoning district
or any existing adjacent residential use.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:812
(c) All timber harvesting practices must protect nearby structures
and utility lines. No uncontrolled felling shall be allowed in
developed areas.
(d) To avoid traffic congestion and sound disturbance, all activities
should start after 7:00 a.m. and end by 6:00 p.m. during the
working week. No forestry activities shall take place between
the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., neither on weekdays nor
at any time on weekends or holidays.
(e) Notification of commencement or completion. For all timber
harvesting operations that are expected to exceed 1/2 acre, the
landowner shall notify the Zoning Officer at least 30 business
days before the operation commences and within 15 days
before the operation is completed. No timber harvesting shall
occur until the notice has been provided. Notification shall be
in writing and shall specify the land on which harvesting will
occur, the expected size of the harvest area and, as applicable,
the anticipated starting or completion date of the operation
and logging plan. This written notification shall also specify
any roads affected, dates of effect, plans to restore any
damages to roads and contact information for the logging
operations submitted to owners abutting the road used to
access the logging site.
(f) Preparation of a logging plan. Every landowner on whose land
timber harvesting is to occur shall prepare a written logging
plan in the form specified in this subsection. No timber
harvesting shall occur until the plan has been prepared and
proper notification of commencement is provided to the City.
The provisions of this plan shall be followed throughout the
operation. The plan shall be available at the harvest site at all
times during the operation and shall be provided to the City
Zoning Officer upon request.
(g) Responsibility for compliance. The landowner and the operator
shall be jointly and severally responsible for complying with
the terms of the logging plan.
(h) Contents of the logging plan.
[1] At a minimum, the logging plan shall include the following:
[a] Design, construction, maintenance and retirement of
the access system, including haul roads, skid roads,
skid trails and landings.
[b] Design, construction and maintenance of water
control measures and structures such as culverts,
broad-based dips, filter strips and water bars.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:813
[c] Design, construction and maintenance of stream and
wetland crossings.
[d] The general location of the proposed operation in
relation City roadways and state highways, including
any accesses to those roadways and highways.
[2] Each logging plan shall include a site map containing the
following information:
[a] Site location and boundaries, including both the
boundaries of the property on which the timber
harvest will take place and the boundaries of the
proposed harvest area within that property.
[b] Significant topographic features related to potential
environmental problems.
[c] Location of all earth disturbance activities such as
roads, landings and water control measures and
structures.
[d] Location of all crossing of waters of the
commonwealth.
[e] The general location of the proposed operation to City
roadways and state highways, including any accesses
to those roadways and highways.
(i) Compliance with applicable regulations. The logging plan shall
address and comply with the requirements of all applicable
state laws and regulations and City ordinances, including, but
not limited to, the following:
[1] Soil erosion and sedimentation control regulations and
standards of the Clinton County Conservation District and/
or PA DEP requirements.
[2] Stream crossing and wetlands protection regulations of PA
DEP and/or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
[3] Stormwater management plans and regulations issued
pursuant to Chapter 352, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(j) Relationship of state laws, regulations, and permits to the
logging plan. Any permits required by state laws and
regulations shall be attached to and become part of the logging
plan. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan that
satisfies the requirements of Section 25, Pennsylvania Code,
Chapter 102 shall also satisfy the minimum requirements for
the logging plan and associated map specified previously,
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:814
provided that all information required by these subsections is
included or attached.
(k) Responsibility for road maintenance and repair; road bonding.
The landowner and the operator shall be responsible for
repairing any damage to City roads caused by traffic
associated with the timber harvest operation pursuant to the
provisions of Section 67, Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 189,
hauling in excess of posted weight limit. The City may require
the landowner and/or operator to furnish a bond to guarantee
the repair of any such damage, pursuant to the said provisions
of the Pennsylvania Code.
(20) Funeral home. Funeral homes are permitted, subject to the
following criteria:
(a) Sufficient off-street stacking area for the formation of the
funeral procession shall be provided on the site. A minimum
one-hundred-foot long on-site stacking area for the funeral
procession shall be provided on the site. No funeral procession
will be allowed to form on public streets.
(b) All off-street parking and off-street loading must be provided
on the lot and shall be provided in accordance with Article
XVIII of this chapter.
(c) In residential districts, building length and setbacks shall be
consistent with surrounding development in the neighborhood.
(d) In residential districts, any permitted funeral home use shall
maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is
compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood.
(e) All rooms available for funerals and viewing shall be located
within the principal building.
(f) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(g) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(h) The applicant shall demonstrate proof of an approved means of
disposal of all solid, medical, and hazardous wastes.
(21) Halfway house. Halfway houses are permitted, subject to the
following criteria:
(a) A halfway house must be licensed where required by an
appropriate federal, state, county or other government
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:815
agency(ies) and shall be in compliance with all applicable rules
and regulations of the licensing body(ies). Prior to a zoning
permit being issued, the applicant shall provide a copy of any
required license to the Zoning Officer prior to beginning the
use.
(b) A halfway house shall be directly affiliated with a parent
institution or organization, which shall provide full-time
supervision and administration to the residents of the house.
(c) A common cooking and eating area must be provided; no
cooking or dining facilities shall be provided in individual
rooms or suites.
(d) The residents of the halfway house shall reside on the premises
to benefit from the services provided.
(e) No portion of a building occupied by a halfway house use shall
be permitted to be located within 1,000 lineal feet of any other
building occupied by a halfway house use.
(f) No portion of a building occupied by a halfway house use shall
be located within 1,000 lineal feet of any property which
contains any one or more of the following specified land uses
where minors may congregate:
[1] Commercial recreation facility, indoor/outdoor;
[2] Day-care facility primarily for children;
[3] Library;
[4] Park, playground, playfield;
[5] Place of worship/assembly;
[6] School, private/public;
[7] Swimming pool, public; or
[8] Other lands, buildings, and uses where minors congregate.
(g) Each application shall be accompanied by a statement
describing the following:
[1] The composition of the halfway house;
[2] The policies and goals of the halfway house and the means
proposed to accomplish those goals;
[3] The characteristics of the residents and number of
residents to be served;
[4] The operating methods and procedures to be used; and
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:816
[5] Any other facts relevant to the proposed operation of the
halfway house.
(h) Any use permit granted for the halfway house shall be bound to
the type and number of offenders listed on the application. Any
change in the type or number of offenders being housed shall
require a new review and subsequent consideration for
approval.
(i) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(j) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(22) Health and fitness clubs. Health and fitness clubs are permitted,
subject to the following criteria:
(a) All outdoor recreation/activity areas shall be set back at least
50 lineal feet from the street right-of-way and 100 lineal feet
any adjoining property within a residential zoning district or
any existing adjacent residential use; otherwise, they shall
comply with the underlying zoning district setbacks.
(b) Any accessory eating or retail use shall not be directly
accessible without passing through the main clubhouse
building.
(c) Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided
amid any outdoor retail sales area. Such trash receptacles shall
be routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter
and debris. All applications shall include a description of a
working plan for the cleanup of litter.
(d) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(e) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(23)Home improvement center, lumber, or building materials sales.
Home improvement center, lumber, or building materials sales
facilities are permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(a) Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards
on adjacent streets. No entrance or exit shall be located closer
than 35 lineal feet to an existing street intersection.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:817
(b) All outdoor storage, sales, display, and inventory areas shall be
set back at least 25 lineal feet from the street right-of-way line
and property lines, and shall not be permitted in required
front, side, or rear yard setback areas. All unpaved yard
setback areas shall be covered with grass or similar vegetative
material.
(c) Outdoor storage, sales, display, and inventory areas shall be
graded for proper drainage and shall be surfaced so as to
provide a durable and dustless surface, such as concrete or
bituminous concrete surface.
(d) Outdoor storage, sales, display, and inventory areas shall be
aligned and displayed in an orderly fashion so that circulation
for firesafety can be maintained at all times.
(e) Outdoor storage, sales, display, and inventory areas shall be all
areas open for public display, including but not limited to
shelves, racks, bins, stalls, tables, and booths, plus any
adjoining aisles or walkways from which consumers can
inspect items for sale. The retail sales area shall include both
interior and exterior areas, as listed above.
(f) All outdoor storage, sales, display, and inventory areas shall be
completely enclosed by surrounded by a fence or wall at least
six feet but not more than eight feet in height.
(g) Any drilling, cutting, sawing, mixing, crushing, or some other
preparation of building materials, plus any testing or repair of
motorized equipment, shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building;
(h) Any exterior microphone/speaker system shall be oriented,
arranged and/or screened to prevent any objectionable noise
impact on adjoining properties.
(i) Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided
amid any outdoor sales area. Such trash receptacles shall be
routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter and
debris. All applications shall include a description of a working
plan for the cleanup of litter.
(j) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(k) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:818
(24) Hospitals. Hospitals are permitted, subject to the following
criteria:
(a) The facility operator shall meet all state and federal rules and
regulations for hospital facilities. All necessary licenses or
permits issued by county, state or federal agencies shall be
provided by the applicant and required licenses, certificates, or
permits shall be a condition for approval.
(b) Primary visitor or passenger dropoff and pickup areas should
be provided on site and arranged so that the passengers do not
have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the site.
(c) Emergency entrances shall be located on a building wall facing
away an adjoining property within a residential zoning district
or any existing adjacent residential use.
(d) Sufficient off-street stacking area for the movement of the
emergency vehicles shall be provided on the site. A minimum
one-hundred-foot-long on-site stacking area for the emergency
vehicles shall be provided on the site. No emergency vehicle
will be allowed to stack or be stored on public streets.
(e) The institution shall submit a copy of its emergency operations
plan (EOP) to the local and county emergency management
agency coordinator. The EOP shall include detailed information
regarding solid, medical and hazardous materials and waste
handling, including a listing of all medical and hazardous
materials and wastes used and generated on site and evidence
indicating the disposal of all materials and wastes will be
accomplished in a manner that complies with state and federal
regulations.
(f) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(g) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(25) Hotels. Hotels are permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(a) Any accessory eating, drinking, retail, or meeting room use
shall be directly accessible by passing through the principal
hotel building, subject to the following:
[1] No drive-through or takeout services shall be permitted;
and
[2] One additional freestanding signs (other than those
permitted for the principal hotel use) shall be permitted.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:819
(b) Each rental unit/room shall have its own toilet and bathing or
shower facilities.
(c) Sufficient off-street stacking area for guest vehicles shall be
provided on the site. No guest vehicles will be allowed to form
or stack on public streets.
(d) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(e) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(26) Indoor commercial recreation facilities. Indoor commercial
recreation facilities are permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(a) All activities shall take place in a completely enclosed building.
(b) All structures where indoor commercial recreation occurs shall
be soundproofed in a manner to prevent sound from traveling
outside, such as solid-core doors, sound-absorbent ceilings and
forced-air ventilation.
(c) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(d) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(27) Industrial, general uses. General industrial uses are permitted,
subject to the following criteria:
(a) The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the
proposed use in each of the following topics:
[1] The nature of the on-site processing operations, the
materials used in the process, the products produced, and
the generation and methods for disposal of any byproducts.
In addition, the applicant shall furnish evidence
that the disposal of materials will be accomplished in a
manner that complies with state and federal regulations.
[2] The general scale of the operation in terms of its market
area, specific floor space requirements for each step of the
industrial process, the total number of employees on each
shift, and an overall needed site size.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:820
[3] Any environmental impacts that are likely to be generated
(e.g., odor, noise, smoke, dust litter, glare, vibration,
electrical disturbance, wastewater, stormwater, solid
waste, etc.) and specific measures employed to mitigate or
eliminate any negative impacts. The applicant shall further
furnish expert evidence that the impacts generated by the
proposed use fall within acceptable levels as regulated by
applicable laws and ordinances, including but not limited
to those of Article XIX of this chapter.
(b) No machinery, equipment, or materials of any kind shall be
stored in front of the principal building.
(c) No machinery, equipment, or materials shall be stored in
required front, side, or rear yard setback areas. All unpaved
yard setback areas shall be covered with grass or similar
vegetative material.
(d) All machinery, equipment, or materials and activities not within
a completely enclosed buildings shall be surrounded by a fence
or wall at least six feet but not more than eight feet in height.
Such fence shall be completely sight-obscuring and maintained
in good condition. Any gate in a fence shall be similarly
constructed and maintained and shall be kept securely locked
at all times when the establishment is not in operation.
(e) All machinery, equipment, or materials shall be stored or
arranged in an orderly fashion so that circulation for firesafety
can be maintained at all times.
(f) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(g) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(28) Industrial, light uses. Light industrial uses are permitted, subject to
the following criteria:
(a) The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the
proposed use in each of the following topics:
[1] The nature of the on-site processing operations, the
materials used in the process, the products produced, and
the generation and methods for disposal of any byproducts.
In addition, the applicant shall furnish evidence
that the disposal of materials will be accomplished in a
manner that complies with state and federal regulations.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:821
[2] The general scale of the operation in terms of its market
area, specific floor space requirements for each step of the
industrial process, the total number of employees on each
shift, and an overall needed site size.
[3] Any environmental impacts that are likely to be generated
(e.g., odor, noise, smoke, dust litter, glare, vibration,
electrical disturbance, wastewater, stormwater, solid
waste, etc.) and specific measures employed to mitigate or
eliminate any negative impacts. The applicant shall further
furnish expert evidence that the impacts generated by the
proposed use fall within acceptable levels as regulated by
applicable laws and ordinances, including but not limited
to those of Article XIX of this chapter.
(b) All reasonable provisions shall be made to prevent or minimize
noise, odor, and vibration, light or electrical interference
adjoining property within a residential zoning district or any
existing adjacent residential use in accordance with Article XIX
of this chapter.
(c) No machinery, equipment, or materials of any kind shall be
stored in front of the principal building.
(d) No machinery, equipment, or materials shall be stored in
required front, side, or rear yard setback areas. All unpaved
yard setback areas shall be covered with grass or similar
vegetative material.
(e) All machinery, equipment, or materials and activities not within
a completely enclosed building shall be surrounded by a fence
or wall at least six feet but not more than eight feet in height.
Such fence shall be completely sight-obscuring and maintained
in good condition. No fence may be permitted in any yard
setback area. Any gate in a fence shall be similarly constructed
and maintained and shall be kept securely locked at all times
when the establishment is not in operation.
(f) All machinery, equipment, or materials shall be stored or
arranged in an orderly fashion so that circulation for firesafety
can be maintained at all times.
(g) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(h) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:822
(29)Kennel, commercial. Commercial kennels are permitted, subject to
the following criteria:
(a) Minimum lot area. Unless animals are kept inside at all times,
each site shall contain at least one acre; otherwise, the
minimum lot area requirement of the applicable zoning district
shall apply.
(b) All structures where animals are kept shall be completely
enclosed and soundproofed in a manner to prevent sound and
odor from traveling outside, such as solid-core doors, soundabsorbent
ceilings and forced air ventilation.
(c) All structures where animals are kept that are not completely
enclosed, and also including any outdoor animal pens, stalls,
and runways shall be located within the rear yard. These
outside and unenclosed facilities shall be a minimum of 50
lineal feet from all property lines, and 150 lineal feet any
residential zoning district boundary or any existing residential
use.
(d) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(e) Where outdoor animal pens, stalls, or runways are permitted,
animals shall be permitted to exercise outside daily between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
(f) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(g) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(h) The applicant shall furnish evidence of effective means of
animal and veterinary waste collection and disposal that shall
be implemented.
(i) The kennel shall be operated in full compliance with the
Animal Welfare Act221 and applicable state kennel regulations.
(30) Landscaping center/nursery. Landscaping centers/nurseries are
permitted, subject to the following criteria:
221. Editor's Note: See 7 U.S.C. § 2131 et seq.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:823
(a) The display and sale of items not grown on the premises shall
be incidental to the nursery operation. The display area for
these items shall not exceed 25% of the total gross display and
sales area on the subject property. The display, sale or repair of
motorized nursery or garden equipment may be permitted as
an accessory use.
(b) All outdoor storage, sales, display, and inventory areas shall be
set back at least 25 lineal feet from the front property line and
any street right-of-way line.
(c) Outdoor storage, sales, display, and inventory areas shall be
graded for proper drainage and shall be surfaced so as to
provide a durable and dustless surface, such as concrete or
bituminous concrete surface.
(d) Outdoor storage, sales, display, and inventory areas shall be
aligned and displayed in an orderly fashion so that circulation
for firesafety can be maintained at all times.
(e) Outdoor storage, sales, display, and inventory areas shall be all
areas open for public display, including but not limited to
shelves, racks, bins, stalls, tables, and booths, plus any
adjoining aisles or walkways from which consumers can
inspect items for sale. The retail sales area shall include both
interior and exterior areas, as listed above.
(f) All outdoor storage, sales, display, and inventory areas shall be
completely enclosed by a fence or wall at least six feet but not
more than eight feet in height.
(g) Any drilling, cutting, sawing, mixing, crushing, or some other
preparation of building materials, plus any testing or repair of
motorized equipment, shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building;
(h) Any exterior microphone/speaker system shall be oriented,
arranged and/or screened to prevent any objectionable noise
impact on adjoining properties.
(i) Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided
amid any outdoor sales area. Such trash receptacles shall be
routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter and
debris. All applications shall include a description of a working
plan for the cleanup of litter.
(j) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(k) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:824
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(31) Licensed group home. Licensed group homes are permitted,
subject to the following criteria:
(a) In a narrative form, a statement of the proposed use, including
its location, number of residents, name, telephone number and
contact person of the sponsoring agency.
(b) A statement that all required approvals, permits and licenses
have been granted from the federal, state and county
governments or other public agencies.
(c) The group home shall comply with all zoning regulations in the
district in which the group home is located.
(d) In residential districts, any permitted licensed group home
uses shall maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and
is compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood.
No modifications to the external appearance of the building
(except fire escapes) which would alter its residential
character shall be permitted.
(e) Building height and setbacks shall be consistent with
surrounding development in the neighborhood.
(f) Fire escapes, where required, shall be located in the rear of the
building and shall not be located on any wall facing a street
right-of-way, excluding alleys.
(g) Occupants of the group home shall live as a family unit.
(h) Accommodations shall be limited to no more than four persons
(which includes full-time staff and/or supervision) in the R-1
and R-L Residential Zoning Districts, and no more than eight
residents (in addition to any in full-time staff and/or
supervision) in the RM, and RH Residential Zoning Districts.
(i) Under no circumstances shall any uses qualifying for or falling
under the definition of "halfway house" be considered a group
home.
(j) All uses must comply with City building, health, housing,
building, safety, property and other applicable code
requirements.
(32) Licensed group residence. Licensed group residence uses are
permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(a) In a narrative form, a statement of the proposed use, including
its location, number of residents, name, telephone number and
contact person of the sponsoring agency.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:825
(b) A statement that all required approvals, permits and licenses
have been granted from the federal, state and county
governments or other public agencies.
(c) The licensed group residences shall comply with all zoning
regulations in the district in which the licensed group
residence is located.
(d) All off-street parking shall comply with Article XVIII, shall not
be located in front of the principal building, and shall be set
back a minimum of 10 lineal feet and be screened from
adjoining property within a residential zoning district or any
existing adjacent residential use.
(e) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(f) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(g) Under no circumstances shall any uses qualifying for or falling
under the definition of "halfway house" be considered a group
home.
(h) All uses must comply with City building, health, housing,
building, safety, property and other applicable code
requirements.
(33) Mini-storage/self-storage facilities. Mini-storage/self-storage
facilities are permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(a) All storage units shall be of fire-resistant construction.
(b) Outdoor storage shall be limited to recreational vehicles, boats
and trailers parked on paved areas. All such items stored
outside of an unenclosed building must be licensed and
inspected, if applicable, and in operable condition.
(c) All permitted outdoor storage shall be completely enclosed by
a fence or wall at least six feet but not more than eight feet in
height.
(d) The storage of inoperable, unlicensed, or inspected motor
vehicles outside of a completely enclosed building shall be
prohibited.
(e) Mini-storage/self-storage facilities shall be used solely for the
dead storage of property. The following lists examples of uses
expressly prohibited upon the site:
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:826
[1] Auctions, commercial wholesale or retail sales, or garage
sales.
[2] The servicing, repair, or fabrication of motor vehicles,
boats, trailers, lawn mowers, appliances, or other similar
equipment.
[3] The operation of power tools, spray-painting equipment,
table saws, lathes, compressors, welding equipment, kilns,
or other similar equipment.
[4] The establishment of a transfer and storage business.
[5] The storage of trash, radioactive or highly toxic
substances, garbage, refuse, explosives or flammable
materials, hazardous substances, animal carcasses or
skins, or similar items that are dangerous, noxious or
offensive because of odors, dust, noise, fumes, or
vibrations.
(f) The applicant shall adequately demonstrate that all ministorage/
self storage rental and/or use contracts shall
specifically prohibit these uses.
(g) All garage doors or outdoor storage areas shall not be located
directly facing toward any adjoining property within a
residential zoning district or any existing adjacent residential
use.
(h) Nothing shall be stored in interior traffic aisles, required offstreet
parking areas, loading areas or accessways.
[1] Minimum separation between buildings shall be 20 lineal
feet, which shall allow passage by emergency vehicles.
[2] No building shall be longer than 200 lineal feet.
(i) The applicant shall submit a working plan for the collection,
recycling and disposal of litter and wastes.
(j) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(k) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(34) Mobile home parks. Mobile home parks are permitted, subject to
the following criteria:
(a) Minimum lot area shall be five acres.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:827
(b) Maximum density in a mobile home park shall be seven units
per acre.
(c) All mobile home lots or areas shall contain at least 4,250
square feet.
(d) Each mobile home lot shall have a minimum:
[1] Lot width: 40 feet;
[2] Front yard: 20 feet;
[3] Rear yard: 15 feet; and
[4] Two side yards: 10 feet each.
(e) In no case shall the distance between any two mobile homes be
less than 20 lineal feet (these setbacks shall also apply to the
mobile home park office, service, utility, or other buildings).
(f) No mobile home lot shall be within 25 lineal feet of a park
boundary, nor within 35 lineal feet of an outside street right-ofway.
This area shall constitute the mobile home park boundary
area.
(g) Each mobile home space shall contain no more than one mobile
home, nor more than one family.
(h) Each mobile home shall be placed on a six-inch-thick poured
concrete pad over a six-inch stone base, the length and width
of which shall be at least equal to the length and width of the
mobile home it is to support. Every mobile home shall be
anchored to the mobile home pad where it is located, prior to
the unit being occupied, and no more than seven days from the
arrival of the mobile home. The anchoring system shall be
designed by a registered professional engineer to prevent
tilting of the unit, and resist a minimum wind velocity of 90
miles per hour.
(i) Each mobile home lot shall be provided with a permanent frostfree
foundation, and each lot will have available adequate
provisions, such as anchor bolts and tie-down straps, to assure
that each mobile home has available to it a means of securing
the home to its site.
(j) Protective skirting shall be placed around the area between
the stand surface and the floor level of each mobile home so as
to prevent that area from forming a harborage for rodents,
creating a fire hazard, or exposing unsightly conditions.
(k) Individual mobile home owners may install accessory or
storage sheds, extensions and additions to mobile homes, and
exterior patio areas. Any such facilities so installed shall not
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:828
intrude into any required front, side, or rear yard, and, in every
case, shall substantially conform in style, quality, and color to
the existing mobile homes.
(l) Each mobile home shall be erected and connected to utilities in
accordance with the most recent versions of the City of Lock
Haven Building Code,222 Chapter 352, Subdivision and Land
Development, and all applicable state and federal
requirements.
(m) All mobile homes shall abut on a street of the mobile home
park's internal private street system. In no case shall access to
such mobile homes and mobile home lots be provided directly
to or abut adjoining public roads.
(n) All internal streets shall, as a minimum, comply with marginal
access street standards of Chapter 352, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(o) Interior mobile home park roads with no on-street parking
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Chapter
352, Subdivision and Land Development, for marginal access
streets. An additional width of 10 feet shall be provided for
each lane of on-street parking.
(p) Each mobile home shall be provided with a minimum of two
paved parking spaces containing at least 180 square feet of
bituminous or concrete surface, which shall be located on the
mobile home lot. If on-street parking is not provided, one
additional off-street parking space per unit shall be provided in
a common visitor parking compound. Such visitor parking lots
shall be sized, arranged, and located so that the spaces are
within 300 feet walking distance to any unit served.
(q) Curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be constructed and installed
on both sides of each street with the mobile home park
(whether public or private), in addition to installation of street
trees, in accordance with Chapter 352, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(r) There shall be a minimum of 15% of the gross acreage of the
mobile home park devoted to active and/or passive common
recreational facilities. Responsibility for maintenance of the
recreational areas shall be with the landowner and/or the
operator.
(s) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
222. Editor's Note: See Ch. 212, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:829
(t) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(u) Deed restrictions or covenants should be included to provide
for the creation of a property owners' association or board of
trustees for the proper protection and maintenance of the
development improvements in the future; at a minimum, all
development improvements relating to internal streets,
sidewalks, curbs, parks, parking areas, etc., shall remain
private and the responsibility of the landowner and/or the
operator. Should the a property owners' association or board of
trustees, or landowner and/or the operator, neglect to maintain
the designated improvements as depicted on the plan, the City
may then maintain said areas and assess the responsible party
for any costs incurred.
(35) Motels. Motels are permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(a) Any accessory eating, drinking, retail, or meeting room use
shall be physically attached to the principal motel building
subject to the following:
[1] No drive-through shall be permitted; and
[2] One additional freestanding signs (other than those
permitted for the principal motel use) shall be permitted.
(b) Each rental unit/room shall have its own toilet and bathing or
shower facilities.
(c) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(d) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(36) Multifamily dwellings. Multifamily dwellings are permitted, subject
to the following criteria:
(a) Individual lots or subdivided parcels 1 1/4 acres or less in size
shall have no building or buildings in addition to the principal
building on the same lot used for living purposes. For parcels
greater than 1 1/4 acres in size, one additional building on the
same lot for living purposes shall be permitted; however, there
must be a minimum of 35 lineal feet between buildings.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:830
(b) All off-street parking shall comply with Article XVIII, shall not
be located in front of the principal building, and shall be set
back a minimum of 10 lineal feet and be screened from
adjoining property within a residential zoning district or any
existing adjacent residential use.
(c) A minimum of 30% of the total tract area shall be designated
and maintained as common open space. Responsibility for
maintenance of the open space area shall be with the
landowner.
(d) Building height and setbacks shall be consistent with
surrounding development.
(e) Any permitted multifamily dwelling use shall maintain an
exterior appearance that resembles and is compatible with any
existing dwellings in the neighborhood.
(f) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(g) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(37) Neighborhood retail/service. Neighborhood retail/service
establishments are permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(a) Hours of operation and activities shall be limited to between
7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. to protect the existing neighborhood
from detrimental noise, disturbance or interruption.
(b) Building height and setbacks shall be consistent with
surrounding development.
(c) In residential districts, any permitted neighborhood retail/
service use shall maintain an exterior appearance that
resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellings in the
neighborhood. No modifications to the external appearance of
the building (except fire escapes) which would alter its
residential character shall be permitted.
(d) Trash receptacles shall be provided and routinely emptied to
present the scattering of litter, and the applicant shall furnish
and implement a working plan for the cleanup of litter and
debris.
(e) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:831
(f) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(38) Nursing homes. Nursing homes are permitted, subject to the
following criteria:
(a) No more than 18 occupants per acre shall be permitted,
excluding the staff of the facility.
(b) A minimum of 30% of the lot shall be suitable and developed
for passive recreation. This area shall include outdoor sitting
areas and pedestrian walks.
(c) The facility operator shall meet all state and federal rules and
regulations for health-care facilities. All necessary licenses or
permits issued by county, state or federal agencies shall be
provided by the applicant and required licenses, certificates, or
permits shall be a condition for approval.
(d) Primary visitor or passenger dropoff and pickup areas should
be provided on site and arranged so that the passengers do not
have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the site.
(e) Sufficient off-street stacking area for the movement of the
visitor and emergency vehicles shall be provided on the site. A
minimum one-hundred-foot-long on-site stacking area for the
visitor and/or emergency vehicles shall be provided on the site.
No visitor or emergency vehicle will be allowed to stack or be
stored on public streets.
(f) The institution shall submit a copy of its emergency operations
plan (EOP) to the local and county emergency management
agency coordinator. The EOP shall include detailed information
regarding solid, medical and hazardous materials and waste
handling, including a listing of all medical and hazardous
materials and wastes used and generated on site and evidence
indicating the disposal of all materials and wastes will be
accomplished in a manner that complies with state and federal
regulations.
(g) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(h) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:832
(39) Outdoor commercial recreation facilities. Outdoor commercial
recreation facilities are permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(a) Minimum lot size shall be five acres.
(b) All outdoor recreation/activity areas shall be set back at least
50 lineal feet from the street right-of-way and 100 lineal feet
any adjoining property within a residential zoning district or
any existing adjacent residential use; otherwise, they shall
comply with the underlying zoning district setbacks.
(c) The facility shall be operated only between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
(d) Any exterior microphone/speaker system shall be oriented,
arranged and/or screened to prevent any objectionable noise
impact on adjoining properties.
(e) Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided
amid any outdoor retail sales area. Such trash receptacles shall
be routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter
and debris. All applications shall include a description of a
working plan for the cleanup of litter.
(f) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(g) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(40) Parking compounds. Parking compounds are permitted, subject to
the following criteria:
(a) Driveways, access drives or other points of ingress/egress for
motor vehicle shall generally be taken from alleys.
(b) No ingress or egress points shall be taken from Main Street,
Church Street, or Water Street in the CBD Zoning District.
(c) Off-street surface parking lots shall not be located on corner
lots, on or adjacent to the intersection of two streets.
(d) Off-street surface parking lots abutting public street rights-ofway,
including alleys, shall be provided with a continuous
street-fronting three-and-one-half-foot-high masonry wall or a
perimeter planting at least five feet in depth measured from all
sides of the parking area towards the property/street line with
a mix of high- and low-level screening in accordance with
Article XIX of this chapter. Wall breaks for driveways shall be
not more than 24 feet in width.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:833
(e) All aboveground off-street parking garage and buildings shall
comply with all provisions for principal buildings in the zoning
district where the parking structures and building is proposed.
(f) Parking garages and structures located along any street rightof-
way line shall be provided with a continuous street-fronting,
ground-level, nonresidential space and use, except for ingress
and egress points necessary for retail store entrances, vehicle
entrance and exit lanes, and pedestrian entrances to stairs and
elevator lobbies into the garage or structure.
(g) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(h) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building rather than the area around it.
(41) Parks, playgrounds, and other noncommercial recreational uses.
Parks, playgrounds, and other noncommercial recreational uses
are permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(a) Parks shall be developed in a manner that preserves natural
features, watercourses, unique rock outcrops, slopes of
greater than 15%, and vegetation.
(b) Hours of operation and activities shall comply with all
applicable City policies and regulations relating to parks and
public outdoor facilities.
(c) Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided
amid any outdoor retail sales area. Such trash receptacles shall
be routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter
and debris. All applications shall include a description of a
working plan for the cleanup of litter.
(42) Personal-care centers and personal-care homes. Personal-care
centers and personal-care homes shall be permitted, subject to the
following criteria:
(a) In residential districts, any permitted personal-care home use
shall maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is
compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood.
No modifications to the external appearance of the building
(except fire escapes) which would alter its residential
character shall be permitted.
(b) Building height and setbacks shall be consistent with
surrounding development in the neighborhood.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:834
(c) All individual resident/patient rooms shall be located within the
principal building.
(d) Accommodations for personal-care homes shall be limited to no
more than four individual resident/patient rooms in a
residential zoning district and eight individual resident/patient
rooms in other zoning districts.
(e) No cooking facilities shall be provided or permitted in the
individual resident/patient rooms.
(f) All off-street parking shall comply with Article XVIII, shall not
be located in front of the principal building, and shall be set
back a minimum of 10 lineal feet from the property lines and be
screened from adjoining property within a residential zoning
district or any existing adjacent residential use.
(g) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(h) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(i) All uses must comply with City building, health, housing,
safety, property and other applicable code requirements.
(j) All personal-care facilities shall obtain and maintain the proper
licensure from the commonwealth.
(43) Place of assembly. Places of assembly are permitted, subject to the
following criteria:
(a) Hours of operation and events shall be scheduled to minimize
negative impacts on the surrounding neighborhood.
(b) Primary passenger dropoff and pickup areas should be
provided on site and arranged so that the passengers do not
have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the site. At a
minimum, passenger dropoff and pickup areas shall be located
in a manner that minimizes detrimental traffic impacts (both
pedestrian and vehicular) on the surrounding neighborhood.
(c) All places of assembly with primary assembly areas providing a
seating capacity of 250 or more persons shall front and have
access to an arterial or collector road as provided in the most
recent version of the City of Lock Haven Comprehensive Plan.
(d) In residential districts, any permitted place of assembly use
shall maintain an exterior appearance that is compatible with
any existing dwellings in the neighborhood.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:835
(e) Building height and setbacks shall be consistent with
surrounding development in the neighborhood.
(f) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(g) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(44) Place of worship. Places of worship are permitted, subject to the
following criteria:
(a) Hours of operation and events shall be scheduled to minimize
negative impacts on the surrounding neighborhood.
(b) Primary passenger dropoff and pickup areas should be
provided on site and arranged so that the passengers do not
have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the site. At a
minimum, passenger dropoff and pickup areas shall be located
in a manner that minimizes detrimental traffic impacts (both
pedestrian and vehicular) on the surrounding neighborhood.
(c) All places of worship with a seating capacity of 250 or more
persons shall front and have access to an arterial or collector
road as provided in the most recent version of the City of Lock
Haven Comprehensive Plan.
(d) In residential districts, any permitted place of worship use
shall maintain an exterior appearance that is compatible with
any existing dwellings in the neighborhood.
(e) Building height and setbacks shall be consistent with
surrounding development in the neighborhood.
(f) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(g) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(45) Public building. Public buildings are permitted, subject to the
following criteria:
(a) In residential districts, any permitted public building shall
maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is
compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:836
(b) In any residential district, the outdoor storage of vehicles or
equipment shall not be permitted.
(c) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(d) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(46) Public/private works facility. Public/private works facilities are
permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(a) The applicant must demonstrate that the selected location is
necessary for public service and the use cannot be supplied if
located elsewhere.
(b) In residential districts, any permitted public/private works
facility shall maintain an exterior appearance that resembles
and is compatible with any existing dwellings in the
neighborhood.
(c) In any residential district, the outdoor storage of vehicles or
equipment shall not be permitted.
(d) Principal buildings and structures shall be set back 100 lineal
feet from an adjoining property within a residential zoning
district or any existing adjacent residential use.
(e) The applicant shall demonstrate that environmental impacts
that are likely to be generated (e.g., odor, noise, smoke, dust
litter, glare, vibration, electrical disturbance, wastewater,
stormwater, solid waste, etc.) and specific measures employed
to mitigate or eliminate any negative impacts beyond the
subject property fall within acceptable levels as regulated by
applicable laws and ordinances, including but not limited to
those of Article XIX of this chapter.
(f) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(g) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(47)Rail yards. Rail yards are permitted, subject to the following
criteria:
(a) Minimum lot area shall be five acres.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:837
(b) All outside storage shall be at least 200 lineal feet from any
public street, adjoining property within a residential zoning
district or an existing adjacent residential use.
(c) All yard setbacks shall at all times be clean, vacant and well
maintained.
(d) The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the
proposed use in each of the following topics:
[1] The applicant shall furnish evidence that the disposal of
materials will be accomplished in a manner that complies
with state and federal regulations.
[2] Any environmental impacts that are likely to be generated
(e.g., odor, noise, smoke, dust, litter, glare, vibration,
electrical disturbance, wastewater, stormwater, solid
waste, etc.) and specific measures employed to mitigate or
eliminate any negative impacts. The applicant shall further
furnish expert evidence that the impacts generated by the
proposed use fall within acceptable levels as regulated by
applicable laws and ordinances, including but not limited
to those of Article XIX of this chapter.
(e) All reasonable provisions shall be made to prevent or minimize
noise, odor, and vibration, light or electrical interference
adjoining property within a residential zoning district or any
existing adjacent residential use in accordance with Article XIX
of this chapter.
(f) No machinery, equipment, or materials shall be stored in
required front, side, or rear yard setback areas. All unpaved
yard setback areas shall be covered with grass or similar
vegetative material.
(g) All machinery, equipment, or materials and activities not within
a completely enclosed building shall be surrounded by a fence
or wall at least six feet but not more than eight feet in height.
Such fence shall be completely sight-obscuring and maintained
in good condition. No fence may be permitted in any yard
setback area. Any gate in a fence shall be similarly constructed
and maintained and shall be kept securely locked at all times
when the establishment is not in operation.
(h) All machinery, equipment, or materials shall be stored or
arranged in an orderly fashion so that circulation for firesafety
can be maintained at all times.
(i) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:838
(j) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the buildings, rather than the area around it.
(48) Recycling collection point, public. Recycling collection point,
public, are permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(a) All materials shall be kept in appropriate containers, with
appropriate sanitary measures and frequent enough emptying
to prevent:
[1] Any menace to public health and safety;
[2] Offensive or obnoxious odors;
[3] The breeding, harboring or infestation of rats and other
rodents and vermin; and
[4] Violation of any health or sanitary law, ordinance, or
regulation of the City of Lock Haven or the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
(b) Adequate provision shall be made for movement of trucks, if
needed, and for off-street parking.
(c) Materials to be collected shall be of the same character as the
following materials: paper, cardboard, plastic, steel/tin,
aluminum and glass. No garbage shall be stored as part of the
use, except for that generated on site and that accidentally
collected with the recyclables. Only materials clearly being
actively collected for recycling may be stored on site. Used
tires shall not be stored on site.
(d) The use shall only include the following operations: collection,
sorting, baling, loading, weighing, routine cleaning and closely
similar work. No burning or land-filling shall occur. No
mechanical operations shall routinely occur at the site other
than operations such as the baling of cardboard.
(e) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(f) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(49) Residential conversions for multiple dwellings. Residential
conversions for multiple dwellings are permitted, subject to the
following criteria:
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:839
(a) The structure must be a single-family detached dwelling that
existed on the effective date of this chapter and contained (at
that time) at least 4,000 square feet of habitable floor area.
(b) In residential districts, all principal structures permitted to be
residential conversion to multiple dwelling units uses shall
maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is
compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood.
No modifications to the external appearance of the building
(except fire escapes) which would alter its residential
character shall be permitted.
(c) Building height and setbacks shall be consistent with
surrounding development in the neighborhood.
(d) No more than four total dwelling units shall be permitted per
lot.
(e) Fire escapes, where required, shall be located in the rear of the
building and shall not be located on any wall facing a street
right-of-way, excluding alleys.
(f) All dwelling units shall be located within the principal building.
(g) All dwelling units must have separate kitchen and bathroom
facilities as well as living/sleeping spaces.
(h) All floors above grade shall have direct means of escape to
ground level.
(i) All off-street parking shall comply with Article XVIII, shall not
be located in front of the principal building, and shall be set
back a minimum of 10 lineal feet from the property lines and be
screened from adjoining property within a residential zoning
district or any existing adjacent residential use.
(j) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(k) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(l) All uses must comply with City building, health, housing,
rental, safety, property and other applicable code
requirements.
(m) The applicant shall obtain any required land development
approvals.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:840
(50) Restaurants. Restaurants are permitted, subject to the following
criteria:
(a) Outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by a minimum
six-foot and maximum of eight-foot-high fence.
(b) In addition to other provisions in this Article XX of this chapter
relating to accessory outdoor cafe/seating, where accessory
outdoor cafe/seating may be permitted, exterior speaker/
microphone systems shall be oriented away from and/or
screened to prevent objectionable noise impact on abutting
properties.
(c) In residential and the CBD Zoning Districts, accessory drivethroughs
are not permitted. Otherwise, where accessory drivethroughs
are permitted, drive-through lane shall have
minimum of 100 feet of on-site stacking preceding the order
location. No vehicle will be allowed to form or stack on public
streets.
(d) Adequate provision for the collection and disposal of greases
shall be demonstrated.
(e) Hours of operation and events shall be scheduled to minimize
negative impacts on the surrounding neighborhood.
(f) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(g) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(51) Schools, commercial. Commercial schools are permitted, subject to
the following criteria:
(a) Within the CBD Zoning District, all maintenance, repair,
rebuilding, testing, construction of mechanical devices,
storage of materials, equipment, etc. shall be conducted within
a completely enclosed building.
(b) All ventilation outlets shall be located at least 100 lineal feet
and shall be oriented away from any adjoining property within
a residential zoning district or any existing adjacent residential
use.
(c) Hours of operation and events shall be scheduled to minimize
negative impacts on the surrounding neighborhood.
(d) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:841
(e) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(f) All height, area, setback and coverage standards within the
underlying zoning district shall apply, except that:
[1] All off-street parking lots shall be set back 25 feet and
screened from adjoining property lines;
[2] All buildings shall be set back at least 50 feet from any
adjoining land within a residential zoning district
boundary or any existing residential use.
(52) Schools, public/private. Public and private schools are permitted,
subject to the following criteria:
(a) In residential districts, any permitted school shall maintain an
exterior appearance that is compatible with any existing
dwellings in the neighborhood.
(b) In residential districts, building height and setbacks shall be
consistent with surrounding development in the neighborhood.
In all other districts, all height, area, setback and coverage
standards within the underlying zoning district shall apply,
except that:
[1] All off-street parking lots shall be set back 25 feet and
screened from adjoining property lines;
[2] All buildings shall be set back at least 50 feet from any
adjoining land within a residential zoning district
boundary or any existing residential use.
(c) Hours of operation and events shall be scheduled to minimize
negative impacts on the surrounding neighborhood.
(d) Primary passenger dropoff and pickup areas should be
provided on site and arranged so that the passengers do not
have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the site. At a
minimum, passenger dropoff and pickup areas shall be located
in a manner that minimizes detrimental traffic impacts (both
pedestrian and vehicular) on the surrounding neighborhood. A
minimum one-hundred-foot-long on-site stacking area vehicles
shall be provided on the site. No vehicles will be allowed to
form or stack on public streets.
(e) All schools with an enrollment of 250 or more students shall
front and have access to an arterial or collector road as
provided in the most recent version of the City of Lock Haven
Comprehensive Plan.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:842
(f) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(g) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(53) Shopping centers. Shopping centers are permitted, subject to the
following criteria:
(a) The subject property shall front on an arterial or collector road
as provided in the most recent version of the City of Lock
Haven Comprehensive Plan, and all access drives shall be set
back at least 200 lineal feet from the intersection of any street
rights-of-way.
(b) Minimum lot size shall be three acres.
(c) Minimum lot width shall be 200 feet.
(d) Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards
on adjacent streets. On-lot traffic circulation channels and
parking areas shall be clearly marked.
(e) The shopping center shall be permitted to erect one planned
shopping center sign along each of the center's frontages. At
least 50% of the total sign area shall be devoted to
advertisement of the shopping center's name. The size of such
sign shall not exceed one square foot for each four feet of
frontage contained within the shopping center. In no case shall
a planned center sign exceed a maximum size of 100 square
feet nor an overall height of 20 feet. In addition, individual uses
within the shopping center may have signs; however, such
signs shall be flat wall, wall-projecting, or roof signs as
described in Article XVII of this chapter.
(f) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(g) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(54) Single-family attached dwellings. Single-family attached dwellings
are permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(a) In residential districts, any permitted single-family attached
dwelling shall maintain an exterior appearance that is
compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:843
(b) Building height and setbacks shall be consistent with
surrounding development in the neighborhood.
[1] Minimum lot area shall be 2,000 square feet per unit,
whether on a common lot or individual lots. [Amended
6-21-2010 by Ord. No. 859]
[2] Minimum lot width: 20 feet for common and interior lots
(attached units) and 45 feet for end units. [Amended
6-21-2010 by Ord. No. 859]
[3] Minimum side yard: zero feet for common and interior lots
(attached units) and 15 feet for end units.
[4] Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet. [Amended
6-21-2010 by Ord. No. 859]
[5] Maximum lot coverage: 65%.
[6] Maximum dwelling units in a row: six, but if four or more
are in a row, then no more than 60% shall have the same
setback. The minimum variation shall be four feet.
(c) All off-street parking shall comply with Article XVIII.
[Amended 6-21-2010 by Ord. No. 859]
(d) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(e) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(55) Taverns/bars. Taverns and bars are permitted, subject to the
following criteria:
(a) Taverns and bars shall be located in accordance with the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
(b) Hours of operation and events shall be scheduled to minimize
negative impacts on the surrounding neighborhood.
(c) The owner(s) and operator(s) of a tavern/bar shall be
responsible for the conduct and safety of the patrons.
(d) Trash receptacles shall be provided and routinely emptied to
prevent the scattering of litter, and the applicant shall furnish
and implement a working plan for the cleanup of litter and
debris.
(e) Adequate provision for the collection and disposal of greases
shall be demonstrated.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:844
(f) In addition to other provisions in this Article XX of this chapter
relating to accessory outdoor cafe/seating, where accessory
outdoor cafe/seating may be permitted, exterior speaker/
microphone systems shall be oriented away from and/or
screened to prevent objectionable noise impact on abutting
properties.
(g) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(h) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(56) Truck terminal. Truck terminals are permitted, subject to the
following criteria:
(a) The subject property shall front on an arterial or collector road
as provided in the most recent version of the City of Lock
Haven Comprehensive Plan.
(b) Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards
on adjacent streets.
(c) No entrance or exit shall be located closer than a minimum of
100 lineal feet to an existing street intersection on the same
side of the right-of-way as the proposed entrance or exit.
[Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 986]
(d) The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the
proposed use in each of the following topics:
[1] The nature of the on-site activities and operations, the
types of materials stored, the frequency of distribution and
restocking, the duration period of storage of materials,
and the methods for disposal of any surplus or damaged
materials. In addition, the applicant shall furnish evidence
that the disposal of materials will be accomplished in a
manner that complies with state and federal regulations.
[2] The general scale of the operation, in terms of its market
area, specific floor space requirements for each activity,
the total number of employees on each shift and an overall
needed site size.
[3] Any environmental impacts that are likely to be generated
(e.g., odor, noise, smoke, dust, litter, glare, vibration,
electrical disturbance, wastewater, stormwater, solid
waste, etc.) and specific measures employed to mitigate or
eliminate any negative impacts. The applicant shall further
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:845
furnish evidence that the impacts generated by the
proposed use fall within acceptable levels, as regulated by
applicable laws and ordinance, including but not limited to
those listed in Article XIX of this chapter.
(e) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(f) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(57) Truck stop/travel plaza. Truck stops/travel plazas are permitted,
subject to the following criteria: [Added 4-2-2018 by Ord. No.
986]
(a) The subject property shall front on an arterial or collector road
as provided in the most recent version of the City of Lock
Haven Comprehensive Plan.
(b) Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards
on adjacent streets.
(c) No entrance or exit shall be located closer than a minimum of
100 lineal feet to an existing street intersection on the same
side of the right of way as the proposed entrance or exit.
(d) In addition to unleaded fueling stations, the premises must also
be equipped with diesel islands for fueling commercial
vehicles.
(e) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(f) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building rather than the area around it.
(g) The premises must include a minimum of three acres.
(58) University/college. Universities and/or colleges are permitted,
subject to the following criteria:
(a) All height, area, setback, and coverage standards within the
underlying zoning district shall apply, except that:
[1] All off-street parking lots shall be set back 25 feet and
screened from adjoining property lines; and
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:846
[2] All buildings shall be set back at least 50 feet from any
adjoining land within a residential zoning district
boundary or any existing residential use.
(b) Individual lots or subdivided parcels 1 1/4 acres or less in size
shall have no building or buildings in addition to the principal
building on the same lot. For parcels greater than 1 1/4 acres
in size, additional buildings on the same lot shall be permitted;
however, there must be a minimum of 35 lineal feet between
buildings.
(c) A minimum of 30% of the total tract area shall be designated
and maintained as common open space. The landowner shall
be responsible for maintenance of the open space area.
(d) Primary passenger dropoff and pickup areas should be
provided on site and arranged so that the passengers do not
have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the site. At a
minimum, passenger dropoff and pickup areas shall be located
in a manner that minimizes detrimental traffic impacts (both
pedestrian and vehicular) on the surrounding neighborhood. A
minimum one-hundred-foot long on-site stacking area vehicles
shall be provided on the site. No vehicle will be allowed to form
or stack on public streets.
(e) The institution shall meet all state and federal rules and
regulations for universities and/or colleges. All necessary
licenses or permits issued by county, state or federal agencies
shall be provided by the applicant and required licenses,
certificates, or permits shall be a condition for approval.
(f) The institution shall submit a copy of its emergency operations
plan (EOP) to the local and county emergency management
agency coordinator. The EOP shall include detailed information
regarding solid, medical and hazardous materials and waste
handling, including a listing of all medical and hazardous
materials and wastes used and generated on site and evidence
indicating the disposal of all materials and wastes will be
accomplished in a manner that complies with state and federal
regulations.
(g) All reasonable provisions shall be made to prevent or minimize
noise, odor, and vibration, light or electrical interference
adjoining property within a residential zoning district or any
existing adjacent residential use in accordance with Article XIX
of this chapter.
(h) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(i) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:847
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the buildings, rather than the area around it.
(59) University housing. University housing is permitted, subject to the
following criteria:
(a) All height, area, setback, and coverage standards within the
underlying zoning district shall apply, except that all buildings
shall be set back at least 100 feet from any adjoining land
within a residential zoning district boundary or any existing
residential use.
(b) Individual lots or subdivided parcels 1 1/4 acres or less in size
shall have no building or buildings in addition to the principal
building on the same lot. For parcels greater than 1 1/4 acres
in size, one additional building on the same lot shall be
permitted; however, there must be a minimum of 35 lineal feet
between buildings.
(c) A minimum of 30% of the total tract area shall be designated
and maintained as common open space. The landowner shall
be responsible for maintenance of the open space area.
(d) The institution shall submit a copy of its emergency operations
plan (EOP) to the local and county emergency management
agency coordinator. The EOP shall include detailed information
regarding solid, medical and hazardous materials and waste
handling, including a listing of all medical and hazardous
materials and wastes used and generated on site and evidence
indicating the disposal of all materials and wastes will be
accomplished in a manner that complies with state and federal
regulations.
(e) All reasonable provisions shall be made to prevent or minimize
noise, odor, and vibration, light or electrical interference
adjoining property within a residential zoning district or any
existing adjacent residential use in accordance with Article XIX
of this chapter.
(f) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(g) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the buildings, rather than the area around it.
(60)Warehousing, distributing, and wholesaling. Warehousing,
distributing, and wholesaling is permitted, subject to the following
criteria:
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:848
(a) The subject property shall front on an arterial or collector road
as provided in the most recent version of the City of Lock
Haven Comprehensive Plan.
(b) Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards
on adjacent streets.
(c) No entrance or exit shall be located closer than 150 lineal feet
to an existing street intersection.
(d) The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the
proposed use in each of the following topics:
[1] The nature of the on-site activities and operations, the
types of materials stored, the frequency of distribution and
restocking, the duration period of storage of materials,
and the methods for disposal of any surplus or damaged
materials. In addition, the applicant shall furnish evidence
that the disposal of materials will be accomplished in a
manner that complies with state and federal regulations.
[2] The general scale of the operation, in terms of its market
area, specific floor space requirements for each activity,
the total number of employees on each shift and an overall
needed site size.
[3] Any environmental impacts that are likely to be generated
(e.g., odor, noise, smoke, dust, litter, glare, vibration,
electrical disturbance, wastewater, stormwater, solid
waste, etc.) and specific measures employed to mitigate or
eliminate any negative impacts. The applicant shall further
furnish evidence that the impacts generated by the
proposed use fall within acceptable levels, as regulated by
applicable laws and ordinance, including but not limited to
those listed in Article XIX of this chapter.
(e) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(f) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(61) Criminal housing facility. A criminal housing facility is permitted
subject to the following criteria: [Added 7-11-2016 by Ord. No.
955]
(a) The lot area in square feet must provide for a minimum of
1,000 square feet per resident, with a maximum occupancy of
16 residents.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:849
(b) A criminal housing facility must be licensed where required by
an appropriate federal, state, county or other government
agency(ies) and shall be in compliance with all applicable rules
and regulations of the licensing body(ies). Prior to a zoning
permit being issued, the applicant shall provide a copy of any
required license to the Zoning Officer.
(c) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of City Council,
with the burden of proof being upon the applicant, that the use
will involve adequate supervision and security measures to
protect public safety.
(d) A criminal housing facility shall be directly affiliated with a
parent institution or organization, which shall provide full-time
supervision and administration to the residents of the house.
(e) City Council may place conditions on the use as necessary to
protect the safety of the community, staff and residents,
including conditions on the types of residents and security
measures.
(f) The facility shall contain identified areas of the following type:
dining area, kitchen area, meeting room area, recreational
area, visiting area, staff office space, separate secured rest
rooms for staff and visitors and laundry area. No cooking or
dining facilities shall be provided in individual rooms or suites.
(g) No portion of a property line for a property on which is located
a building is occupied by a criminal housing facility use shall be
located within 1,000 lineal feet of any property which contains
any one or more of the following specified land uses where
minors may congregate:
[1] Any other building occupied by a criminal housing facility
use;
[2] Commercial recreation facility, indoor/outdoor;
[3] Day-care facility primarily for children;
[4] Library;
[5] Park, playground, play field;
[6] Place of worship/assembly;
[7] School, private/public;
[8] Swimming pool, public;
[9] Other lands, buildings, or uses where minors congregate;
or
[10] Residential zoning district or a residential use.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-124
1:850
(h) Each application shall be accompanied by a statement
describing the following:
[1] A description of the type of residents that will be housed at
the criminal housing facility;
[2] The policies and goals of the criminal housing facility and
the means proposed to accomplish those goals;
[3] The characteristics of the residents and number of
residents to be served;
[4] The operating methods and procedures to be used; and
[5] Any other facts relevant to the proposed operation of the
criminal housing facility.
(i) Any use permit granted for the criminal housing facility shall
be bound to the type and number of residents listed on the
application. Any change in the type or number of offenders
being housed or any expansion of such treatment center or any
relocation from one building to another building shall require
conditional use approval.
(j) All on-site, outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(k) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(l) Parking shall be provided in accordance with Article XVIII of
this chapter.
(62) Treatment center. Treatment centers are permitted subject to the
following criteria: [Added 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 955]
(a) Accommodations shall be limited to a maximum occupancy of
16 residents.
(b) A treatment center must be licensed where required by an
appropriate federal, state, county or other government
agency(ies) and shall be in compliance with all applicable rules
and regulations of the licensing body(ies). Prior to a zoning
permit being issued, the applicant shall provide a copy of any
required license to the Zoning Officer.
(c) A treatment center shall be directly affiliated with a parent
institution or organization, which shall provide full-time
supervision and administration to the residents of the house.
§ 410-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-124
1:851
§ 410-125. Additional supplemental standards and requirements for
specific accessory uses, buildings and structures.
(d) The facility shall contain identified areas of the following type:
dining area, kitchen area, meeting room area, recreational
area, visiting area staff office space, separate secured rest
rooms for staff and visitors and laundry area. No cooking or
dining facilities shall be provided in individual rooms or suites.
(e) Each application shall be accompanied by a statement
describing the following:
[1] The policies and goals of the treatment center and the
means proposed to accomplish those goals;
[2] The number of residents to be served;
[3] The operating methods and procedures to be used; and
[4] Any other facts relevant to the proposed operation of the
treatment center.
(f) Any use permit granted for the treatment center shall be bound
to the number of residents listed on the application. Any
change in the number of residents being housed or any
expansion of such treatment center or any relocation from one
building to another building shall require conditional use
approval.
(g) A treatment center shall also be permitted with conditional use
approval as an accessory use within an existing permitted state
licensed general hospital within the Public Institutional
District. Any expansion of such treatment center or any
relocation from one building to another building shall require
conditional use approval.
(h) All on-site, outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas
shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine
glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it.
(i) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of
this chapter.
(j) Parking shall be provided in accordance with Article XVIII of
this chapter.
A. Bed-and-breakfast. Bed-and-breakfast uses are permitted, subject to
the following criteria:
(1) The building must be the principal residence of the owner.
§ 410-124 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-125
1:852
(2) The bed-and-breakfast must be operated by the owner of the
building or a manager.
(3) The operator must offer the individuals temporarily abiding at the
bed-and-breakfast not less than one meal per day.
(4) The premises must be inspected not less than annually by the City
of Lock Haven Code, Zoning and Health Officers for compliance
with City zoning and code ordinances and state regulations
regarding places serving food or drink other than any requirement
for use of commercial equipment. The zoning permit shall specify
the maximum number of rooms for guests for which the premises is
approved and may be amended, from time to time, upon the annual
inspection.
(5) Individuals temporarily abiding at the bed-and-breakfast shall not
abide there in excess of 14 consecutive days.
(6) Signs shall be in conformance with Article XVII of this chapter.
B. Cafe/outdoor dining. Cafe/outdoor dining uses are permitted, subject to
the following criteria:
(1) Outdoor furnishings shall be limited to tables, chairs, umbrellas,
benches, outdoor heaters, and reservation podium.
(2) Outdoor furnishings shall be stored in an enclosed facility after
normal operating hours.
(3) The limits of the outdoor dining area shall be defined. In addition to
decorative fencing and landscaping, decorative planters, posts with
ropes, and other removable enclosures, as well as reservation
podium are encouraged as a way of defining the area occupied by
the outdoor dining area.
(4) Any exterior microphone/speaker system shall be oriented,
arranged and/or screened to prevent any objectionable noise
impact on adjoining properties.
(5) Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided amid any
outdoor retail sales area. Such trash receptacles shall be routinely
emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter and debris. All
applications shall include a description of a working plan for the
cleanup of litter.
(6) Advertising or promotional features, other than permitted signs in
accordance with Article XVII of this chapter, shall be limited to
umbrellas and canopies.
(7) Outdoor dining shall not impede public sidewalks. Where
permission is granted by the entity having jurisdiction over the
public right-of-way in which the outdoor dining is proposed, a
minimum of six feet uninterrupted (obstacle-free) pathway can be
§ 410-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-125
1:853
continuously maintained, public sidewalks may be utilized for
outdoor dining areas.
(8) All reasonable provisions shall be made to prevent or minimize
noise, odor, and vibration, light or electrical interference adjoining
property within a residential zoning district or any existing
adjacent residential use in accordance with Article XIX of this
chapter.
(9) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas shall
be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by employing
hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine glare to the site,
and security lighting should be directed toward the building, rather
than the area around it.
C. Day care, accessory. Accessory day cares as defined in this chapter are
exempted from zoning/building permit requirements, except that the
principal residential dwelling must comply with all other applicable
requirements of this chapter.
D. Day care, family. Family day-care uses are permitted, subject to the
following criteria:
(1) All family day-care facilities shall be conducted within a singlefamily
detached dwelling.
(2) A family day-care facility shall offer care and supervision to no
more than six different nonresident minors during any calendar
day.
(3) An outdoor play area no less than 390 square feet in area shall be
provided. Such play area shall not be located within the front yard
nor any vehicle parking lot.
(4) No portion of a day-care facility shall be located within 300 lineal
feet from any potentially hazardous land use or activity which could
pose a threat to the safety of the children, staff, or other occupants
of the facility.
(5) Off-street parking areas shall not be used as outdoor play areas.
Outdoor play areas shall include secure fencing around outdoor
play areas. Outdoor play areas shall not be located within the front
yard and screening shall be in compliance with Article XVIII of this
chapter, but vegetative materials located within the outdoor play
areas shall be of a non-harmful type (poisonous, thorny, allergenic,
etc.) All outdoor play areas must provide a means of shade, such as
a shade tree(s), pavilion(s), etc.
(6) Enrollment shall be defined as the largest number of students and/
or children under day-care supervision at any one time during a
seven-day period.
§ 410-125 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-125
1:854
(7) Primary passenger dropoff and pickup areas should be provided on
site and arranged so that the passengers do not have to cross traffic
lanes on or adjacent to the site. At a minimum, passenger dropoff
and pickup areas shall be located in a manner that minimizes
detrimental traffic impacts (both pedestrian and vehicular) on the
surrounding neighborhood.
(8) Building height and setbacks shall be consistent with surrounding
development in the neighborhood.
(9) In residential districts, any permitted family day-care use shall
maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is compatible
with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood. No modifications
to the external appearance of the building (except fire escapes)
which would alter its residential character shall be permitted
unless required by the City of Lock Haven Building Code or
applicable commonwealth agency.
(10) All family day-care facilities with enrollment of more than three
minors shall obtain, furnish, and maintain a valid registration
certificate for the proposed use, issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare.
(11) All signs shall comply with Article XVII of this chapter.
E. Drive-through. Drive-throughs are permitted as an accessory use to a
permitted principal use, subject to the following criteria:
(1) Where practicable, all drive-through window lanes shall be
separated from the parking lot's interior driveways.
(2) Where practicable, all drive-through window facilities and lanes
shall be located on a building wall facing away from an adjoining
property within a residential zoning district or any existing
adjacent residential use.
(3) Where practicable, all drive-through window facilities and lanes
shall be located on a building wall facing away from a public street,
except alleys.
(4) All automated teller machines shall be located, or contain
convenient parking spaces, so that the on-site movement of
vehicles will not be hampered by those cars belonging to persons
using the automated teller machines.
(5) Sufficient stacking lanes shall be provided associated with drivethrough
windows, to prevent vehicle backups on adjoining streets.
A minimum one-hundred-foot-long on-site stacking area for the
vehicles shall be provided on the site. No vehicle will be allowed to
stack or form on public streets. Furthermore, each drive-through
lane shall have on-site directional signs, indicator lights or
§ 410-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-125
1:855
pavement markings identifying the direction of travel and lane
status (i.e., open versus closed).
(6) Any exterior microphone/speaker system shall be oriented,
arranged and/or screened to prevent any objectionable noise
impact on adjoining properties.
(7) Within the CBD Zoning District, drive-throughs shall be prohibited.
(8) Screening shall be provided in accordance with Article XIX of this
chapter.
(9) All on-site outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas shall
be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by employing
hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine glare to the site,
and security lighting should be directed toward the building, rather
than the area around it.
F. Essential services. Essential services as defined in this chapter shall be
permitted in all zoning districts and shall conform to, design, yard area,
setback and height. Where necessary and appropriate, screening shall
be provided in accordance with Article XIX of this chapter.
G. Home occupation. Home occupation uses are permitted, subject to the
following criteria:
(1) The use shall be clearly incidental to the principal use of the
premises as a single-family detached and semidetached dwelling
for living purposes.
(2) No more than three persons, at least one of whom shall be a
resident of the dwelling, may be engaged in the home occupation
use.
(3) No more than one home occupation may be located in any dwelling
unit.
(4) Any permitted home occupation use shall maintain an exterior
appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing
dwellings in the neighborhood. No modifications to the external
appearance of the building (except fire escapes) which would alter
its residential character, shall be permitted.
(5) No mechanical equipment shall be employed in a home occupation,
other than that customarily utilized for hobby or domestic
purposes.
(6) No sales of any goods or merchandise shall occur on the premises
other than those goods or merchandise which are produced on the
premises.
§ 410-125 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-125
1:856
(7) No manufacturing shall occur on the premises other than the
products of customary hobbies and fabrication of garments by a
seamstress.
(8) No goods shall be displayed so as to be visible from the exterior of
the premises.
(9) Activities associated with the home occupation shall be conducted
in such a way that no noise, odor, vibration, electromagnetic
interference, or smoke shall be noticeable at or beyond the
property line.
(10)Home occupations shall be limited to not more than 25% of the
gross floor area of the dwelling unit, or 500 square feet of gross
floor area, whichever is less.
(11)No accessory building or structure shall be utilized as a home
occupation.
(12) Signs shall be provided in accordance with Article XVII of this
chapter.
(13) The applicant shall submit evidence of all applicable state and city
approvals.
(14) All off-street parking shall comply with Article XVIII of this chapter.
H. Keeping of pets. Keeping of pets outdoors is permitted subject the
following criteria:
(1) Horses may be kept outdoors in any residential zoning district,
provided:
(a) The lot contains at least three acres of pasture per horse.
(b) Manure is not stored within 150 lineal feet of any lot line.
(c) The pasture is completely enclosed with a fence at least six feet
in height.
(d) Raising or boarding of horses for hire, remuneration or sale is
prohibited. [Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
(2) Dogs may be kept outdoors in any zoning district, provided:
(a) Not more than three dogs per lot may be kept outdoors.
(b) Not permitted in the front of the principal building or front
yard area.
(c) Any greater number of dogs stored outdoors shall comply with
the provisions relating to kennels in accordance with this
Article XX of this chapter.
§ 410-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-125
1:857
(d) All dogs kept outside shall comply with Chapter 182, Animals,
and other applicable health and safety codes, as well as any
applicable state regulations.
I. No-impact home occupation. No-impact home occupation uses are
permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(1) The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of
the property and surrounding residential uses.
(2) The business shall employ no employees other than family
members residing in the dwelling.
(3) There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling
or inventory of a substantial nature.
(4) There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including
but not limited to parking, signs or lights.
(5) The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibrations, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or
electronic interference, including interference with radio or
television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
(6) The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
(7) The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling
and may not occupy more than 25 of the habitable floor area.
(8) The business may not involve any illegal activity.
J. Storage of recreational vehicles and recreational equipment.
Recreational vehicles and recreational equipment as defined within the
terms of this chapter may be parked or stored, subject to the following
requirements:
(1) Camping and recreational equipment belonging to persons other
than the owner of the property may be temporarily parked on a
residential property in residential zoning districts. Temporary
trailer parking shall be limited to a maximum of one consecutive
six-week period in any one calendar year.
(2) Permanent parking and storing of camping and recreational
equipment shall be limited to the interior of private, automobile
garages or other available on-lot accessory buildings, or to the side
or rear of the lot.
K. Accessory buildings. No accessory building shall be constructed upon a
lot until the construction of the principal building has been actually
commenced and except as provided elsewhere in this chapter. Unless
otherwise specified elsewhere in this chapter, accessory buildings, such
§ 410-125 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-125
1:858
as but not limited to detached private garages, barns, storage
buildings, garden structures and greenhouses (not used for commercial
purposes), may be erected in accordance with the following
requirements:
(1) Accessory buildings of not more than 144 square feet in ground
floor area and 10 feet in height are exempted from zoning/building
permit requirements; provided, however, the building does not
involve any electrical, plumbing or mechanical installation.
(2) No accessory building shall be used for residential living purposes.
Provided, however, that one residential unit for a caretaker may be
permitted in conjunction with any industrial establishment.
Accessory buildings shall only be permitted in the side and rear
yard areas.
(3) Accessory buildings shall not be permitted in front of the principal
building or any front yard area.
(4) Unless a greater distance is specified in accordance with required
buffer yards in Article XIX of this chapter, all accessory buildings
shall be set back a minimum of five lineal feet from any side lot line.
(5) Where a rear yard opens onto an alley or a street, including a
corner lot, detached private garages and detached carports shall
be set back a minimum of 10 lineal feet from the right-of-way line.
Otherwise, the minimum setback shall be five feet.
(6) Any accessory building(s) shall not cover more than 40% of the rear
yard area. In no case shall the footprint or building coverage of an
accessory building exceed the footprint or building coverage of the
principal building.
(7) Any accessory building shall be no less than five lineal feet from the
principal building on the lot to which is accessory.
(8) All accessory buildings in residential zoning districts shall not be
higher than 1 1/2 stories or 15 feet, whichever is less. Otherwise, in
all other zoning districts, accessory buildings are permitted to be
constructed to the maximum height requirements of principal
buildings in the zoning district.
L. Fences and walls. Fences and walls are permitted, subject to the
following criteria:
(1) Fences and walls may be erected, altered and maintained within
the yards and along the boundaries of a lot.
(2) In any residential and the CBD Zoning Districts, any such fence or
wall in the front yard shall not exceed 3 1/2 feet in height. In all
other zoning districts, fences or walls in front yards shall not
exceed eight feet in height.
§ 410-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-125
1:859
(a) On a corner lot at the intersection of two streets in residential
and the CBD Zoning Districts, the maximum height of a fence
shall be 3 1/2 abutting both streets, except that the maximum
height, as be as specified below, shall be achieved only within
an area that is behind the rear of the principal building.
(3) In any residential zoning district, any fence or wall in the side or
rear yard may be a maximum of six feet in height. In all other
zoning districts, fences or walls in the side or rear yard shall not
exceed eight feet in height.
(4) All yard areas used for the outdoor storage of any materials and
equipment needed for the operation or conduct of an industrial or
commercial enterprise shall be enclosed by a solid wall, uniformly
painted board fence, chain-link fence in conjunction with a screen
planting in accordance with Article XIX of this chapter on all sides
which adjoin property within a residential zoning district or any
existing adjacent residential use.
(5) For fences constructed of wood cover on wood frame, the
framework must face onto the interior of the lot, unless the fence is
so designed as to provide equal frame and cover area to adjoining
yards.
(6) For fences constructed open metal mesh, supported by posts and
frame of either pipe or wood, the posts and frames must be on the
interior of the mesh.
(7) For fences constructed of masonry construction, a finished surface
must be provided on the exterior side.
(8) No fence shall be constructed in any street or alley right-of-way.
(9) All fences must meet the intersection visibility requirements set
forth in this chapter.
M. Private swimming pools. Private swimming pools are permitted, subject
to the following criteria:
(1) The pool is intended to be used by the occupants of the principal
use of the property on which it is located.
(2) It may be located only in the rear yard or side yard of the property
on which it is an accessory use.
(3) Swimming pools, including any accessory structures adjacent
thereto, shall not be located closer than 10 lineal feet to any
property line of the property on which the swimming pools is
located.
(4) No permanent swimming pool structure shall be permitted without
an operable filtration system utilizing chlorine, bromine or some
other antibacterial agent.
§ 410-125 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-125
1:860
§ 410-126. Additional supplemental standards and requirements for
temporary uses.
Only the following uses are permitted temporarily (from a period of one up
to six weeks in one calendar year):
(5) Conventional wading pools less than the area and depth
requirements of item above shall be exempt.
(6) All swimming pools shall comply with the requirements of the City's
Building Code.223
(7) No water from a pool shall be discharged directly onto or within 20
lineal feet of any public right-of-way or adjacent property without
the owner's consent.
(8) All on-site outdoor lighting shall be designed to prevent glare to
adjoining properties by employing hooded, shielded, or screened
fixtures that confine glare to the site.
N. Tennis courts. Tennis courts are permitted, subject to the following
criteria:
(1) All tennis courts in residential zones shall include an open mesh
permanent fence 10 feet in height behind each baseline. Such fence
shall extend parallel to said baseline at least 10 lineal feet beyond
the court's playing surface, unless the entire court is enclosed.
(2) All on-site outdoor lighting shall be designed to prevent glare to
adjoining properties by employing hooded, shielded, or screened
fixtures that confine glare to the site.
A. Christmas tree sales in any zoning district.
B. Carnival, circus, street fairs or bazaar-type events in any zoning
district.
C. Mobile amusement and lighting equipment for promotion,
advertisement and grand openings in commercial and industrial
districts.
D. Construction site trailers. Construction site trailers may be authorized
by the Zoning Office, but only for limited periods of time. When so
authorized, such units shall be subject to the following standards:
[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
(1) A temporary zoning permit shall be required, and when issued,
shall indicate the specific period of time for which the authorization
is granted. No temporary permit for such uses shall be issued for a
period of time exceeding six months.
223. Editor's Note: See Ch. 212, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 410-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-126
1:861
(2) The Zoning Officer may authorize an extension to or renew the
temporary permit for as many as two additional six-month periods
if, in the Zoning Officer's opinion, the applicant encountered
unforeseen circumstances in carrying out the operation for which
the original temporary permit was issued.
(3) Information concerning water supply and sewage disposal facilities
to be used shall be presented by the applicant as part of the zoning
permit application to be reviewed by the City Engineer for
compliance with all applicable regulations.
(4) All such construction site trailers shall be removed from the site by
the applicant upon expiration of the permit at no cost to the City of
Lock Haven.
(5) Construction site trailers shall meet the minimum setback
requirements for the zoning district in which they are to be located.
(6) A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided to
accommodate the proposed temporary activity.
E. Mobile vending units. Mobile vending units may be permitted to house
temporary uses; however, they are subject to all requirements of this
article. Mobile vending units shall not be permitted as principal uses/
structures unless located on a permanent foundation. [Added
5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
(1) A temporary zoning permit shall be required, and when issued,
shall indicate the specific period of time for which the authorization
is granted. No temporary permit for such uses shall be issued for a
period of time exceeding six months.
(2) Mobile vending units shall meet the minimum setback
requirements for the zoning district in which they are located.
(3) A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided to
accommodate the proposed temporary activity.
F. Other temporary uses. Other low-impact temporary uses deemed
beneficial to the public health or general welfare of the City residents or
necessary to promote proper development of the municipality, including
yard, garage or porch sales; flea markets; auctions; or periodic parking
lot sales, may be permitted to be located in any zoning district in the
City. No zoning permit shall be required for these uses or activities.
Temporary uses shall, however, be subject to the following standards:
[Added 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 880]
(1) All such temporary uses shall be limited to three continuous days
no more than two times in any calendar year.
(2) Temporary uses shall meet the minimum setback requirements for
the zoning district in which they are to be located.
§ 410-126 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-126
1:862
(3) If the temporary use is to take place on a lot or land not owned by
the applicant, the applicant shall obtain written permission from
the owner of the property to conduct the proposed activity.
(4) A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided to
accommodate the proposed temporary activity.
§ 410-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-126
1:863

ARTICLE XXI
Nonconformities
§ 410-127. Continuation of a nonconformities.
All lawful uses of land, buildings, sings, or other structures existing on
the effective date of this chapter may be continued, altered, resorted,
reconstructed, sold, or maintained in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, even though such uses of land, buildings, sings, or other structures
do not conform to the regulations established for the zoning district in
which it is located.
§ 410-128. Registration of nonconformities.
§ 410-129. Change of nonconforming uses.
One classification of nonconforming use cannot be changed to another
less restrictive use classification. Use classification, as herein described,
shall mean the various zoning district classifications with residential singlefamily
being the most restrictive and industrial the least restrictive. For
example, a nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming
use of the same or more restricted classification, but only upon approval
of a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with
Article XXIII of this chapter. Before granting a special exception for the
replacement of one nonconforming use by another, the Zoning Hearing
Board must determine that the proposed nonconforming use will have
no more adverse effect upon adjacent property than the existing
nonconforming use. In making this determination, the Board should
consider particularly the effect upon adjacent property of the following:
A. Nonconforming uses and structures may be reported to the Zoning
Officer by the owner, user, lessor, or lessee, and be registered by the
Zoning Officer within one year of the effective date of this chapter. The
Zoning Officer, upon proof of a legal nonconformity, may certify the
existence of the nonconforming uses and/or structures.
B. Should a nonconforming use or building not be reported or identified
within one year, the owner of the nonconforming use or structure shall
have the right to show by a preponderance of the evidence to the
Zoning Officer that the use or building was nonconforming upon the
effective date of this chapter.
A. Signs and lighting.
B. Extent and appearance of structures.
C. Traffic generation and movement.
D. Parking and loading.
E. Emission of noise, odors, fumes, glare, vibration, smoke, vapors, gases,
wastes or stormwater runoff.
§ 410-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-129
1:865
§ 410-130. Alterations to nonconforming buildings or structures.
§ 410-131. Extension or expansion.
F. Fire, explosion or other hazards.
A. A nonconforming building or structure may be altered, improved or
repaired, provided the work does not exceed 50% of the fair market
value of the building or structure as determined by the most current
assessment of the Clinton County Assessor or by a private real estate
broker, whichever may be greater.
B. A nonconforming building or structure may be altered, improved or
repaired in excess of 50% of the fair market value of the building or
structure, but not exceeding 100% of the fair market value as
determined by the most current assessment of the Clinton County
Assessor or by a private real estate broker, whichever may be greater.
Any alteration which exceeds 50% of the fair market value of the
building shall be approved as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board upon a determination that the six factors enumerated under
§ 410-129A through F have been met.
C. A nonconforming building or structure may be altered to the extent
necessary if such alteration is intended and will result in the conversion
to a conforming use.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize as a special exception the
following types of extensions, expansions, or enlargements for
nonconforming use and buildings existing on the effective date of this
chapter:
(1) The extension of a nonconforming use of land upon a lot occupied
by such use.
(2) The extension or enlargement of a conforming building occupied by
a nonconforming use.
(3) The extension or enlargement of a nonconforming building
occupied by a nonconforming use.
(4) The extension or enlargement of a nonconforming building
occupied by a conforming use.
B. In addition to the standards and procedures in Article XXIII of this
chapter, regarding special exception, the applicant for the expansion or
extension of nonconforming use must demonstrate compliance with the
following:
(1) Expansion confined to lot. That expansion of nonconformity be
confined to the lot on which the use is located on the effective date
of this chapter. The total of all such expansions or extensions shall
not exceed an additional 50% of the actual area of those buildings,
§ 410-129 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-131
1:866
§ 410-132. Restoration.
A building, damaged by fire, explosion or other casualty, and which does not
comply with the use, area or height regulations of this chapter, shall not be
restored, except in conformity with the regulations for the zoning district
in which such building is located if said damage exceeds more than 75% of
the building's fair market value (at the time of the damage) as determined
by the most current assessment of the Clinton County Assessor or a private
real estate broker, whichever may be greater. If said damage exceeds than
75% of the building's fair market value (at the time of damage), a variance
may be issued by the Zoning Hearing Board, provided the appropriate
findings of facts are made as enumerated under Article XXIII of this chapter.
Any nonconforming building properly authorized for reconstruction shall
not exceed the height, area or volume of the original building. This provision
shall not apply to buildings located in the any floodplain area as set forth
in Article XV of this chapter regarding flood damage control standards. Any
structures or land devoted to the nonconforming use, as they
existed on the date on which such buildings, structures or land first
became nonconformities. The applicant shall furnish conclusive
evidence as to the extent of the nonconformity when it was created.
The above maximum increase shall be measured in aggregate over
the entire life of the nonconformity. All expansions of the
nonconforming use and/or building(s) that occurred since the use
originally became nonconforming shall count toward the above
maximum increase.
(2) Access, parking and loading. Provision of access drives, off-street
parking and off-street loading consistent with standards required
by this chapter for that newly expanded portion of the building or
use.
(3) Yards, height and building area. Provision of yards, building height
and building area are consistent with the standards required for
permitted uses in the zone in which the nonconforming use in
question is located for that newly expanded portion of the building
or use.
(4) Appearance. That appearance is harmonious with surrounding
properties. This feature includes, but is not limited to, landscaping,
enclosure of principal and accessory uses, height control, sign
control, architectural control and maintenance in good condition of
all improvements and open spaces.
(5) Buffers and screens. Buffers and screens as necessary to
adequately protect neighboring properties including, but not
limited to, fences, walls, planting and open spaces.
(6) Additional requirements. Such additional requirements as may be
necessary to assure that the proposed expansion will not impair the
use or development of neighboring properties.
§ 410-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-132
1:867
such buildings located in any floodplain area as set forth in Article XV of
this chapter that are damaged by fire, explosion or other casualty shall be
regulated under terms of Article XV of this chapter.
§ 410-133. Repairs and maintenance of nonconformities.
§ 410-134. Abandonment and discontinuance of nonconformities.
§ 410-135. Unlawful use not authorized.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as authorization for or approval
of the continuance of the illegal use of a structure or premises in violation
of zoning controls in existence at the time of enactment of this chapter.
§ 410-136. District changes.
Whenever the boundaries of a zoning district shall be changed so as to
transfer an area from one zoning district to another zoning district of a
different classification, the foregoing provisions of this article shall apply to
any nonconforming uses existing therein.
A. Notwithstanding any of the above regulations, nothing in this article
shall be deemed to prevent normal maintenance and repair of any use
or building, or the carrying out upon the issuance of a building permit
of major structural alterations or demolitions in the interest of public
safety. In granting such a building permit, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall state the precise reason for such alterations.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition of any portion of a building declared unsafe by a proper
authority.
A. A nonconforming use shall be presumed abandoned when operations
associated with the nonconforming use have ceased by an apparent act
or failure to act on the part of the tenant or owner to reinstate such use
within one year from the date the activity stopped and the use is not
actively advertised for sale or lease. Such nonconforming use shall not
thereafter be reinstated except in conformance with this chapter.
B. A nonconforming building or land, which is actively marketed, but has
not been sold or leased, shall not be considered abandoned. The
applicant shall be responsible to provide evidence that the
nonconformity was not abandoned.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, a nonconforming
use shall be considered abandoned when it has been replaced by a
conforming use. No nonconforming use shall, if once changed into a
conforming use, be changed thereafter to be a nonconforming use.
§ 410-132 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-137
1:868
§ 410-137. Construction approved prior to legal enactment of
chapter.
Any permit issued prior to enactment of this chapter shall remain valid and
be subject to the usual provisions concerning the time period of validity for
the permit and any rights to extend the permit for a lengthier time.
§ 410-138. Nonconforming lots of record.
A. In any zoning district, a building or use of land for a permitted principal
use and customarily accessory use permitted in the applicable zoning
district may be erected or conducted on any single lot of record at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. Such lot must
be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots
in the same ownership.
B. If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with
continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of
passage or amendment of this chapter, and if all or part of the lots do
not meet the requirements for lot width and area in the respective
zoning district, the lands involved shall be considered to be an
undivided parcel for the purpose of this chapter, and no portion of said
parcel shall be used or sold which does not meet lot width and area
requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of the
parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area
below the requirements stated in this chapter.
§ 410-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-138
1:869

ARTICLE XXII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 410-139. Administration.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by an agent, to be
appointed by the City Council, who shall be known as the Zoning
Officer. The Zoning Officer may have designated an employee of the
City of Lock Haven as his/her assistant, who shall exercise all the
powers of the Zoning Officer during the temporary absence or disability
of the Zoning Officer.
B. The duties of the Zoning Officer shall be:
(1) Administer the Zoning Ordinance (this chapter) in accordance with
its literal terms;
(2) To receive, examine and process all applications and permits as
provided by the terms of this chapter. The Zoning Officer shall also
issue zoning permits for special exception and conditional uses, or
for variances after the same have been approved;
(3) To record and file all applications for zoning permits or certificates
of occupancy, and accompanying plans and documents, and keep
them for public record;
(4) To inspect properties to determine compliance with all provisions
of this chapter as well as conditions attached to the approval of
variances, special exceptions, conditional uses and curative
amendments;
(5) Determine the date before which steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed. The Zoning Officer shall determine an appropriate
duration of time for compliance of the specified activity, not to
exceed 30 days. Extensions up to a total of 90 days from the date of
receipt of the enforcement notice may be granted at the discretion
of the Zoning Officer if applied for in writing;
(6) Upon the request of the City Council or the Zoning Hearing Board,
present to such bodies facts, records, and any similar information
on specific requests, to assist such bodies in reaching their
decisions;
(7) To be responsible for keeping this chapter and the Official Zoning
Map up to date, including any amendments thereto;
(8) To revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this
chapter in case of any false statement or misrepresentation of fact
in the application or on the plans on which the permit or approval
was based or for any other cause set forth in this chapter, or
otherwise permitted by law;
§ 410-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-139
1:871
§ 410-140. Permits and certificates.
A zoning permit indicates that a zoning application complies with this
chapter to the best knowledge of the Zoning Officer or his/her designee. No
zoning permit or certificate of use and occupancy shall be granted by him/
her for any purpose except in compliance with the literal provisions of this
chapter. The Zoning Officer may be authorized to institute civil enforcement
proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting within his/her scope of
employment.
(9) To review proposed subdivisions and land developments for
compliance with this chapter; and
(10) To take enforcement actions as provided by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.224
A. A zoning permit is required to be issued prior to the start of any of the
following activities:
(1) Erection, construction, movement, placement, razing, demolition,
removal, alteration or expansion (vertical or horizontal) of a
structure, building or sign;
(2) Change of the type of use or expansion of the use of a structure or
area of land;
(3) Creation of a new use;
(4) Demolition of a building;
(5) Other activities required to have a permit by this chapter;
(6) The alteration or development of any improvement or unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations for underground
utilities, provided the final grade is not altered.
(7) The erection or alteration of any signs specified in Article XVII of
this chapter;
(8) No zoning permit shall be required for repairs or maintenance of
any structure or land, provided such repairs do not change the use
or the exterior dimensions of the structure, or otherwise violate the
provisions of this chapter.
B. The City of Lock Haven may, at its option, issue combined or separate
building permits and zoning permits and/or may utilize a single or
separate application for the permits.
224. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-139 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-140
1:872
C. The only determination by the Zoning Officer that shall be official shall
be a written determination after the Zoning Officer receives a duly
submitted written official application.
D. Such zoning permits shall be granted or refused within 90 days from
date of application.
E. No zoning permit shall be issued except in conformity with:
(1) All applicable regulations of this chapter;
(2) Any conditions imposed upon the site by the Zoning Hearing Board
or the City Council; and
(3) Any recorded subdivision or land development plan.
F. In all instances in which the Zoning Officer expresses a reasonable
doubt as to the ability of a proposed use to meet all of the abovedescribed
requirements, it will be incumbent upon the applicant to
furnish adequate evidence in support of his application. If such
evidence is not presented, the zoning permit will be denied.
G. Application for a zoning permit shall be made by the owner or lessee of
any building or structure, or the agent of either; provided, however,
that if the application is made by a person other than the owner or
lessee, it shall be accompanied by a written authorization of the owner
or the qualified person making the application, that the proposed work
is authorized by this owner. The full names and addresses of the owner,
lessee, applicant, and of the responsible officers, if the owner or lessee
is a corporate body, shall be stated in the application.
H. The Zoning Officer may call upon other City of Lock Haven staff and/or
municipal-appointed consultants in the review of submitted materials
for applications.
I. The Zoning Officer may revoke a permit or approval issued under the
provisions of this chapter in case of any false statement or
misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the plans which the
permit or approval was based or for any other cause set forth in this
chapter.
J. Where a zoning permit is required by this chapter, but the work is
commenced or changed prior to obtaining such permit, and after notice
by the City of Lock Haven, the fees set by ordinance or resolution of the
City Council for such permit shall be doubled. The doubling of the
permit fee shall be required to reflect the additional expense incurred
by the City of Lock Haven resulting from the need to inspect the
property, respond to any complaints, issue any enforcement notices,
and/or process the application as soon as it is received. The payment of
such increased permit fee shall not relieve any person from complying
with all requirements of this chapter or any other applicable the City of
§ 410-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-140
1:873
§ 410-141. Certificate of use and occupancy.
Lock Haven ordinances or from any penalties or enforcement actions
authorized by this chapter.
K. Issuance of permits. Upon receiving the application, the Zoning Officer
shall examine the same within a reasonable time after filing. If the
application or plans do not conform to the provisions of all pertinent
local laws, he shall reject such application in writing, stating the
reasons therefor. He shall inform the applicant of his right to appeal to
the Zoning Hearing Board in the event such application is rejected. If
satisfied that the proposed work and/or use conforms to the provisions
of this chapter and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, and that
the certificate of use and occupancy as required herein has been
applied for, he shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practical but not
later than 90 days from receipt of the application.
L. Reconsideration of application. An applicant whose request for a permit
has been denied by the Zoning Officer may make a later application for
a permit, provided all deficiencies which were the basis for the prior
denial of the permit have been eliminated. Additional fees may apply as
set by the City Council.
M. Expiration of zoning permit. The permit shall expire after one year from
the date of issuance; provided, however, that the same may be extended
one time for one additional year, upon written request by the applicant
on a form provided by the City of Lock Haven.
N. Compliance with chapter. The permit shall be a license to proceed with
the work and should not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, or
set aside any of the provisions of this chapter, except as stipulated by
the Zoning Hearing Board.
O. Compliance with permit and plot plan. All work or uses shall conform to
the approved application and plans for which the permit has been
issued as well as the approved plot plan.
P. Display of zoning permit. All approved zoning permits shall be
prominently displayed on the subject property during construction,
renovation, reconstruction, repair, remodeling or the conduct of other
site improvements. Such permit displays shall occur within five days of
permit issuance, or prior to the commencement of actual work on the
site, whichever occurs first. Such permit display shall be continuous
until the site receives its certificate of occupancy.
Q. Inspections. Inspections of the property in question by the Zoning
Officer or other duly appointed official may be required at various
intervals during the construction process. By submitting an application
for a zoning permit, the landowner authorizes the City of Lock Haven to
perform such inspections as required.
§ 410-140 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-141
1:874
§ 410-142. Sign permit.
A. It shall be unlawful to use and/or occupy any structure, sign, land area
or portion thereof for which a zoning permit is required until a
certificate of use and occupancy for such activity has been issued by the
Zoning Officer.
B. The City of Lock Haven staff may permit the zoning permit application
to serve as the application for the certificate of use and occupancy.
C. The certificate of use and occupancy shall only be issued by the Zoning
Officer if the Zoning Officer determines that the activity complies with
this chapter, to the best knowledge of the Zoning Officer.
D. The applicant shall keep a copy of the certificate of use and occupancy
available for inspection.
E. Upon request of the applicant, the Zoning Officer may issue a
temporary certificate of use and occupancy. Such temporary certificate
may permit an activity to occur in all or part of a structure before the
entire work covered by the zoning permit has been completed.
(1) However, such temporary certificate shall only be issued if the
applicant proves to the Zoning Officer that the activity or
occupancy can occur safely without endangering public health or
safety.
(2) The temporary certificate shall establish in writing a maximum
time period under which it is valid. A six-month maximum time
period shall apply if not otherwise specified.
(3) Failure to receive a permanent certificate of use and occupancy
within such time period shall be a violation of this chapter.
(4) The temporary certificate may be conditioned upon compliance
with certain specific requirements within certain time periods.
F. The Zoning Officer shall inspect any structure, building, or sign within
10 days upon notification that the proposed work that was listed under
a zoning permit has been completed, and if satisfied that the work is in
conformity and compliance with the work listed in the issued permit
and all other pertinent laws, he shall issue a certificate of use and
occupancy for the intended use listed in the original application. Where
a building permit is required under the City of Lock Haven Building
Code,225 a certificate of use shall not be issued until a final inspection by
the Building Code Official is complete and found to be satisfactory.
A. A sign permit for a temporary or permanent sign may be issued by the
Zoning Officer for signs in accordance with § 410-103 of this chapter.
225. Editor's Note: See Ch. 212, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 410-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-142
1:875
§ 410-143. Temporary uses and structures permit.
§ 410-144. Types of uses.
B. No permanent or temporary sign as described in this chapter shall be
erected until a permit therefor has been issued by the Zoning Officer,
unless specified in Article XVII of this chapter.
C. The party erecting a sign shall be the applicant for a sign permit.
Application to the Zoning Officer shall be processed within one week
upon receipt of the written request to erect a sign and payment of a fee
is predetermined from a fee schedule adopted by the City Council;
provided, the size and nature of the sign is in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter and all other effective and applicable
ordinances. Refusal for a sign permit shall include a written statement
to the applicant citing specific sections of this chapter containing the
reasons for denial.
A. A permit for a temporary or permanent use or structure may be issued
by the Zoning Officer for any of the following:
(1) Customary, routine and accessory short-term special events,
including but not limited to: Christmas tree sales in any zoning
district; carnival, circus, street fairs or bazaar-type events in any
zoning district; and mobile amusement and lighting equipment for
promotion, advertisement, and grand openings in nonresidential
zoning districts; provided that only a well-established nonprofit
organization or a permitted place of worship proposing a
temporary use demonstrates clearly that the proposed use will
primarily serve a charitable, public service or religious purpose in
order to be eligible to receive approval for commercial-type
activities in a district where a commercial use would not otherwise
be permitted.
(2) Temporary storage and office trailers that are necessary to serve
on-site construction, while such construction is actively underway.
(3) Such other activities that the applicant proves are routine,
customary and temporary.
B. The Zoning Officer may require reasonable safeguards to be made so
that the temporary use or structures do not endanger the health, safety
and welfare of the public.
C. Time period. The Zoning Officer shall state a reasonable maximum time
period on the temporary permit. If no time limit is stated, then a sixweek-
maximum period shall apply. A temporary permit may be renewed
for a maximum of two additional weeks during any one calendar year
for just cause, unless otherwise specified in this chapter.
D. There shall be no fee required.
§ 410-142 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-144
1:876
§ 410-145. Applications for zoning permits.
A. Permitted-by-right uses. The Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning permit
under this chapter in response to an application for a use that is
"permitted by right" if it meets all of the requirements of this chapter.
B. Special exception use. A zoning permit under this chapter for a use
requiring a special exception permit shall be issued by the Zoning
Officer only in response to a written approval by the Zoning Hearing
Board, following a hearing, and compliance with any conditions by the
Zoning Hearing Board and any conditions required by this chapter.
C. Conditional use. A zoning permit under this chapter for a use requiring
a conditional use permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer only in
response to a written approval by the City Council, following a hearing,
and compliance with any conditions by the City Council and any
conditions required by this chapter.
D. Application requiring a variance. A permit under this chapter for a use
requiring a variance shall be issued by the Zoning Officer only in
response to a written approval by the Zoning Hearing Board, following
a hearing, and compliance with any conditions by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
A. Submittal. All applications for a zoning permit shall be made in writing
on a form provided by the City of Lock Haven. Such completed
application, with required fees, shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer.
B. Site plan. The applicant shall submit a minimum of two copies of a site
plan with the application if the application involves a new principal
building, expansion of a principal building or addition of three or more
parking spaces. The site plan shall be drawn to scale and show the
following:
(1) Locations, dimensions and uses of existing and proposed
structures, parking and loading areas, and location of existing and
proposed uses of areas of land, with existing features clearly
distinguished from proposed features.
(2) Notes showing the dimensions of all buildings from lot lines and
street rights-of way.
(3) Location of any watercourses and any one-hundred-year floodplain.
(4) Proposed lot areas, lot widths and other applicable dimensional
requirements.
(5) Locations and widths of existing and proposed sidewalks.
C. Additional information. Any application under this chapter shall include
the following information, unless the Zoning Officer determines such
information is unnecessary to determine compliance with this chapter:
§ 410-144 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-145
1:877
(1) Address of the lot.
(2) Name and address of the applicant, and of the owner of the
property, if different from the applicant.
(3) Description of the proposed use of the property.
(4) All other applicable information listed on the official the City of
Lock Haven application form.
(5) Such additional information that the Zoning Officer may determine
is reasonably necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
(6) Applications for zoning permits in all residential and the CBD
Zoning Districts In addition to the information required in
§ 410-145 of this chapter, applications for the construction of new
principal buildings or additions/alterations to existing principal
buildings in all residential and the CBD Zoning Districts shall be
submitted with the following information:
(a) A complete set of calculations (i.e., averages of heights,
setbacks, etc.) used to determine and demonstrate compliance
with all applicable standards set forth in the dimensional
requirements of Articles IV through VIII of this chapter.
(b) A schematic architectural drawing of the principal building's
front facade.
D. Application for zoning permits for uses in all commercial and industrial
zones (excluding demolition permits) shall include the following:
(1) A location plan showing the tract to be developed, zone boundaries,
adjoining tracts, significant natural features, and streets for a
distance of 200 lineal feet from all tract boundaries;
(2) A plot plan certified by a professional surveyor or engineer of the
lot showing the location of all existing and proposed buildings,
driveways, parking lots showing access drives, circulation patterns,
curb cut accesses, parking stalls, access from streets, screening
fences and walls, waste disposal fields or other methods of sewage
disposal, other construction features on the lot, and the location of
all topographical features;
(3) A description of the operations proposed in sufficient detail to
indicate the effects of those operations in producing traffic
congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, vibration,
fire hazards, safety hazards, or the emission of any potentially
harmful or obnoxious matter or radiation;
(4) Evidence that the disposal of materials and wastes will be
accomplished in a manner that complies with state and federal
regulations. Such evidence shall, at a minimum, include copies of
contracts with waste haulers licensed to operate within the City of
§ 410-145 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-145
1:878
Lock Haven which have been contracted to dispose of the materials
used and wastes generated on-site. The zoning permit shall remain
valid only so long as such contracts remain in effect and all
materials and wastes are properly disposed of on a regular basis.
Should the nature of the use change in the future such that the
materials used or wastes generated change significantly, either
in type or amount, the owner shall so inform the Zoning Officer,
and shall provide additional evidence demonstrating continued
compliance with the requirements of this section;
(5) Engineering plans for the handling of traffic, noise, glare, air
pollution, water pollution, vibration, fire hazards, or safety hazards,
smoke, or emission of any potentially harmful or obnoxious matter
or radiation;
(6) Designation of the manner by which sanitary sewage and
stormwater shall be disposed and water supply obtained;
(7) The proposed number of shifts to be worked and the maximum
number of employees on each shift;
(8) Where use by more than one firm is anticipated, a list of firms
which are likely to be located in the center, their floor area, and
estimated number of employees; and
(9) Submission, approval and recordation of a subdivision or land
development plan, as required.
E. Areas subject to flooding. If the proposed development, excavation or
construction is located within an area subject to regulation by Article
XV, Flood Damage Control Standards Overlay, the following information
is specifically required to accompany all applications, as prepared by a
licensed professional:
(1) The accurate location and elevation of the one-hundred-year
floodplain and floodway.
(2) The elevation, in relation to the datum referenced on the effective
maps, of the lowest floor, including basements.
(3) The elevation, in relation to the datum referenced on the effective
maps, to which all structures and utilities will be flood-proofed or
elevated.
(4) Where floodproofing is proposed to be utilized for a particular
structure, the zoning permit application shall be accompanied by a
document certified by a licensed professional engineer registered
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or a licensed professional
architect registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
certifying that the floodproofing methods used meet all applicable
codes and ordinances.
§ 410-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-145
1:879
§ 410-146. Issuance of permits.
F. City of Lock Haven Building Code. Where the proposed use is regulated
under the City of Lock Haven Building Code,226 the applicant shall
submit an application of building permit concurrently with the zoning
permit. A zoning permit will not be issued until satisfactorily meeting
the requirements of the City of Lock Haven Building Code.
G. Submittals for special exception or conditional uses. In addition to the
information listed above, an application for a special exception or
conditional use requiring a site plan and action by the Zoning Hearing
Board or City Council shall also include the following information,
unless the Zoning Officer determines that such information is not
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter:
(1) Present zoning district and major applicable lot requirements.
(2) For nonresidential use:
(a) Description of the proposed nonresidential operations and
storage in sufficient detail to indicate potential nuisances and
hazards regarding noise, large truck traffic, glare, odors, dust,
fire or toxic or explosive hazards or other significant public
health and safety hazards.
(b) Maximum hours of operation.
(3) Existing directions of stormwater flow (and any proposed revisions)
and any proposed methods of stormwater management.
(4) Listing of any sections of this chapter from which a variance is
being requested.
(5) Approximate locations of principal buildings and locations of
streets and alleys and zoning district boundaries within 100 lineal
feet of the boundaries of the tract, and description of uses of
adjoining properties (such as "funeral home" or "single-family
detached dwelling").
(6) Heights, locations, methods of illumination and intensity of exterior
lighting and sign lighting.
(7) Name and address of person who prepared the site plan.
(8) Signed acknowledgement of the site plan by the applicant.
(9) Such additional information required under applicable sections of
this chapter.
A. At least one copy of each zoning permit application and any other
zoning approvals shall be retained in the City of Lock Haven files.
226. Editor's Note: See Ch. 212, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 410-145 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-146
1:880
§ 410-147. Revocation of permits; appeal of permit or approval.
§ 410-148. Compliance with Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
If an application under this chapter would also be regulated by the City
of Lock Haven Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (SALDO),
Chapter 352, then any permit or approval under this chapter shall
automatically be conditioned upon compliance with the SALDO.
§ 410-149. General procedure for permits.
B. PennDOT permit. Where necessary for access onto a state road, a City
of Lock Haven zoning or building permit shall be automatically
conditioned upon issuance of a PennDOT highway occupancy permit.
A. Revocation. The Zoning Officer shall revoke, withhold or suspend a
permit or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in the
case of one or more of the following:
(1) Any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application
or on the plans on which the permit or approval was based. (Note:
The Pennsylvania Criminal Code provides for penalties for
providing false information to a municipal employee in the carrying
out of his/her duties).
(2) Upon violation of any condition lawfully imposed by the Zoning
Hearing Board for a special exception use or a variance.
(3) Upon violation of any condition lawfully imposed by the City
Council for a conditional use.
(4) Any work being accomplished or use of land or structures in such a
way that does not comply with this chapter or an approved site plan
or approved permit application.
(5) Any other just cause set forth in this chapter.
B. Appeals. A party with legitimate standing, or as otherwise provided by
state law, may appeal decisions made under this chapter within the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.227 Such
appeal shall occur within the time period established by the MPC.
A. For example, if an applicant applies for a permit for a single-family
detached dwelling on a proposed new lot, the construction permit for
such dwelling shall not be valid until after the lot is granted final
subdivision and land development approval and the lot is officially
recorded by the Clinton County Recorder of Deeds.
A. After receiving a proper application, the Zoning Officer shall either:
227. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-146 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-149
1:881
§ 410-150. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
All of the enforcement, violations and penalty provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code,228 are hereby incorporated into this chapter
by reference.
(1) Issue the applicable permit(s); or
(2) Deny the application(s) as submitted, indicating one or more
reasons in writing to the applicant.
B. After the permit under this chapter has been issued, the applicant may
undertake the action specified in the permit, in compliance with other
City of Lock Haven ordinances. However, it is recommended that
applicants wait 30 days to begin construction if there is a possibility of
an appeal by another party to have the permit revoked. Any
commencement of construction or a use within this thirty-day appeal
period shall be at the risk of the applicant.
A. Violations. Any person who shall commit or who shall permit any of the
following actions violates this chapter:
(1) Failure to secure a zoning permit prior to a change in use of land or
structure, or the erection, construction or alteration of any
structure or portion thereof, or the excavation of land to prepare
for the erection, construction or alteration of any structure or
portion thereof.
(2) Placement of false statements on or omitting relevant information
from an application for a zoning permit.
(3) Undertaking any action in a manner which does not comply with an
approved zoning permit.
(4) Violation of any conditions imposed by a decision of the Zoning
Hearing Board in granting a variance, special exception or other
approval.
(5) Violation of any condition imposed by a decision of the City Council
in granting a conditional use.
B. Causes of action; enforcement; remedies.
(1) Enforcement. If it appears to the City of Lock Haven that a violation
of this chapter has occurred, the City of Lock Haven shall initiate
enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement notice. Prior
to sending an official enforcement notice, the Zoning Officer may,
at his/her option, informally request compliance.
(2) Enforcement notice. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the
owner of record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred,
228. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-149 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-150
1:882
to any person who has filed a written request to receive
enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and to any other person
requested in writing by the owner of record. An enforcement notice
shall state the following, at minimum:
(a) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the municipality intends to take action.
(b) The location of the property in violation.
(c) The specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
(d) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(e) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter.
(f) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly
described.
(3) Evidence and fees. In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the
Zoning Hearing Board, the City of Lock Haven shall have the
responsibility of presenting its evidence first. Any filing fees paid by
a party to an appeal to an enforcement notice to the Zoning
Hearing Board shall be returned to the appealing party by the City
of Lock Haven if the Zoning Hearing Board, or any court in a
subsequent appeal, rules in the appealing party's favor.
(4) Cause of action. If the enforcement notice is not complied with,
within the specified time period, the Zoning Officer, City Solicitor,
or other officer of the City of Lock Haven may notify the City
Council. With the consent of the City Council, the City of Lock
Haven Solicitor or other officer of the City of Lock Haven may
institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain,
correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to
prevent in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or
use constituting a violation.
(5) Violations and penalties. Any person, partnership or corporation
who or which has violated or permitted the violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in
a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the City of Lock
Haven, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs,
including the reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the City of
Lock Haven as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
§ 410-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-150
1:883
§ 410-151. Determination of fees.
The City Council may, by resolution, establish fees for the administration
of this chapter. All fees shall be determined by a schedule that is made
available to the general public. The City Council may reevaluate the fees
schedule and make necessary alterations to it. Such alterations shall not be
considered an amendment to this chapter and may be adopted at any public
meeting of the City Council.
§ 410-152. Amendments.
imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the determination
of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the City of Lock
Haven may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules
of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless a Magisterial District Judge,
determining that there has been a violation, further determines
that there was a good-faith basis for the person, partnership or
corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was
no such violation, in which event, there shall be deemed to have
been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of
the determination by the Magisterial District Judge, and thereafter
each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney's fees
collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the
City of Lock Haven. Imprisonment shall not be authorized by this
chapter.
A. Power of amendment. The City Council may from time to time, amend,
supplement, change or repeal this chapter, including the Official Zoning
Map. Any amendment, supplement, change or repeal may be initiated
by the City Planning Commission, the City Council or by a petition to
the City Council by an interested party.
B. Hearing and enactment procedures for zoning amendments.
(1) Public hearing. Before hearing and enacting a Zoning Ordinance
and/or Zoning Map amendments, the City Council shall conduct a
public hearing to inform the general public of the nature of the
amendment, and to obtain public comment. Such public hearing
shall be conducted after public notice (as defined herein and listed
below) has been given.
(2) Public notice. Before conducting a public hearing, the City Council
shall provide public notice as follows:
(a) Notice shall be published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in City. Such
notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the
particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
§ 410-150 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-152
1:884
The first publication shall not be more than 30 days, and the
second publication shall not be less than seven days from the
date of the hearing. Publication of the proposed amendment
shall include either the full text thereof or the title and brief
summary, prepared by the municipal solicitor and setting forth
all the provisions in reasonable detail.
(b) For Zoning Map amendments, public notice shall also include
the posting of a sign at conspicuous locations along the
perimeter of the subject property; these sign(s) shall be posted
at least one week prior to the hearing and will exhibit the
nature, date, time, municipality, location of the hearing.
(c) In addition to the requirement that notice be posted on the
subject property, where the proposed amendment involves a
Zoning Map change, notice of the public hearing shall be
mailed by City at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing
by first class mail to the addresses to which real estate tax bills
are sent for all real property located within the area being
rezoned, as evidenced by tax records within the possession of
City. The notice shall include the location, date and time of the
public hearing. The provisions of this section shall not apply
when the rezoning constitutes a comprehensive rezoning.
(d) For curative amendments, public notice shall also indicate that
the validity of the chapter and/or map is in question, and shall
give the place where and the times when a copy of the request
including any plans, explanatory material or proposed
amendments may be examined by the public.
(e) If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the
proposed amendment is changed substantially, or is revised, to
include land previously not affected by it, the City Council shall
hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before
proceeding to vote on the amendment.
(3) Enactment notice. In addition to the public notice requirements
defined herein, the City Council must publish a reference to the
time and place of the meeting at which passage of the chapter or
amendment will be considered, and a reference to a place within
City where copies of the proposed chapter or amendment may be
examined without charge, or obtained for a charge not greater than
the cost thereof. Enactment notice shall be published at least once
in one newspaper of general circulation in City not more than 60
days nor less than seven days prior to passage. The published
content of the enactment notice shall be the same as that required
for public notice described in the preceding subsection.
(4) City Planning Commission referrals. For amendments proposed by
parties other than the City Planning Commission, the City Council
shall submit each amendment at least 30 days prior to public
§ 410-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-152
1:885
hearing to the City Planning Commission for review and comment.
The City Planning Commission shall submit a report of its review,
together with any recommendations, to the City Council within 45
days from the date of said referral. The recommendation of the
City Planning Commission may include a specific statement as to
whether or not the proposed amendment is in accordance with the
intent of this chapter and any officially adopted Comprehensive
Plan of City. The City Council cannot act upon the amendment
until it has received a recommendation from the City Planning
Commission; however, should the City Planning Commission fail to
submit its recommendation within 45 days, the City Council may
proceed without its recommendation.
(5) Clinton County Planning Commission Referrals. All proposed
amendments shall be submitted to the Clinton County Planning
Commission at least 30 days prior to public hearing on such
amendments. The Clinton County Planning Commission may
submit recommendations to the City Council within 45 days of such
referral. The City Council cannot act upon the amendment until it
has received a recommendation from the Clinton County Planning
Commission; however, should the Clinton County Planning
Commission fail to submit its recommendation within 45 days, the
City Council may proceed without its recommendation.
(6) Adjournment of public hearing. If during the public hearing
process, the City Council needs additional time to understand the
proposal, inform the public, receive public comment, and/or render
a decision, it may adjourn the public hearing to a specific time and
place.
(7) Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this
chapter shall be forwarded to the Clinton County Planning
Commission.
C. Amendment initiated by the City Planning Commission. When an
amendment, supplement, change or repeal is initiated by the City
Planning Commission, the proposal shall be presented to the City
Council, which shall then proceed in the same manner as with a petition
to the City Council which has already been reviewed by the City
Planning Commission.
D. Amendment initiated by the City Council. When an amendment,
supplement, change or repeal is initiated by the City Council, such
amendment, supplement, change or repeal shall follow the procedure
prescribed for a petition under Subsection B.
E. Amendment initiated by a petition from an interested party. A petition
for amendment, supplement, change or repeal for a portion of this
chapter shall include an accurate legal description and surveyed plan of
any land to be rezoned, and all of the reasons supporting the petition to
be considered. The petition shall also be signed by at least one record
§ 410-152 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-152
1:886
owner of the property in question, whose signature shall be notarized
attesting the truth and correctness of all the facts and information
presented in the petition. A fee to be established by City Council shall
be paid upon the filing of such petition for change and for the purpose
of defraying the costs of the proceedings prescribed herein. The City
Council may require duplicate sets of petition materials.
F. Curative amendment by a landowner. A landowner who desires to
challenge on substantive grounds the validity of this chapter or the
Official Zoning Map or any provision thereof which prohibits or restricts
the use or development of land in which he has an interest, may submit
a curative amendment to the City Council, including all of the reasons
supporting the request to be considered, with a written request that his
challenge and proposed amendment be heard and decided as provided
in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.229 The City Council
shall commence a hearing thereon within 60 days of the request. The
curative amendment shall be referred to the Clinton County Planning
Commission as provided for in Subsection B of this chapter and public
notice of the hearing shall be provided as defined herein.
(1) In reviewing the curative amendment, the City Council may deny
the request, accept the request as submitted, or may adopt an
alternative amendment which will cure the challenged defects. The
City Council shall consider the curative amendments, plans and
explanatory material submitted by the landowner and shall also
consider:
(a) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities.
(b) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the
proposal upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of
the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually
available to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise
unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions of the
chapter or map.
(c) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by
the site's soils, slopes, woodland, wetlands, floodplains,
aquifers, natural resources and other natural features.
(d) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and
natural features, the degree to which these are protected or
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and
any adverse environmental impacts.
(e) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture
and other land uses which are essential to public health and
welfare.
229. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-152
1:887
(2) The City Council shall render its decision within 45 days after the
conclusion of the last hearing.
(3) If the City Council fails to act on the landowner's request within the
time limits referred to above, a denial of the request is deemed to
have occurred on the 46th day after the close of the last hearing.
(4) Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of
the chapter or Zoning Map is in question and shall give the place
where and the times when a copy of the request including any
plans, explanatory material or proposed amendments may be
examined by the public.
(5) The challenge shall be deemed denied when:
(a) The City Council fails to commence the hearing within 60 days;
(b) The City Council notified the landowner that it will not adopt
the curative amendment;
(c) The City Council adopts another curative amendment which is
unacceptable to the landowner; or
(d) The City Council fails to act on the request 45 days after the
close of the last hearing on the request, unless the time is
extended by mutual consent by the landowner and
municipality.
(6) Where curative amendment proposal is approved by the grant of a
curative amendment application by the City Council pursuant to
this section or a validity challenge is sustained by the Zoning
Hearing Board or the court acts finally on appeal from denial of a
curative amendment proposal or a validity challenge, and the
proposal or challenge so approved requires a further application
for subdivision or land development, the developer shall have two
years from the date of such approval for a subdivision, land
development or planned residential development. Within the twoyear
period, no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning,
subdivision or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in
any manner which adversely affects the rights of the applicant as
granted in the curative amendment or the sustained validity
challenge. Upon the filing of the preliminary or tentative plan, the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code230
shall apply.
(7) Where the proposal appended to the curative amendment
application or the validity challenge is approved but does not
require further application under Chapter 352, Subdivision and
Land Development, the developer shall have one year within which
to file for a zoning permit. Within the one-year period, no
230. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-152 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-152
1:888
subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or
other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any manner
which adversely affects the rights of applicant as granted in the
curative amendment or the sustained validity challenge. During
these protected periods, the court shall retain or assume
jurisdiction for the purposes of awarding such supplemental relief
as may be necessary.
G. Curative amendment by the City Council.
(1) The City Council, by formal action, may declare this chapter or
portions thereof substantively invalid and propose to prepare a
curative amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days
following such declaration proposal, the City Council shall:
(a) By resolution, make specific findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of the chapter or portions thereof which may include:
[1] References to specific uses which are either not permitted
or not permitted in sufficient quantity;
[2] References to a class of use or uses which require revision;
or
[3] References to the entire chapter which requires revisions.
(b) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to the
chapter to correct the declared invalidity.
(2) Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the
City Council shall enact a curative amendment to validate or
reaffirm the validity of this chapter pursuant to the provisions
required by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code231 in
order to cure the declared invalidity of the chapter.
(3) Upon the date of the declaration and proposal, the City Council
shall not be required to entertain or consider any curative
amendment filed by a landowner. Nor shall the Zoning Hearing
Board be required to give a report, upon request, for a challenge to
the validity of the chapter subsequent to the declaration and
proposal, based upon the grounds identical to or substantially
similar to those specified in the resolution required by this section.
Upon the enactment of a curative amendment to, or the
reaffirmation of the validity of this chapter, no rights to a cure by
amendment or challenge shall, from the date of the declaration and
proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis of the substantive
invalidity of the City of Lock Haven Zoning Ordinance for which the
City Council propose to prepare a curative amendment.
231. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 410-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-152
1:889
§ 410-153. Conditional uses.
The City Council shall hear and decide requests for conditional use upon
application as provided for and following the procedures set forth in this
section of this chapter and subject to all applicable requirements, including
but not limited to:
(4) The City Council, having utilized the procedures as set forth in this
section, may not again utilize said procedures for a thirty-six-month
period following the date of the enactment of a curative
amendment, or reaffirmation of the validity of the chapter;
provided, however, that if after the date of declaration and proposal
there is a substantially new duty or obligation imposed upon City by
virtue of a decision by any court of competent jurisdiction, the City
Council may utilize the provisions of this section to prepare a
curative amendment to the chapter to fulfill this duty or obligation.
H. Authentication of Official Zoning Map. Whenever there has been a
change in the boundary of a zone or a reclassification of the zone
adopted in accordance with the above, the change on the Official
Zoning Map shall be made, and shall be duly certified by the City Clerk/
Manager and shall thereafter be refilled as part of the permanent
records of City.
A. General criteria. Each applicant must demonstrate compliance with the
following:
(1) The proposed use shall be consistent with the purpose and intent of
this chapter.
(2) The proposed use shall not detract from the use and enjoyment of
adjoining or nearby properties.
(3) The proposed use will not effect a change in the character of the
subject property's neighborhood.
(4) Adequate public facilities are available to serve the proposed use
(e.g., schools, fire, police and ambulance protection, sewer, water,
and other utilities, vehicular access, etc.).
(5) The proposed use complies with Article XV of this chapter
regarding flood damage control standards.
(6) The proposed use shall comply with those criteria specifically listed
in Article XX of this chapter. In addition, the proposed use must
comply with all other applicable regulations of this chapter.
(7) The proposed use will not substantially impair the integrity of the
City of Lock Haven Comprehensive Plan.
B. Filing of conditional use. In addition to the information required on the
zoning permit application, the conditional use application must show:
§ 410-152 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-153
1:890
(1) Ground floor plans and elevations of proposed structures.
(2) Names and addresses of adjoining property owners, including
properties directly across a public right-of-way.
(3) A scaled drawing (site plan) of the site with sufficient detail and
accuracy to demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) A written description of the proposed use in sufficient detail to
demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
C. Referral to City Planning Commission. All applications for a conditional
use shall be referred to the City of Lock Haven Planning Commission at
least 30 days prior to the hearing held upon an application to provide
the City Planning Commission an opportunity to submit
recommendations. However, the City Council shall meet the time limits
for a decision provided in this article, regardless of whether the City
Planning Commission has provided comments.
D. Conditions. The City Council, in approving conditional use applications,
may attach conditions considered necessary to protect the public
welfare and the purposes listed above, including conditions which are
more restrictive than those established for other uses in the same zone.
These conditions shall be enforceable by the Zoning Officer and failure
to comply with such conditions shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
E. Site plan approval. Any site plan presented in support of the conditional
use shall become an official part of the record for said conditional use.
Approval of any conditional use will also bind the use in accordance
with the submitted site plan; therefore, should a change in the site plan
be required as part of the approval of the use, the applicant shall revise
the site plan prior to the issuance of a zoning permit. Any subsequent
change to the use on the subject property not reflected on the originally
approved site plan shall require the obtainment of another conditional
use approval.
F. Hearing procedures. The hearing shall be conducted by the City
Council or the City Council may appoint any member or an independent
attorney as a hearing officer. The decision, or, where there is no
decision, the findings shall be made by the City Council. However, the
appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to City, may,
prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings by the
City Council and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as
final.
G. Application.
(1) All action before the City Council shall be initiated by a written
application for hearing, which shall be filed with the Zoning Officer
§ 410-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-153
1:891
at least three weeks prior to the meeting at which time the matter
is to be heard along with all maps, plans and text which may be
relevant to the request. All applications shall be made on forms
specified by the City Council. No application shall be accepted
unless the same shall be fully and legibly completed and unless
all exhibits and supplemental material required by the application
shall be attached and until all fees required shall have been paid.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall transmit the request and any information
received therewith, along with his file on said issue forthwith to the
City Council.
H. Fees. The City Council may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearings before the City Council. Fees for said hearings may include
compensation for the secretary, notice and advertising costs and
necessary administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The
costs, however, shall not include legal expenses of the City Council,
expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants
or expert witness costs.
I. Hearing schedule. The City Council may conduct hearings and make
decisions at any regular or special meeting. In no instance will a
hearing be scheduled later than 60 days from the date of the applicant's
request for a hearing, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time.
J. Notification of hearing.
(1) Whenever a hearing has been scheduled, public notice shall be
given to the general public by means of publication once each week
for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation
within the community. Such notice shall state the time and place of
the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be
considered. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days
and the second publication shall not be less than seven days prior
to the date of the hearing.
(2) Written notice shall be given to the applicant, the City Planning
Commission, the Zoning Officer and to any person who has made
timely request for such notice.
(3) In addition to the notice provided herein, the Zoning Officer shall
conspicuously post notice of said hearing on the affected tract of
land no less than seven days prior to the date of the hearing.
(4) The applicant shall, at least five days prior to the time appointed for
said hearing, give personal notice to all owners of property within
200 lineal feet of the affected property by either handing a copy
thereof to the said property owner(s) or by leaving a copy at their
usual place of abode or by sending written notification by certified
mail/return receipt requested to the last known address of the
property owner(s).
§ 410-153 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-153
1:892
(a) Where the owner(s) are a partnership, service upon any
partner as above provided shall be sufficient, and where the
owner(s) are corporations, service upon any officer, as above
set forth, shall be sufficient.
K. Conduct of hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by the City Council.
The decision, or where no decision is called for, the findings, shall be
made by the City Council; however, the appellant or the applicant, as
the case may be, in addition to the City, may, prior to the decision of the
hearing, waive decision or findings by the City Council and accept the
decision or findings of the hearing as final.
(1) Order of hearing.
(a) Hearing called to order.
(b) Chairman's statement of reason for hearing.
(c) Chairman's statement of parties to hearing.
(d) Identification of other parties wishing to be heard.
(e) Outline of procedures to be followed during hearing.
(f) Applicant's presentation of their case.
[1] Objectors cross-examine applicant's witnesses.
[2] City Council cross-examines applicant's witnesses.
(g) Statement of the Zoning Officer.
[1] Applicant's cross-examination.
[2] Objector's cross-examination.
[3] City Council's cross-examination.
(h) Objector's presentation of their case.
[1] Applicant cross-examines objector's witnesses.
[2] City Council cross-examines objector's witnesses.
(i) Other testimony and evidence.
(j) Rebuttal by applicant.
(k) Rebuttal by objectors.
(l) Concluding remarks and notice of when decision is expected to
be made.
(m) Adjournment of hearing.
§ 410-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-153
1:893
(2) Record. The City Council shall keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be
shared equally by the applicant and the City Council. A transcript of
the proceedings and copies of graphic or written material received
in evidence shall be made available to any party at cost. The cost of
the original transcript shall be paid by the City Council if the
transcript is ordered by the City Council or shall be paid by the
person appealing from the decision of the City Council if such
appeal is made, and in either event the cost of additional copies
shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other
cases, the party requesting the original transcript shall bear the
cost thereof.
(3) Parties. The parties to the hearing shall be the City, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of
record before the City Council and any other person, including civic
or community organizations permitted to appear by the City
Council. All persons who wish to be considered parties shall enter
appearances, in writing, on forms provided by the City Council for
that purpose. Persons aggrieved shall not be denied standing
because they do not reside nor have a property interest within the
municipal boundaries.
(4) Representation. All parties shall have the right to be represented
by counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and
present evidence and argument, and to cross-examine adverse
witnesses on all relevant issues.
(5) Witnesses. All witnesses shall testify under oath. The Chairman or
acting Chairman of the City Council presiding shall have power to
administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of
witnesses and the production of relevant documents and papers,
including witnesses and documents requested by the parties.
(6) Evidence. The City Council shall not be bound by strict rules of
evidence, but it may exclude irrelevant, immaterial, incompetent or
unduly repetitious testimony or evidence. The Chairman shall rule
on all questions relating to the admissibility of evidence, which may
be overruled by a majority of the City Council.
(7) Communication. The City Council shall not communicate, directly
or indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection
with any issue involved, except upon notice and opportunity for all
parties to participate, shall not take notice of any communication,
reports, staff memoranda or other materials, except advice from
the City Solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to
contest the material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its
surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party
or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to
be present.
§ 410-153 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-153
1:894
(8) Decisions.
(a) The City Council shall render a written decision, or when no
decision is called for, make written findings within 45 days
after the last hearing before the City Council. Where the
application is contested or denied, each decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon
together with reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any
provisions of this chapter or the MPC shall contain a reference
to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is
deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found.
(b) The City Council shall conduct its deliberations and vote on all
matters in public session at the meeting in which evidence is
concluded. If additional time for deliberation is necessary, the
City Council shall reschedule the deliberations to a date within
the allotted forty-five-day time limit.
(c) All matters shall be decided by a roll call vote. Decisions on any
matter before the City Council shall require the affirmative
vote of those present and voting unless otherwise specified
herein.
(d) No member of the City Council shall sit in hearing or vote on
any matter in which he is personally or financially interested.
Said member shall not be counted by the City Council in
establishing the quorum for such matters.
(e) No member of the City Council shall vote on the adjudication of
any matter unless he has attended the public hearing thereon.
(f) A tie vote shall be considered a rejection of the application
under consideration. However, if a person aggrieved has
appealed the grant of a permit or approval, a tie vote upholds
the prior approval.
(g) A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for,
of the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or
mailed to him not later than the next business day following its
date. To all other persons who have filed their name and
address with the City Council not later than the last day of the
hearing, the City Council shall provide, by mail or otherwise,
brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the
place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.
(9) Continuances. On its own motion, or by any party to the proceeding
or on approval of requests by applicant, appellants or their
authorized agents, the City Council may provide for continuances
of cases on which hearings have begun. Such continuances shall be
permitted only for good cause stated in the motion and, unless time
and place is stated, shall require new public notice, with fees paid
by applicants or appellants if continuances are at their request or
§ 410-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-153
1:895
result from their actions. A notice of the place, date and time
of the continued hearing shall also be posted prominently at the
municipal office where the hearing will be continued.
(10) Failure to hold hearing or render decision. Where the City Council
fails to render a decision within the period required, or fails to hold
a hearing within the period required, the decision shall be deemed
to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless otherwise
specified in the MPC. However, failure to act on a validity challenge
results in a deemed denial. When a decision has been rendered in
favor of the applicant because of the failure of the City Council to
meet or render a decision, the City Council shall give public notice
of deemed approval within 10 days from the last day it could have
met to render a decision in the same manner as in Subsection K(8)
hereinabove.
L. Time limitation.
(1) If a conditional use is granted, the necessary permit shall be
secured and the authorized action begun within two years after the
date when the conditional use is finally granted, and the building or
alteration, as the case may be, shall be completed within three
years of said date. For good cause, the City Council may at any
time, upon application in writing, extend either of these deadlines.
(2) Should the appellant or applicant fail to obtain the necessary
permits within said two-year period, or having obtained the permit,
should he fail to commence work thereunder within such two-year
period, it shall be conclusively presumed that the appellant or
applicant has waived, withdrawn, or abandoned his application,
and all approvals and permits granted to him shall be deemed
automatically rescinded by the City Council.
(3) Should the appellant commence construction or alternation within
said two-year period, but should he fail to complete such
construction or alteration within said three-year period, the City
Council may, upon 10 days' notice in writing, rescind or revoke the
granted conditional use, if the City Council finds that no good cause
appears for the failure to complete within such three-year period,
and if the City Council further finds that conditions have altered or
changed in the interval since the granting of the conditional use
that revocation or rescission of the action is justified.
(4) As an alternative to the preceding, an applicant can request, as
part of the original application before the City Council, the granting
of a timetable associated with the request which would supersede
the deadlines imposed in this article. In so doing, the applicant
must demonstrate that the times requested are logically related to
normal and expected progress of the project. In approving a
timetable under this section, the City Council must establish and
§ 410-153 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-153
1:896
bind a definite time frame for: issuance of a zoning permit; and
completion of construction of the project.
§ 410-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-153
1:897

ARTICLE XXIII
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 410-154. Creation and appointment.
§ 410-155. Removal of members.
Any Zoning Hearing Board member may be removed for malfeasance,
misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority
vote of the Council, taken after the member has received 15 days' advance
notice of the intent to take such vote. A hearing shall be held in connection
with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.
§ 410-156. Organization of Zoning Hearing Board.
A. Zoning Hearing Board members. A Zoning Hearing Board is hereby
created, which Board shall have all of the powers and duties as set forth
in the MPC or this chapter. The membership of said Board shall consist
of five residents of the City appointed by City Council. The terms of
office of each member of the Board shall be five years and shall be so
fixed that the term of office of one member of the Board shall expire
each year. The Board shall promptly notify City Council of any vacancies
which occur. Appointment to fill vacancies shall be only for the
unexpired portion of the term. Members of the Zoning Hearing Board
shall hold no other office (including appointed or elected) in the City,
including membership on the Planning Commission and Zoning Officer.
B. Alternate members. The City Council may appoint by resolution at least
one but no more than three residents of the City to serve as alternate
members of the Zoning Hearing Board. The term of office of an
alternate member shall be five years. When seated in accordance with
§ 410-156B of this chapter, an alternate shall be entitled to participate
in all proceedings and discussions of the Zoning Board to the same and
full extent as provided by law for Zoning Hearing Board members,
including specifically the right to cast a vote as a voting member during
the proceedings, and shall have all the powers and duties set forth on
this chapter and otherwise provided by law. Alternates shall hold no
other office in the City, including membership on the Planning
Commission and Zoning Officer. Any alternate may participate in any
proceeding or discussion of the Zoning Board, but shall not be entitled
to vote as a member of the Zoning Board nor be compensated pursuant
to § 410-157B of this chapter unless designated as a voting alternate
member pursuant to § 410-156B of this chapter.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall elect from its own membership its
officers, who shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed
themselves. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action,
a quorum shall be not less than a majority of all members of the Zoning
Hearing Board, but the Zoning Hearing Board may appoint a hearing
officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf
§ 410-154 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-156
1:899
§ 410-157. Expenditures for services.
§ 410-158. Powers and duties.
and the parties may waive further action by the Zoning Hearing Board
as provided in Article IX, § 908 of the MPC.232
B. If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not
reached, the Chairman of the Board shall designate as many alternate
members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be needed to provide a
quorum. Any alternate member of the Board shall continue to serve on
the Board in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the
alternate was initially appointed until the Board has made a final
determination of the matter or case. Designation of an alternate
pursuant to this section shall be made on a case-by-case basis in
rotation according to declining seniority among all alternates.
C. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the City and laws of the
commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its business,
which records shall be the property of the City, and shall submit a
report of its activities to City Council as requested by City Council.
A. The City Council shall make provision in its budget for appropriate
funds for the operation of the Zoning Hearing Board. Within the limits
of funds appropriated by the City Council, the Zoning Hearing Board
may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel,
consultants and other technical and clerical services.
B. Members of the Zoning Hearing Board may receive compensation for
the performance of their duties, as may be fixed by the City Council, but
in no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid
to the members of the City Council. Alternate members of the Board
may receive compensation, as may be fixed by the City Council, for the
performance of their duties when designated as alternate members in
§ 410-156B of this chapter, but in no case shall such compensation
exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the members
of the City Council.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,
except those brought before City Council pursuant to § 609.1 and
916.1(a)(2) of the MPC.233
(2) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
232. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
233. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1(a)(2), respectively.
§ 410-156 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-158
1:900
enactment or adoption, which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of said
ordinance. Where the ordinance appealed from is the initial zoning
ordinance of the City and a zoning hearing board has not been
previously established, the appeal raising procedural questions
shall be taken directly to court.
(3) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including but
not limited to the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act
on the application thereof, the issuance of any cease-and-desist
order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming
use, structure or lot.
(4) Appeals from a determination by a City Engineer or the Zoning
Officer with reference to the administration of any floodplain or
flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use
ordinance.
(5) Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter or such
provisions within a land use ordinance, pursuant to § 910.2 of the
MPC.234
(6) Applications for special exceptions under this chapter or such
provisions within a land use ordinance, pursuant to § 912.1 of the
MPC.235
(7) Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged
with the administration of any transfers of development rights or
performance density provisions of this chapter.
(8) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under § 916.2 of
the MPC.236
(9) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or City
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or
provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management, insofar as the same relate to
development not involving Article V or VII application of the
MPC.237
B. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter where it is alleged that the provisions of
this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the application following
the procedures set forth in § 410-159 of this chapter.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a variance, provided the
following findings are made, where relevant in a given case:
234. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10910.2.
235. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10912.1.
236. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
237. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq. or 10701 et seq., respectively.
§ 410-158 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-158
1:901
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or district in
which the property is located.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter, and that
the authorization of variance is therefore necessary to enable
the reasonable use of the property.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(2) Conditions. The Zoning Hearing Board, in approving variance
applications, may attach conditions considered necessary to
protect the public welfare and the purposes listed above, including
conditions which are more restrictive than those established for
other uses in the same zone. These conditions shall be enforceable
by the Zoning Officer, and failure to comply with such conditions
will constitute a violation of this chapter.
(3) Filing requirements. In addition to the required zoning permit,
each variance applications shall include the following:
(a) Ground floor plans and elevations of existing and/or proposed
structures.
(b) Names and addresses of adjoining property owners, including
properties directly across a public right-of-way. This
information is provided by the City staff based on the current
tax records.
(c) A scaled drawing (site plan) of the site with sufficient detail
and accuracy to demonstrate compliance with all applicable
provisions of this chapter.
§ 410-158 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-158
1:902
(d) A written description of the proposed use in sufficient detail to
demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
(4) Site plan approval. Any site plan presented in support of a variance
shall become an official part of the record for said variance.
Approval of any variance will also bind the use in accordance with
the submitted site plan.
C. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide requests for special
exceptions upon the application as provided for and following the
procedures set forth in § 410-159 in this chapter and subject to all
applicable requirements, including but not limited to:
(1) General criteria. Each applicant must demonstrate compliance
with the following:
(a) The proposed use shall be consistent with the purpose and
intent of this chapter.
(b) The proposed use shall not detract from the use and enjoyment
of adjoining or nearby properties.
(c) The proposed use will not substantially change the character of
the subject property's neighborhood.
(d) Adequate public facilities are available to serve the proposed
use (e.g., schools, fire, police and ambulance protection, sewer,
water and other utilities, vehicular access, etc.).
(e) The proposed use complies with Article XV of this chapter
regarding flood damage control standards.
(f) The proposed use shall comply with those criteria specifically
listed in Article XX of this chapter. In addition, the proposed
use must comply with all other applicable regulations
contained in this chapter.
(g) The proposed use will not substantially impair the integrity of
the City of Lock Haven Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Filing requirements. In addition to the required zoning permit
information, each special exception application shall include the
following:
(a) Ground floor plans and elevations or proposed structures.
(b) Names and address of adjoining property owners, including
properties directly across a public right-of-way. This
information is provided by the City staff based on the current
tax records.
§ 410-158 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-158
1:903
§ 410-159. Procedures.
(c) A scaled drawing (site plan) of the site with sufficient detail
and accuracy to demonstrate compliance with all applicable
provisions of this chapter.
(d) A written description of the proposed use in sufficient detail to
demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
(3) Conditions. The Zoning Hearing Board, in approving special
exception applications, may attach conditions considered
necessary to protect the public welfare and the purposes listed
above, including conditions which are more restrictive than those
established for other uses in the same zone. The conditions shall be
enforceable by the Zoning Officer and failure to comply with such
conditions shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(4) Site plan approval. Any site plan presented in support of the special
exception shall become an official part of the record for said special
exception. Approval of any special exception will also bind the use
in accordance with the submitted site plan; therefore, should a
change in the site plan be required as part of the approval of the
use, the applicant shall revise the site plan prior to the issuance of
a zoning permit. Any subsequent change to the use on the subject
property not reflected on the originally approved site plan, shall
require the obtainment of another special exception approval.
A. Application.
(1) All action before the Board shall be initiated by a written
application for hearing, which shall be filed with the Zoning Officer
at least three weeks prior to the meeting at which time the matter
is to be heard, along with all maps, plans and text which may be
relevant to the request. All applications shall be made on forms
specified by the Board. No application shall be accepted unless the
same shall be fully and legibly completed and unless all exhibits
and supplemental material required by the application shall be
attached and until all fees required shall have been paid.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall transmit the request and any information
received therewith, along with his file on said issue, forthwith to
the Zoning Hearing Board.
B. Fees. The City Council may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said hearings may
include compensation for the secretary and members of the Zoning
Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary
administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs,
however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing Board,
§ 410-158 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-159
1:904
expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants
or expert witness costs.
C. Time limitations.
(1) Landowner appeals. All appeals from determinations adverse to the
landowner shall be filed by the landowner within 30 days after
notice of the determination is issued.
(2) Appeal of persons aggrieved. No person shall be allowed to file any
proceeding with the Board later than 30 days after an application
for development, preliminary or final, has been approved by the
appropriate City officer, agency or body if such proceeding is
designed to secure reversal or to limit the approval in any manner,
unless such person alleges and proves that he had no notice,
knowledge or reason to believe that such approval had been given.
If such person has succeeded to his interest after such approval, he
shall be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in interest.
D. Hearing schedule. The Board may conduct hearings and make decisions
at any regular or special meeting. In no instance will a hearing be
scheduled later than 60 days from the date of the applicant's request
for a hearing, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension
of time.
E. Notification of hearing.
(1) Whenever a hearing has been scheduled, public notice shall be
given to the general public by means of publication once each week
for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation
within the community. Such notice shall state the time and place of
the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be
considered. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days,
and the second publication shall not be less than seven days prior
to the date of the hearing.
(2) Written notice shall be given to the applicant, the Zoning Officer
and to any person who has made timely request for such notice.
(3) In addition to the notice provided herein, the Zoning Officer shall
conspicuously post notice of said hearing on the affected tract of
land no less than seven days prior to the date of the hearing.
(4) The applicant shall, at least five days prior to the time appointed for
said hearing, give personal notice to all owners of property within
200 lineal feet of the affected property by either handing a copy
thereof to the said property owner(s) or by leaving a copy at their
usual place of abode or by sending written notification by certified
mail/return receipt requested to the last known address of the
property owner(s).
§ 410-159 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-159
1:905
(a) Where the owner(s) are a partnership, service upon any
partner as above provided shall be sufficient, and where the
owner(s) are corporations, service upon any officer, as above
set forth, shall be sufficient.
F. Conduct of hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by the Zoning
Hearing Board. The decision, or where no decision is called for, the
findings, shall be made by the Board; however, the appellant or the
applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the City, may, prior to the
decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings by the Zoning
Hearing Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing as
final.
G. Order of hearing.
(1) Hearing called to order.
(2) Chairman's statement of reason for hearing.
(3) Chairman's statement of parties to hearing.
(4) Identification of other parties wishing to be heard.
(5) Outline of procedures to be followed during hearing.
(6) Applicant's presentation of their case.
(a) Objectors cross-examine applicant's witnesses.
(b) Board cross-examines applicant's witnesses.
(7) Statement of the Zoning Officer.
(a) Applicant's cross-examination.
(b) Objector's cross-examination.
(c) Board's cross-examination.
(8) Objector's presentation of their case.
(a) Applicant cross-examines objector's witnesses.
(b) Board cross-examines objector's witnesses.
(9) Other testimony and evidence.
(10) Rebuttal by applicant.
(11) Rebuttal by objectors.
(12) Concluding remarks and notice of when decision is expected to be
made.
(13) Adjournment of hearing.
§ 410-159 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-159
1:906
H. Record. The Zoning Hearing Board shall keep a stenographic record of
the proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared
equally by the applicant and the Zoning Hearing Board. A transcript of
the proceedings and copies of graphic or written material received in
evidence shall be made available to any party at cost. The cost of the
original transcript shall be paid by the Zoning Hearing Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Zoning Hearing Board or shall be paid by
the person appealing from the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board if
such appeal is made, and in either event, the cost of additional copies
shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other
cases, the party requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost
thereof.
I. Parties. The parties to the hearing shall be the City, any person affected
by the application who has made timely appearance of record before
the Board and any other person, including civic or community
organizations permitted to appear by the Board. All persons who wish
to be considered parties shall enter appearances, in writing, on forms
provided by the Board for that purpose. Persons aggrieved shall not be
denied standing because they do not reside nor have a property interest
within the municipal boundaries.
J. Representation. All parties shall have the right to be represented by
counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present
evidence and argument, and to cross-examine adverse witnesses on all
relevant issues.
K. Witnesses. All witnesses shall testify under oath. The Chairman or
acting Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board presiding shall have
power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents and
papers, including witnesses and documents requested by the parties.
L. Evidence. The Zoning Hearing Board shall not be bound by strict rules
of evidence, but it may exclude irrelevant, immaterial, incompetent or
unduly repetitious testimony or evidence. The Chairman shall rule on
all questions relating to the admissibility of evidence, which may be
overruled by a majority of the Zoning Hearing Board.
M. Communication. The Zoning Hearing Board shall not communicate,
directly or indirectly, with any party or his representatives in
connection with any issue involved, except upon notice and opportunity
for all parties to participate, shall not take notice of any communication,
reports, staff memoranda or other materials, except advice from the
Zoning Hearing Board Solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an
opportunity to contest the material so noticed and shall not inspect the
site or its surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any
party or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to
be present.
N. Decisions.
§ 410-159 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-159
1:907
(1) The Board shall render a written decision, or when no decision is
called for, make written findings within 45 days after the last
hearing before the Board. Where the application is contested or
denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon together with reasons therefor.
Conclusions based on any provisions of this chapter or the MPC
shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons
why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts
found.
(2) The Board may conduct its deliberations and shall vote on all
matters in public session at the meeting in which evidence is
concluded. If additional time for deliberation is necessary, the
Board shall reschedule the deliberations to a date within the
allotted forty-five-day time limit.
(3) All matters shall be decided by a roll call vote. Decisions on any
matter before the Board shall require the affirmative vote of those
present and voting unless otherwise specified herein.
(4) No member of the Board shall vote on any matter in which he is
personally or financially interested. Said member may be counted
by the Board in establishing the quorum for such matters.
(5) No member of the Board shall vote on the adjudication of any
matter unless he has attended the public hearing thereon.
(6) A tie vote shall be considered a rejection of the application under
consideration. However, if a person aggrieved has appealed the
grant of a permit or approval, a tie vote upholds the prior approval.
(7) A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to
him not later than the next business day following its date. To all
other persons who have filed their name and address with the
Zoning Hearing Board not later than the last day of the hearing, the
Zoning Hearing Board shall provide, by mail or otherwise, brief
notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at
which the full decision or findings may be examined.
O. Continuances. On its own motion, or by any party to the proceeding or
on approval of requests by applicant, appellants or their authorized
agents, the Board may provide for continuances of cases on which
hearings have begun. Such continuances shall be permitted only for
good cause, stated in the motion and, unless time and place is stated,
shall require new public notice, with fees paid by applicants or
appellants if continuances are at their request or result from their
actions. A notice of the place, date and time of the continued hearing
shall also be posted prominently at the municipal office where the
hearing will be continued.
§ 410-159 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-159
1:908
§ 410-160. Effect of Zoning Hearing Board's decision.
P. Failure to hold hearing or render decision. Where the Board fails to
render a decision within the period required, or fails to hold a hearing
within the period required, the decision shall be deemed to have been
rendered in favor of the applicant unless otherwise specified in the
MPC. However, failure to act on a validity challenge results in a deemed
denial. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant
because of the failure of the Board to meet or render a decision, the
Board shall give public notice of deemed approval within 10 days from
the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner
as in Subsection N hereinabove.
A. If the variance or special exception is granted or the issuance of a
permit is approved, or other action by the appellant is authorized, the
necessary permit shall be secured and the authorized action begun
within one year after the date when the variance or special exception is
finally granted, or the issuance of a permit is finally approved, or the
other action by the appellant is authorized, and the building or
alteration, as the case may be, shall be completed within two years of
said date. For good cause, the Zoning Hearing Board may, at any time,
upon application in writing, extend either of these deadlines.
B. Should the appellant or applicant fail to obtain the necessary permits
within said one-year period, or having obtained the permit, should he
fail to commence work thereunder within such one-year period, it shall
be conclusively presumed that the appellant or applicant has waived,
withdrawn, or abandoned his appeal or his application, and all
provisions, variances and permits granted to him shall be deemed
automatically rescinded by the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. Should the appellant or applicant commence construction or alteration
within said one-year period, but should he fail to complete such
construction or alteration within said two-year period, the Zoning
Hearing Board may, upon 10 days' notice in writing, rescind or revoke
the granted variance or special exception, or the issuance of the permit,
or permits, or the other action authorized to the appellant or applicant,
if the Zoning Hearing Board finds that no good cause appears for the
failure to complete within such two-year period, and if the Zoning
Hearing Board further finds that conditions have so altered or changed
in the interval since the granting of the variance, permit or action, that
revocation or rescission of the action is justified.
D. As an alternative to the preceding, an applicant can request, as part of
the original application before the Zoning Hearing Board, the granting
of a timetable associated with the request which would supersede the
deadlines imposed. In so doing, the applicant must demonstrate that
the times requested are logically related to normal and expected
progress of the project. In approving a timetable under this section, the
Zoning Hearing Board must establish and bind a definite time frame
§ 410-159 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-160
1:909
§ 410-161. Information required on appeal application.
All appeals from a decision of the Zoning Officer and applications to the
Board shall be in writing on forms prescribed by the Board. Every appeal or
application shall include the following:
§ 410-162. Stay of proceedings.
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from unless the Building Inspector certifies to the Board after the notice of
appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate
stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which
case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order
which may be granted by the Board after notice to the Building Inspector or
by the Court of Common Pleas.
§ 410-163. Appeals.
The procedure set forth in Article X-A of the MPC238 shall constitute the
exclusive mode of appeal from any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board.
for: issuance of a zoning permit; and completion of construction of the
project.
A. The name and address of the applicant, or the appellant.
B. The name and address of the owner of the zone lot to be affected by
such proposed change or appeal.
C. A brief description and location of the zone lot to be affected by such
proposed change or appeal.
D. A statement of the present zoning classification of the zone lot in
question, the improvements thereon and the present use thereof.
E. A statement of the section of this chapter under which the appeal is
made and reasons why it should be granted, or a statement of the
section of this chapter governing the situation in which the alleged
erroneous ruling is being appealed and reasons for this appeal.
F. A description of the present improvements and the additions or changes
intended to be made under this application, indicating the size of such
proposed improvements, materials and general construction thereof. In
addition, there shall be attached a plot plan drawn to scale of the real
property to be affected, indicating the location and size of the lot and
size of improvements thereon and proposed to be erected thereon.
238. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11001-A et seq.
§ 410-160 LOCK HAVEN CODE § 410-163
1:910

CITY OF LOCK HAVEN, PENNSYLVANIA
FILE OF CITY COUNCIL
SESSION OF 2020
ORDINANCE NO. 2020- 02
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 999 WHICH ADOPTED THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LOCK HAVEN, CLINTON COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA,
TO AMEND CHAPTER 410, ZONING, PART 125, ADDITIONAL SUPPLEMENTAL
STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC ACCESSORY USES, BUILDINGS
AND STRUCTURES.
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the City Council ofthe City of Lock Haven,
Clinton County, Pennsylvania, that Chapter 410, Part 125, be and hereby is amended as follows:
SECTION I. Chapter 410, Part 125, Section L, Subsection ( 3) is hereby amended to read
as follows:
In any zoning district, a fence or wall in the side or rear yard may be a maximum
of eight (8) feet in height."
SECTION II. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith be and the
same repealed.
SECTION III. This ordinance shall become effective twenty (20) days after final
adoption.
INTRODUCED BY COUNCIL MEMBER Conklin
PASSED CITY COUNCIL FIRST READING February 17, 2020
PASSED CITY COUNCIL SECOND READING March 2, 2020
ATTEST: APPROVED:
et/( —
lerk Mayor

ZONING
410 Attachment 1
City of Lock Haven
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
Dimensional Requirements (§ 410-21)
Permitted Uses
Lot/Land Buildings
Minimum
Area
(square feet)
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
Front
Setback
(feet)
Minimum Side Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Rear
Setback
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Footprint
(square feet)
Residential
Single-family
detached
9,600 80 35% —1
25 total for both side
yards, with not less than
10 for one side
40 —2 No maximum
Nonresidential
Parks, playgrounds,
and playfields
No minimum 40% 15 feet 15 40 35 No maximum
Other permitted
uses
20,000 100 50% —1
35 total for both side
yards, with not less than
15 for one side
40 —2
15,000
Accessory
See principal use above to which it is accessory and Articles XIX and XX of this chapter.
NOTES:
1 Front setbacks shall comply with the following provisions:
(a) Where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings, the following provisions
shall apply:
(1) Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 lineal feet of existing buildings on both sides, the required front
setback shall be a line drawn between the two closest front cornices of the adjacent structures on the two sides. This distance may be
adjusted by not more 25%.
(2) When a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 lineal feet of an existing building on one side only, the required front
setback shall be a line drawn between the front cornice of the adjacent structure on the one side and a point on the on a parcel of land where
the building is to be erected, measured 25 feet from the street right-of-way line, halfway between side property lines. This distance may be
adjusted by not more 25%.
410 Attachment 1:1 01 - 01 - 2019
LOCK HAVEN CODE
(b) Otherwise, the building shall have a required front setback of 25 feet. This distance may be adjusted by not more than 25%.
(c) No new building shall extend into any street right-of-way.
2 Building height shall comply with the following provisions:
(a) Where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings, the following provisions
shall apply:
(1) Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 lineal feet of existing buildings on both sides, the required building
height shall be the average of the existing heights of the adjacent structures on the two sides. This height may be adjusted by not more than
25%.
(2) When a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 lineal feet of an existing building on one side only, the required
building height shall be that of the existing adjacent building. This height may be adjusted by not more than 25%.
(b) Otherwise, there shall be no required building height.
(c) However, no building shall have a height exceeding 35 feet.
410 Attachment 1:2 01 - 01 - 2019

ZONING
410 Attachment 2
City of Lock Haven
R-L Low-Density Residential District
Dimensional Requirements (§ 410-25)
Permitted Uses
Lot/Land Buildings
Minimum
Area
(square feet)
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
Minimum
Front
Setback
(feet)
Minimum Side Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Rear
Setback
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Footprint
(square feet)
Residential
Single-family semidetached dwelling
5,000 (per
dwelling
unit)
50 (per
dwelling unit)
40% (per
dwelling
unit)
—1
0 at common wall, 10 for
non-common wall side
20 —2
Two-family
dwelling
8,000
(4,000 per
dwelling
unit)
80
(40 per
dwelling unit)
40% —1
0 at common wall, 20
total for both side yards,
with not less than 8 for
one side
20 —2
Single-family
detached
6,000 60 35% —1
25 total for both side
yards, with not less than
8 for one side
20 —2 No
maximum
Nonresidential
Parks, playgrounds,
and playfields
No minimum 40% 15 15 15 35 No
maximum
Other permitted
uses
20,000 100 50% —1
35 total for both side
yards, with not less than
15 for one side
40 —2
15,000
Accessory
See principal use above to which it is accessory and Articles XIX and XX of this chapter.
410 Attachment 2:1 01 - 01 - 2019
LOCK HAVEN CODE
NOTES:
1 Front setbacks shall comply with the following provisions:
(a) Where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings, the following provisions
shall apply:
(1) Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 lineal feet of existing buildings on both sides, the required front
setback shall be a line drawn between the two closest front cornices of the adjacent structures on the two sides. This distance may be
adjusted by not more than 25%.
(2) When a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 lineal feet of an existing building on one side only, the required front
setback shall be a line drawn between the front cornice of the adjacent structure on the one side and a point on the on a parcel of land where
the building is to be erected, measured 25 feet from the street right-of-way line, halfway between side property lines. This distance may be
adjusted by not more than 25%.
(b) Otherwise, the building shall have a required front setback of 25 feet. This distance may be adjusted by not more than 25%.
(c) No new building shall extend into any street right-of-way.
2 Building height shall comply with the following provisions:
(a) Where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings, the following provisions
shall apply:
(1) Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 lineal feet of existing buildings on both sides, the required building
height shall be the average of the existing heights of the adjacent structures on the two sides. This height may be adjusted by not more than
25%.
(2) When a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 lineal feet of an existing building on one side only, the required
building height shall be that of the existing adjacent building. This height may be adjusted by not more than 25%.
(b) Otherwise, there shall be no required building height.
(c) However, no building shall have a height exceeding 35 feet.
410 Attachment 2:2 01 - 01 - 2019

ZONING
410 Attachment 3
City of Lock Haven
R-M Medium-Density Residential District
Dimensional Requirements (§ 410-30)
Permitted Uses
Lot/Land Buildings
Minimum
Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
Minimum
Front
Setback
(feet)
Minimum Side
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Rear
Setback
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Footprint
(square feet)
Residential
Multifamily
dwelling
16,000 100 50% —1
25 25 —2
15,000
Residential
Single-family semidetached dwelling
5,000 (per
dwelling
unit)
50 (per
dwelling
unit)
40% (per
dwelling
unit)
—1
0 at common wall, 10
for non-common wall
side
20 —2 No maximum
Two-family
dwelling
8,000
(4,000 per
dwelling
unit)
80
(40 per
dwelling
unit)
40% —1
0 at common wall, 20
total for both side yards,
with not less than 8 for
one side
20 —2 No maximum
Single-family
detached
6,000 60 35% —1
25 total for both side
yards, with not less than
8 for one side
20 —2 No maximum
Nonresidential
Parks, playgrounds,
and playfields
No minimum 40% 15 15 15 35 No maximum
Other permitted
uses
10,000 80 50% —1
35 total for both side
yards, with not less than
15 for one side
40 —2
15,000
Accessory
See principal use above to which it is accessory and Articles XIX and XX of this chapter.
410 Attachment 3:1 01 - 01 - 2019
LOCK HAVEN CODE
NOTES:
1 Front setbacks shall comply with the following provisions:
(a) Where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings, the following provisions
shall apply:
(1) Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 lineal feet of existing buildings on both sides, the required front
setback shall be a line drawn between the two closest front cornices of the adjacent structures on the two sides. This distance may be
adjusted by not more than 25%.
(2) When a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 lineal feet of an existing building on one side only, the required front
setback shall be a line drawn between the front cornice of the adjacent structure on the one side and a point on the on a parcel of land where
the building is to be erected, measured 25 feet from the street right-of-way line, halfway between side property lines. This distance may be
adjusted by not more than 25%.
(b) Otherwise, the building shall have a required front setback of 25 feet. This distance may be adjusted by not more than 25%.
(c) No new building shall extend into any street right-of-way.
2 Building height shall comply with the following provisions:
(a) Where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings, the following provisions
shall apply:
(1) Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 lineal feet of existing buildings on both sides, the required building
height shall be the average of the existing heights of the adjacent structures on the two sides. This height may be adjusted by not more than
25%.
(2) When a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 lineal feet of an existing building on one side only, the required
building height shall be that of the existing adjacent building. This height may be adjusted by not more than 25%.
(b) Otherwise, there shall be no required building height.
(c) However, no building shall have a height exceeding 35 feet.
410 Attachment 3:2 01 - 01 - 2019

ZONING
410 Attachment 4
City of Lock Haven
R-H High-Density Residential District
Dimensional Requirements (§ 410-35)
Permitted Uses
Lot/Land Buildings
Minimum
Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
Minimum
Front
Setback
(feet)
Minimum Side
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Rear
Setback
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Footprint
(square feet)
Residential
Multifamily
dwelling
16,000 100 50% —1
25 25 —2
15,000
Single-family semidetached dwelling
5,000 (per
dwelling
unit)
50 (per
dwelling
unit)
40% (per
dwelling
unit)
—1
0 at common wall, 10
for non-common wall
side
20 —2 No maximum
Two-family
dwelling
8,000
(4,000 per
dwelling
unit)
80
(40 per
dwelling
unit)
40% —1
0 at common wall, 20
total for both side yards,
with not less than 8 for
one side
20 —2 No maximum
Single-family
detached
6,000 60 30% —1
25 total for both side
yards, with not less than
8 for one side
20 —2 No maximum
Nonresidential
Parks, playgrounds,
and playfields
No minimum 40% 15 feet 15 15 35 No maximum
Other permitted
uses
10,000 80 50% —1
35 total for both side
yards, with not less than
15 for one side
40 —2
15,000
Accessory
See principal use above to which it is accessory and Articles XIX and XX of this chapter.
NOTES:
1 Front setbacks shall comply with the following provisions:
(a) Where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings, the following provisions
shall apply:
410 Attachment 4:1 01 - 01 - 2019
LOCK HAVEN CODE
(1) Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 lineal feet of existing buildings on both sides, the required front
setback shall be a line drawn between the two closest front cornices of the adjacent structures on the two sides. This distance may be
adjusted by not more than 25%.
(2) When a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 lineal feet of an existing building on one side only, the required front
setback shall be a line drawn between the front cornice of the adjacent structure on the one side and a point on the on a parcel of land where
the building is to be erected, measured 25 feet from the street right-of-way line, halfway between side property lines. This distance may be
adjusted by not more than 25%.
(b) Otherwise, the building shall have a required front setback of 25 feet. This distance may be adjusted by not more than 25%.
(c) No new building shall extend into any street right-of-way.
2 Building height shall comply with the following provisions:
(a) Where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings, the following provisions
shall apply:
(1) Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 lineal feet of existing buildings on both sides, the required building
height shall be the average of the existing heights of the adjacent structures on the two sides. This height may be adjusted by not more than
25%.
(2) When a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 lineal feet of an existing building on one side only, the required
building height shall be that of the existing adjacent building. This height may be adjusted by not more than 25%.
(b) Otherwise, there shall be no required building height.
(c) However, no building shall have a height exceeding 35 feet.
410 Attachment 4:2 01 - 01 - 2019

ZONING
410 Attachment 5
City of Lock Haven
CBD Central Business District
Dimensional Requirements (§ 410-40)
[Amended 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 955]
Permitted Uses
Lot/Land Buildings
Minimum
Area
Minimum
Width
Maximum
Coverage
Minimum
Front
Setback
Minimum Side
Setback
Minimum
Rear
Setback
Maximum
Height
Maximum
Building
Footprint
Nonresidential
All other uses No minimum 100% —1 —2 —3 —4 —5
Accessory
See principal use above to which it is accessory and Articles XIX and XX of this chapter.
NOTES:
1 Any new construction must match the front yard setback of one of the existing adjacent structures; this dimension may be adjusted by up to 25%. If
no adjacent building exists, new construction may build with a zero-foot setback; however, in no instance can the new structure be set back more
than 10 feet from the front property line.
2 Zero feet at common wall with nonresidential use/building, otherwise, five feet for non-common wall. Ten feet if abutting a residential use and/or
zoning district.
3 Ten feet when abutting a residential use and/or zoning district.
4 Building height shall comply with the following provisions:
(a) Where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings, the following provisions
shall apply:
(1) Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 lineal feet of existing buildings on both sides, the required building
height shall be the average of the existing heights of the adjacent structures on the two sides. This height may be adjusted by not more than
25%.
(2) When a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 lineal feet of an existing building on one side only, the required
building height shall be that of the existing adjacent building. This height may be adjusted by not more than 25%.
(3) However, no new building shall be less than 30 feet (which must be designed to appear to be a minimum of two stories) and no new
building or addition/expansion to an existing building shall be greater than 65 feet in height.
410 Attachment 5:1 01 - 01 - 2019
LOCK HAVEN CODE
5 The maximum building footprint of any new building constructed or addition/expansion of an existing building shall comply with the following
provisions:
(a) Where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings, the following provisions
shall apply:
(1) Where a building is to be erected or new addition/expansion on a parcel of land that is within 100 lineal feet of existing buildings on both
sides, the maximum building footprint shall be the average of the existing building footprints of the adjacent structures on the two sides.
This footprint may be adjusted by not more than 25%.
(2) When a building is to be erected or new addition/expansion on a parcel of land that is within 100 lineal feet of an existing building on one
side only, the maximum building footprint shall be that of the existing adjacent building. This footprint may be adjusted by not more than
25%.
410 Attachment 5:2 01 - 01 - 2019

ZONING
410 Attachment 6
City of Lock Haven
GC General Commercial District
Dimensional Requirements (§ 410-45)
Permitted Uses
Lot/Land Buildings
Minimum
Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
Minimum
Front
Setback
(feet)
Minimum Side
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Rear
Setback
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Footprint
Nonresidential
Parks, playgrounds,
and playfields
No
minimum
No minimum 40% 15 15 15 35 No maximum
All other uses 5,000 50 80% 0 101
101
65 No maximum
Accessory
See principal use above to which it is accessory and Articles XIX and XX of this chapter.
NOTES:
1 Fifteen feet when abutting a residential use and/or zoning district.
410 Attachment 6:1 01 - 01 - 2019

ZONING
410 Attachment 7
City of Lock Haven
GC/LI General Commercial/Light Industrial District
Dimensional Requirements (§ 410-50)
Permitted Uses
Lot/Land Buildings
Minimum
Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
Minimum
Front
Setback
(feet)
Minimum Side
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Rear
Setback
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Footprint
Nonresidential
All other uses 5,000 50 60% 10 101
101
65 No maximum
Accessory
See principal use above to which it is accessory and Articles XIX and XX of this chapter.
NOTES:
1 Twenty-five feet when abutting a residential use and/or zoning district.
410 Attachment 7:1 01 - 01 - 2019

ZONING
410 Attachment 8
City of Lock Haven
I Industrial District
Dimensional Requirements (§ 410-55)
Permitted Uses
Lot/Land Buildings
Minimum
Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
Minimum
Front
Setback
(feet)
Minimum Side
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Rear
Setback
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Footprint
Nonresidential
All other uses 20,000 100 75% 25 251
251
65 No maximum
Accessory
See principal use above to which it is accessory and Articles XIX and XX of this chapter.
NOTES:
1 Fifty feet when abutting a residential use and/or zoning district.
410 Attachment 8:1 01 - 01 - 2019

ZONING
410 Attachment 9
City of Lock Haven
IPA Industrial Park Airport District
Dimensional Requirements (§ 410-60)
Permitted Uses
Lot/Land Buildings
Minimum
Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
Minimum
Front
Setback
(feet)
Minimum Side
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Rear
Setback
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Footprint
Nonresidential
Parks, playgrounds,
and playfields
No minimum 40% 15 15 15 35 No maximum
All other uses 20,000 100 75% 25 251
251
65 No maximum
Accessory
See principal use above to which it is accessory and Articles XIX and XX of this chapter.
NOTES:
1 Fifty feet when abutting a residential use and/or zoning district.
410 Attachment 9:1 01 - 01 - 2019

ZONING
410 Attachment 10
City of Lock Haven
PI Public Institutional District
Dimensional Requirements (§ 410-65)
Permitted Uses
Lot/Land Buildings
Minimum
Area
Minimum
Width
Maximum
Coverage
Minimum
Front
Setback
(feet)
Minimum Side
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Rear
Setback
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Footprint
Nonresidential
Parks, playgrounds,
and playfields
No minimum 40% 15 15 15 35 No maximum
All other uses No minimum 80% 20 25 total for 2 sides, 10
for 1 side1
201
75 No maximum
Accessory
See principal use above to which it is accessory and Articles XIX and XX of this chapter.
NOTES:
1 Twenty-five feet when abutting a residential use and/or zoning district.
410 Attachment 10:1 01 - 01 - 2019


Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 2003 Code of Ordinances to 2019 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 2003 Code of
Ordinances
Location in 2019 Code
Ch. 1, Administration and Government
Part 1, Administrative Code Ch. 7
Part 2, Elected Officials
A, Mayor or Council Ch. 128, Art. I
B, Tax Collector Ch. 128, Art. II
Part 3, Appointed Officials
§ 1-301, Office of Health Officer
Established; Qualifications and
Responsibilities
Ch. 81, Art. I
§ 1-302, Appointment of Health Officer Ch. 81, Art. I
§ 1-303, Position of Planner/
Development Coordinator Established;
Duties; Compensation
Ch. 81, Art. II
§ 1-304, Position of Chief of Police
Established; Compensation
Ch. 81, Art. III
Part 4, Authorities
A, Lock Haven City Authority Ch. 18, Art. I
B, Redevelopment Authority of the City
of Lock Haven
Ch. 18, Art. II
Part 5, Boards and Commissions
A, Code Enforcement Board of Appeals
and Review
Ch. 30, Art. IV
B, Civil Service Commission Ch. 30, Art. III
C, Planning Commission Ch. 30, Art. I
D, Recreation and Parks Board Ch. 30, Art. VIII
§ 410-163 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:911
Chapter/Title From 2003 Code of
Ordinances
Location in 2019 Code
E, Shade Tree Commission Ch. 30, Art. VI
F, Watershed Management Committee Ch. 30, Art. II
G, Board of Health Ch. 30, Art. V
Part 6, Police Department
A, Police Department Ch. 116, Art. I
B, Auxiliary Police Department Ch. 116, Art. II
Part 7, Fire Department
A, Organization Ch. 59
B, Duties and Responsibilities Ch. 59
C, General Regulations Ch. 59
D, Firemen's Relief Association Ch. 68
Part 8, Pensions
A, Police Pensions Ch. 99, Art. I
B, City of Lock Haven City Employees
Retirement Fund
Ch. 99, Art. II
C, Death Benefits for Retired Police Ch. 99, Art. III
D, Death Benefits for Active Police REP
Part 9, Real Estate Registry Ch. 316
Part 10, Employee Benefits Ch. 105, Art. I
Part 11, Appointment of Council Members
to Boards and Commissions
Ch. 30, Art. VII
Part 12, Organizational Structure for City
Personnel
Ch. 105, Art. II
Part 13, Reward Policy Ch. 120, Art. I
Ch. 2, Animals
Part 1, Dogs Ch. 182, Art. I
Part 2, Animal Nuisances Ch. 182, Art. II
Ch. 3, Bicycles (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 4, Buildings (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 5, Code Enforcement
Part 1, Building Code Repealed by Ord. No.
710
Part 2, Electrical Code Repealed by Ord. No.
710
§ DT-1 LOCK HAVEN CODE § DT-1
1:912
Chapter/Title From 2003 Code of
Ordinances
Location in 2019 Code
Part 3, Property Maintenance Code Repealed by Ord. No.
736; see now Ch. 307
Part 4, Plumbing Code Repealed by Ord. No.
710
Part 5, Mechanical Code Repealed by Ord. No.
710
Part 6, Fire Prevention Code Repealed by Ord. No.
710
Ch. 6, Conduct
Part 1, Loitering Ch. 279
Part 2, Curfew Ch. 220
Part 3, Alcoholic Beverages Ch. 170
Part 4, Firearms and Other Weapons Ch. 241
Part 5, Littering Ch. 273
Ch. 7, Fire Prevention and Fire Protection
Part 1, Fireworks Display NCM
Ch. 8, Floodplains (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 9, Grading and Excavating (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 10, Health and Safety
Part 1, Vegetative Growth Ch. 194
Ch. 11, Housing
Part 1, Inspection of Residential Units Ch. 321
Ch. 12, Libraries
Part 1, Annie Halenbake Ross Library Ch. 268
Ch. 13, Licenses, Permits and General Business
Regulations
Part 1, Mechanical Amusement Devices Ch. 177
Part 2, Transient Retail Businesses Ch. 371
Part 3, Alarms Ch. 164
Part 4, Cable Television Regulations Ch. 203
Ch. 14, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
(Reserved)
Omitted
Ch. 15, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 380
Ch. 16, Parks and Recreation
Part 1, Flood Protection Levee System Ch. 298, Art. I
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:913
Chapter/Title From 2003 Code of
Ordinances
Location in 2019 Code
Part 2, Motorized Vehicles Ch. 298, Art. II
Part 3, Rules and Regulations Ch. 298, Art. III
Ch. 17, Planned Residential Development
(Reserved)
Omitted
Ch. 18, Sewers and Sewage Disposal
Part 1, Sewer Connections and Uses Ch. 328, Art. III
Part 2, Sewer Rental and Charges Ch. 328, Art. II
Part 3, Individual and Community Sewage
Systems and Holding Tanks
A, Individual and Community Sewage
Systems
Ch. 328, Art. I
B, Holding Tanks Ch. 328, Art. IV
Part 4, Industrial Pretreatment Program Repealed by Ord. No.
854; see now Ch. 328,
Art. IV
Ch. 19, Signs and Billboards (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 20, Solid Waste
Part 1, Garbage and Refuse Superseded by Ord. No.
836; see now Ch. 340,
Art. I
Part 2, Recyclable Materials Ch. 340, Art. II
Ch. 21, Streets and Sidewalks
Part 1, Street Excavation Ch. 346, Art. I
Part 2, Sidewalks
A, Construction, Repair and Use Ch. 346, Art. III
B, Snow and Ice Removal Ch. 346, Art. II
Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development Ch. 352
Ch. 23, Swimming Pools (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 24, Taxation; Special
Part 1, Earned Income Tax Repealed by Ord. No.
893; see now Ch. 365,.
Art. I
Part 2, Occupation Privilege Tax Repealed by Ord. No.
808; see now Ch. 365,
Art. VI
Part 3, Realty Transfer Tax Ch. 365, Art. V
§ DT-1 LOCK HAVEN CODE § DT-1
1:914
Chapter/Title From 2003 Code of
Ordinances
Location in 2019 Code
Part 4, Property Tax Exemption Ch. 365, Art. II
Part 5, Business Privilege Tax Ch. 365, Art. IV
Part 6, Mercantile Tax Ch. 365, Art. III
Ch. 25, Trees (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 26, Water
Part 1, Rules and Regulations for the Supply
of Water
Ch. 394, Art. I
Ch. 27, Zoning Repealed by Ord. No.
827; see now Ch. 410
Appendix
A. Annexation of Territory (Reserved) Omitted
B. Bond Issues and Loans NI
C. Franchises and Services NI
D. Governmental and Intergovernmental
Affair
NI
E. Plan Approval (Reserved) Omitted
F. Public Property NI
G. Sewers NI
H. Streets and Sidewalks NI
I. Water NI
J. Zoning; Prior Ordinances NI
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
KEY:
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:915
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
673 4-7-2003 General fund budget amendment NCM
674 4-7-2003 Capital escrow fund budget
amendment
NCM
675 4-21-2003 General fund budget amendment NCM
676 4-7-2003 Airport budget amendment NCM
677 5-19-2003 General fund budget amendment NCM
678 5-19-2003 Recreation fund amendment NCM
679 6-2-2003 Budget for Enterprise Program NCM
680 6-2-2003 PennVest sewer borrowing NCM
680-A 7-21-2003 PennVest sewer borrowing
amendment
NCM
681 7-7-2003 Salaries amendment NCM
682 8-4-2003 Enterprise revolving loan fund
budget amendment
NCM
683 8-4-2003 Airport budget amendment NCM
684 8-4-2003 CDBG revolving loan program
amendment
NCM
685 8-4-2003 CDBG 2001 program budget
amendment
NCM
686 8-18-2003 General fund budget amendment NCM
687 9-8-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 380
688 9-15-2003 Establishing 2003 CDBG budget NCM
689 9-22-2003 RBEG program budget
amendment
NCM
690 9-22-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
691 10-6-2003 Recreation fund budget
amendment
NCM
692 10-13-2003 Street acceptance NCM
693 10-13-2003 General fund budget amendment NCM
694 12-8-2003 CDBG 2002 program budget
amendment
NCM
695 12-22-2003 2004 tax levy NCM
696 12-22-2003 2004 budget NCM
697 12-22-2003 General fund budget amendment NCM
698 12-22-2003 Airport fund budget amendment NCM
§ DL-1 LOCK HAVEN CODE § DL-1
1:916
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
699 12-22-2003 Sewer fund budget amendment NCM
700 2-2-2004 Confirm benefits of non-union
employees
NCM
701 3-1-2004 Water budget amendment NCM
702 5-3-2004 CDBG 2002 program budget
amendment
NCM
703 5-3-2004 Airport project fund budget
amendment
NCM
704 5-3-2004 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 827
705 6-7-2004 CDBG loan program budget
amendment
NCM
706 6-7-2004 General fund budget amendment NCM
707 6-7-2004 Highway aid fund amendment NCM
708 6-21-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment:
Parking fines increased
Ch. 380
709 6-21-2004 Establishing New Communities
Main Street program budget
NCM
710 6-28-2004 Construction codes, uniform Ch. 212
711 6-28-2004 Federal enterprise program
budget amendment
NCM
Res.
No.
963
6-28-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 380
712 7-12-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 380
713 7-26-2004 Sewer fund budget amendment NCM
714 8-9-2004 Salaries amendment NCM
715 8-9-2004 General fund budget amendment NCM
716 9-13-2004 Establishing 2004 CDBG budget NCM
717 10-25-2004 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 827
718 10-25-2004 Salaries amendment NCM
719 11-1-2004 CDBG 2003 program budget
amendment
NCM
720 12-13-2004 Housing revolving loan fund
budget amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:917
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
721 12-13-2004 CDBG 2002 program budget
amendment
NCM
722 12-13-2004 General fund budget amendment NCM
723 12-20-2004 Inventory, recreation and airport
fund budgets amendment
NCM
724 12-27-2004 2005 tax levy NCM
725 12-27-2004 2005 appropriations NCM
726 1-17-2005 Taxation: emergency and
municipal services tax
Repealed by
Ord. No. 808
727 2-7-2005 CDBG revolving loan fund
amendment
NCM
728 2-14-2005 Salaries amendment NCM
729 2-14-2005 General fund budget amendment NCM
730 2-14-2005 Federal enterprise program
budget amendment
NCM
731 4-4-2005 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 827
732 4-4-2005 CDBG 2003 program budget
amendment
NCM
733 4-18-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 380
734 4-18-2005 General fund budget amendment NCM
735 5-2-2005 Main Street budget amendment NCM
736 5-16-2005 Property maintenance (2003
edition)
Ch. 307
737 5-16-2005 Owner occupied housing rehab
program budget
NCM
738 5-16-2005 New communities enterprise fund
amendment
NCM
739 6-6-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 380
740 6-6-2005 Airport project fund budget
amendment
NCM
741 6-20-2005 Tattoo and body-piercing
establishments
Ch. 358
742 7-11-2005 Intergovernmental cooperation:
joint planning agreement
NCM
743 7-25-2005 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 827
§ DL-1 LOCK HAVEN CODE § DL-1
1:918
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
744 7-25-2005 General, water, sewer, river dam
funds budget amendments
NCM
745 8-8-2005 Main Street program budget
amendment
NCM
746 8-15-2005 Establishing 2005 CDBG budget NCM
747 9-12-2005 CDBG revolving loan budget
amendment
NCM
748 9-12-2005 CDBG 2004 program budget
amendment
NCM
749 10-17-2005 Airport project fund budget
amendment
NCM
750 10-24-2005 General fund budget amendment NCM
751 11-21-2005 Federal enterprise program
budget amendment
NCM
752 11-21-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 380
753 11-21-2005 CDBG revolving loan program
amendment
NCM
754 11-21-2005 CDBG 2003 program budget
amendment
NCM
755 12-5-2005 CDBG 2005 program budget
amendment
NCM
756 12-5-2005 Capital escrow fund budget
amendment
NCM
757 12-12-2005 Rental property: inspection of
residential units amendment
Ch. 321, Art. I
758 12-28-2005 2006 tax levy NCM
759 12-28-2005 2006 appropriations NCM
760 1-16-2006 Sewer fund budget amendment NCM
761 1-16-2006 Airport project fund budget
amendment
NCM
762 3-20-2006 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 827
763 4-3-2006 CDBG revolving loan program
fund budget amendment
NCM
764 4-17-2006 Street vacation NCM
765 4-17-2006 New communities main street
program budget amendment
NCM
766 5-15-2006 Sale of property NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:919
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
767 6-19-2006 CDBG 2002 program budget
amendment
NCM
768 6-19-2006 CDBG revolving loan program
fund budget amendment
NCM
769 7-31-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
770 7-31-2006 General fund budget amendment NCM
771 7-31-2006 Sewer fund budget amendment NCM
772 7-31-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 380
773 7-31-2006 Establishing 2006 CDBG budget NCM
774 9-11-2006 Salaries amendment NCM
775 9-11-2006 General fund budget amendment NCM
776 10-2-2006 Sewer fund budget amendment NCM
777 10-2-2006 Capital escrow fund budget
amendment
NCM
778 10-2-2006 Airport project fund budget
amendment
NCM
779 10-2-2006 Inventory budget amendment NCM
780 10-16-2006 Airport project fund budget
amendment
NCM
781 11-6-2006 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 827
782 11-6-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 380
783 11-20-2006 Airport project fund budget
amendment
NCM
784 12-1-2006 2007 tax rates NCM
785 12-18-2006 Sewers and sewage disposal:
sewer rates amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 830
786 12-18-2006 2007 budget NCM
787 1-8-2007 Water fund budget amendment NCM
788 1-8-2007 Inventory fund budget
amendment
NCM
789 3-5-2007 CDBG 2005 program budget
amendment
NCM
790 3-5-2007 CDBG 2003 program budget
amendment
NCM
791 3-19-2007 Recreation fund budget
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 LOCK HAVEN CODE § DL-1
1:920
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
792 4-16-2007 Salaries amendment NCM
793 5-21-2007 General, water, sewer, airport,
and capital escrow fund budget
amendments
NCM
794 5-23-2007 Main Street program budget
amendment
NCM
795 8-27-2007 Redevelopment Authority fund
budget amendment
NCM
796 8-27-2007 2007 debt NCM
797 9-10-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 380
798 9-24-2007 PennVest debt NCM
799 9-24-2007 2007 loan fund budget NCM
800 10-1-2007 Dam project budget NCM
801 10-15-2007 Train station project fund budget NCM
802 11-5-2007 2007 capital project fund budget NCM
803 11-15-2007 Establishing 2007 CDBG budget NCM
804 11-15-2007 CDBG 2004 program budget
amendment
NCM
805 11-5-2007 CDBG 2006 program budget
amendment
NCM
806 11-5-2007 CDBG revolving loan fund budget
amendment
NCM
807 12-10-2007 Zoning amendment; Zoning Map
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 827;
Ch. 410
attachment
808 12-10-2007 Taxation: local services tax Ch. 365, Art. VI
809 2008 tax levy NCM
810 12-17-2007 2008 appropriations NCM
811 12-17-2007 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 194
812 12-17-2007 Vehicles, junked and abandoned Ch. 386
813 12-17-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 380
814 1-21-2008 Owner occupied housing rehab
program budget amendment
NCM
815 3-3-2008 Outdoor fuel-burning appliances Ch. 290
816 5-5-2008 General fund budget amendment NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:921
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
817 5-19-2008 Solid waste: garbage and refuse
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 836
818 7-21-2008 Recreation fund, airport project
fund, home program fund, Main
Street program budget
amendments
NCM
819 8-4-2008 CDBG 2007 program budget
amendment
NCM
820 8-18-2008 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 827
821 9-8-2008 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 827
822 9-8-2008 Establishing 2008 CDBG budget NCM
823 9-22-2008 Salaries amendment NCM
824 9-22-2008 Airport project fund budget
amendment
NCM
825 9-22-2008 General, water, sewer budget
amendments
NCM
826 11-18-2008 General fund budget amendment NCM
827 11-24-2008 Zoning Ch. 410
828 12-22-2008 2009 tax levy NCM
829 12-22-2008 2009 appropriations NCM
830 12-22-2008 Sewers and sewage disposal:
sewer rates amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 888
831 2-2-2009 CDBG 2008 program budget
amendment
NCM
832 2-2-2009 Pensions: City Employees
Retirement Fund amendment
Ch. 99, Art. II
833 2-2-2009 Pensions: Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 99, Art. I
834 CDBG 2007 program budget
amendment
NCM
835 4-20-2009 General fund budget amendment NCM
836 5-4-2009 Solid waste: garbage and refuse
storage and disposal
Ch. 340, Art. I
837 6-8-2009 Owner occupied housing rehab
program budget amendment
NCM
838 6-22-2009 General fund budget amendment NCM
§ DL-1 LOCK HAVEN CODE § DL-1
1:922
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
839 6-22-2009 Capital revenue fund budget
amendment
NCM
840 8-3-2009 Boards and Commissions:
Planning Commission amendment
Ch. 30, Art. I
841 8-17-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 380
842 8-17-2009 Airport project fund budget
amendment
NCM
843 9-21-2009 Dam project fund and train
station project fund budget
amendments
NCM
844 10-19-2009 Capital escrow fund budget
amendment
NCM
845 11-16-2009 Salaries amendment NCM
846 11-23-2009 Establishing 2009 CDBG budget NCM
847 11-24-2009 Debt NCM
848 12-21-2009 2010 tax levy NCM
849 12-21-2009 2010 budget NCM
850 1-18-2010 2010 sewer plant improvement
fund budget
NCM
851 1-18-2010 2010 capital project loan fund
budget
NCM
852 2-1-2010 American Recovery and
Restoration Act projects budget
NCM
853 2-22-2010 Water: groundwater as potable
water
Ch. 394, Art. II
854 4-19-2010 Sewers and sewage disposal:
industrial pretreatment program
Ch. 328, Art. V
855 5-3-2010 Debt NCM
856 5-3-2010 ARRA project fund budget
amendment
NCM
857 6-7-2010 Water budget amendment NCM
858 6-7-2010 Parks and recreation areas: park
rules and regulations amendment
Ch. 298, Art. III
859 6-21-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 410
860 9-13-2010 Main Street program budget
amendment
NCM
861 9-20-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:923
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
862 10-18-2010 Parks and recreation areas: flood
protection levee areas
amendment; park rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. 298, Art. I;
Ch. 298, Art. II
863 10-18-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 410
864 11-15-2010 Street vacation NCM
865 11-15-2010 Debt NCM
866 Salaries amendment NCM
867 11-29-2010 Establishing 2010 CDBG budget NCM
868 12-6-2010 Main Street program budget
amendment
NCM
869 12-13-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
870 12-13-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 410
871 12-13-2010 Water: rules and regulations for
water supply users amendment
Ch. 394, Art. I
872 12-20-2010 2011 tax levy NCM
873 12-20-2010 2011 budget NCM
874 1-17-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
875 2-7-2011 Recreation fund budget
amendment
NCM
876 2-7-2011 ARRA project fund budget
amendment
NCM
877 2-7-2011 Basic law enforcement
communication grant project
budget
NCM
878 3-7-2011 CDBG 2008 program budget
amendment
NCM
879 5-2-2011 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 380
880 5-16-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 410
881 5-16-2011 2011 sewer plant improvement
fund budget
NCM
882 5-16-2011 RACP loan fund budget NCM
883 6-6-2011 Drugs and drug paraphernalia:
bath salts and synthetic
cannabinoids
Ch. 229, Art. I
884 6-20-2011 Airport business park fund budget
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 LOCK HAVEN CODE § DL-1
1:924
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
885 8-8-2011 Salaries amendment NCM
886 9-12-2011 CDBG revolving loan fund budget
amendment
NCM
887 9-19-2011 Airport project fund budget
amendment; General fund budget
amendment
NCM
888 10-3-2011 Sewers and sewage disposal:
sewer rental charges amendment
Ch. 328, Art. II
889 10-3-2011 Pensions: Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 99, Art. I
890 10-17-2011 Budgets NCM
891 11-7-2011 Sidewalk repair loan fund budget NCM
892 11-14-2011 Debt NCM
893 11-21-2011 Taxation: earned income tax Ch. 365, Art. I
894 11-21-2011 Airport project fund budget
amendment
NCM
895 11-28-2011 Owner occupied housing rehab
program budget amendment
NCM
896 11-28-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
897 12-19-2011 2012 tax levy NCM
898 12-19-2011 2012 budget NCM
899 1-23-2012 Sewer plant improvement fund
budget amendment
NCM
900 1-30-2012 Incorporate CDBG loan fund NCM
901 1-30-2012 Intergovernmental cooperation:
Pennsylvania Municipal Health
Insurance Cooperative
NCM
902 2-27-2012 PennVest debt NCM
903 4-2-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 380
904 4-2-2012 Establishing 2011 CDBG budget NCM
905 5-7-2012 Franchise agreement: Comcast of
Colorado/Pennsylvania/West
Virginia, LLC
NCM
906 6-18-2012 General, recreation, water and
sewer fund budget amendments
NCM
907 8-20-2012 Airport project fund budget
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:925
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
908 8-20-2012 Sewers and sewage disposal:
sewer connections and uses
amendment
Ch. 328, Art. III
909 9-10-2012 Salaries amendment NCM
910 10-1-2012 Pensions: Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 99, Art. I
911 10-1-2012 Pensions: City Employees
Retirment Fund amendment
Ch. 99, Art. II
912 11-19-2012 Establishing 2012 CDBG budget NCM
913 12-10-2012 Taxation: Local Economic
Revitalization Tax amendment
Ch. 365, Art. II
914 12-10-2012 General, airport, highway aid
budget amendment
NCM
915 1-7-2013 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 307
916 12-17-2012 2013 tax levy NCM
917 12-17-2012 2013 appropriations NCM
918 2-4-2013 Salaries and compensation:
Mayor and Council amendment;
City Treasurer amendment
Ch. 128, Art. I;
Ch. 128, Art. II
919 4-1-2013 Fire prevention amendment NI (amends
repealed
chapter)
920 4-29-2013 2013 debt NCM
921 4-29-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 380
922 6-17-2013 General, off street, and airport
project fund amendments
NCM
923 9-9-2013 Library bylaws amendment NCM
924 10-7-2013 Salaries amendment NCM
925 11-4-2013 Pensions: Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 99, Art. I
926 12-2-2013 Pensions: Police Pension early
retirement incentive window
NCM
927 12-30-2013 2014 tax levy NCM
928 12-30-2013 2014 budget NCM
929 1-6-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
930 2-3-2014 Airport project fund budget
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 LOCK HAVEN CODE § DL-1
1:926
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
931 2-24-2014 Fire Department amendment;
personnel: employee benefits
amendment
Ch. 59; Ch. 105,
Art. I
932 4-7-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
933 4-7-2014 CDBG 2013 program budget
amendment
NCM
934 7-21-2014 PA DOT / DCED streetscapes fund
budget
NCM
935 8-4-2014 Owner occupied housing rehab
program budget amendment
NCM
936 9-22-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
937 11-3-2014 General obligation debt NCM
938 11-17-2014 Salaries amendment NCM
939 12-22-2014 Tax rate for 2015 NCM
940 12-22-2014 Appropriations for 2015 NCM
941 2-23-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 410
942 2-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 380
943 3-16-2015 Airport budget project fund
amendment
NCM
944 3-16-2015 Capital project fund budget
amendment
NCM
945 7-20-2015 Intergovernmental cooperation:
police service agreement with
Lock Haven University
NCM
946 7-20-2015 Intergovernmental cooperation:
police service agreement with
Pine Creek and Woodward
NCM
947 10-5-2015 Budget NCM
948 10-19-2015 Budget NCM
949 11-16-2015 Salaries amendment NCM
950 12-21-2015 Millage NCM
951 12-21-2015 Budget NCM
952 12-21-2015 Solid waste: recycling amendment Ch. 340, Art. II
953 5-2-2016 Street vacation NCM
954 6-6-2016 Floodplain management Ch. 246
955 7-11-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 410
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:927
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
956 7-11-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
957 8-1-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 410
958 8-1-2016 Budget NCM
959 8-22-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 380
960 8-22-2016 Budget NCM
961 9-12-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
962 10-24-2016 Debt service NCM
963 12-12-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 380
964 12-19-2016 Millage NCM
965 12-19-2016 Budget NCM
966 1-16-2017 Administration of government
amendment; Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 7; Ch. 380
967 2-6-2017 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 380
968 3-6-2017 Budget NCM
969 3-6-2017 Budget NCM
970 3-20-2017 Sidewalk cafes Ch. 332
971 4-17-2017 Budget amendment NCM
972 5-15-2017 Budget amendment NCM
973 1-19-2017 Insurance: fire loss claims Ch. 257, Art. I
974 10-16-2017 Pensions: City Employees
Retirement Fund amendment
Ch. 99, Art. II
975 11-6-2017 Salaries amendment NCM
976 12-4-2017 Budget amendment NCM
977 12-18-2017 Millage NCM
978 12-18-2017 Budget amendment NCM
979 12-18-2017 Salaries amendment NCM
980 1-22-2018 Zoning Map amendment NCM
981 2-19-2018 Budget amendment NCM
982 3-5-2018 Peace and good order: public
urination and defecation
Ch. 302, Art. I
983 3-5-2018 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 164
984 4-2-2018 Mobile food vendors Ch. 284
985 4-2-2018 Transient retail merchants
amendment
Ch. 371
§ DL-1 LOCK HAVEN CODE § DL-1
1:928
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
986 4-2-2018 Zoning amendment Ch. 410
987 5-21-2018 Street vacation NCM
988 5-21-2018 Street vacation NCM
989 5-7-2018 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 307
990 6-4-2018 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 380
991 7-2-2018 Street vacation NCM
992 7-2-2018 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 194
993 7-2-2018 Sewers and sewage disposal:
industrial pretreatment program
amendment
Ch. 328, Art. V
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-01 4-1-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 410 1
2019-02 4-12-2019 Alcoholic Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 170 1
2019-03 5-6-2019 Noise Ch. 287 1
2019-04 6-17-2019 Authorities,
Municipal:
Redevelopment
Authority of City of
Lock Haven
Amendment
Ch. 18, Art.
II
1
2019-05 10-7-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 380 1
2019-06 10-7-2019 Library Ch. 268 1
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:929