Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-16]
Be it enacted and ordained by the Board of Commissioners of the Township
of Lower Allen, County of Cumberland, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and
it is enacted and ordained as follows:
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1502, Clause I, II (53 P.S. § 56502) of the First Class
Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of Lower Allen, County of Cumberland, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and
sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1
through 220, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Lower
Allen, which shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the
Township of Lower Allen," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of
the prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued
in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption
by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Lower Allen, and it
is the intention of said Board of Commissioners that each such provision
contained within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears
in said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted
from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions
of § 1-3 below, and only new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6
below, shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this Code,
as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of Lower Allen and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed
as of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, including the prior Code of
the Township of Lower Allen, adopted June 10, 1985, by Ord. No. 85-7, and
in particular Article 139, Educational Service Agency, except as hereinafter
provided.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to April 14, 1997.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the township or other instruments or evidence of
the township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-
§ 1-4 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances and resolutions of a general and permanent nature adopted
subsequent to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of
this ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon
being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances
and resolutions shall be temporarily placed in the Code until printed
supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Part Eleven, Title Three, Subdivisions and Land Development, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances.
S. Part Twelve, Title One, Article 1201, Stormwater Management, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances.
T. Part Thirteen, Title One, Article 1301, BOCA Basic Building Code, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances.
U. Part Thirteen, Title One, Article 1303, BOCA One and Two Family
Dwelling Code, of the 1985 Code of Ordinances.
V. Part Thirteen, Title One, Article 1305, BOCA Basic Plumbing Code, of
the 1985 Code of Ordinances.
W. Part Thirteen, Title One, Article 1306, Electrical Inspection Agencies, of
the 1985 Code of Ordinances.
X. Part Fifteen, Article 1505, BOCA Fire Prevention Code, of the 1985
Code of Ordinances.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the township for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Board of Commissioners that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so
changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, the following changes and revisions of a
substantive nature are hereby made to various ordinances and
resolutions included in the Code as set forth in Schedule A attached
hereto and made a part hereof.1 These changes are made to bring
provisions into conformity with the desired policies of the Board of
Commissioners, and it is the intent of the Board of Commissioners that
all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so
changed have been previously formally amended to read as such. All
such changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the
effective date of the Code specified in § 1-15.
C. Nomenclature changes. The following changes have been made
throughout the Code:
(1) "Justice of the Peace" and "District Magistrate" are hereby
amended to read "District Justice."
(2) "Building Official," "Building Inspector," "Health Officer" and
"Codes Administrator" are hereby amended to read "Code Official."
(3) "Department of Environmental Resources (DER)" is hereby
amended to read "Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)."
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 11-10-1997 by Ord. No.
97-16." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
township offices.
§ 1-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 1-8
1:6
§ 1-8. General rules; definitions.
In the construal of Code provisions, the following rules and definitions shall
control, except those inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Board of
Commissioners as disclosed in a particular provision, section or code:
A. Terms defined. As used throughout this Code, the following terms shall
have the meanings listed below, unless otherwise indicated:
CODE OFFICIAL — The official or officials appointed by the governing
body to enforce the provisions of this Code, including but not limited
to the "Building Official," "Building Inspector," "Health Officer" and
"Codes Administrator."
COUNTY — Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any person who is by law given the
power to enforce the law when acting within the scope of that person's
employment.[Added 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
OWNER — When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint
owner or tenant-in-common of the whole or any part of such property.
PERSON — Extends to and is applied to associations, clubs,
corporations, firms and partnerships, as well as to individuals.
PREMISES — As applicable to property, extends to and includes land
and buildings.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Extends to and includes the school board, the
township, the county, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the United
States of America and any duly authorized public official.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal, and any mixed and lesser
estates or interests therein. "Personal property" includes every kind
of property except real property. "Real property" includes lands,
tenements and hereditaments.
REASONABLE TIME — In all cases where provision is made for an act
to be done or notice to be given within a reasonable time, such time
only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such act or
giving of such notice.
STATE and COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STREET and ROAD — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road,
highway, freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used
or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether
public or private.
TENANT or OCCUPANT — As applied to a building or land, shall extend
and be applied to any person holding a written or oral lease of or who
occupies the whole or any part of a building or land, alone or with
others.
TOWNSHIP or MUNICIPALITY — Lower Allen Township, Cumberland
County, Pennsylvania.
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:7
§ 1-9. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-10. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
B. General rules.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, words and phrases
shall be construed according to the common usage of language.
However, technical words and phrases and such others as may have
acquired a special meaning in the law shall be construed according
to such technical or special meaning.
(2) Whenever, in this Code, authority is given to an officer or an act is
required to be performed, such authority may be exercised and
such act may be performed, at the instance of such officer, by a
deputy or subordinate unless contrary to law or to the clear intent
of any such particular provision.
C. Calendar; computation of time. The terms "month" and "year" mean the
calendar month or year. The time expressed in days within which an act
is to be done or a period is to expire shall be computed by excluding the
first and including the last day, except that if the last day is Saturday or
Sunday, it shall be excluded. If time is expressed in hours, the whole of
Sunday shall be excluded.
D. Conjunctions. "And" includes "or" and "or" includes "and," if the sense
so requires.
E. Gender. Words importing the masculine shall extend and be applied to
the feminine and neuter genders.
F. Number. Words in the plural include the singular, and words in the
singular include the plural number.
G. Tenses. The use of any verb in the present tense includes the future
tense.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-8 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 1-10
1:8
shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-11. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Commissioners to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to
be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-12. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Township
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
legislation adopted by the Board of Commissioners subsequent to the
effective date of this codification which the Board of Commissioners shall
adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be
included therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are
printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements
shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-13. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the township. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-14. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation;
general penalty.
A. It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by
additions or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or
portion thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of
the township to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this
section of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:9
§ 1-15. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered. It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the Board of Commissioners that this ordinance and the Code
would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause,
sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof had not been
included therein.
§ 1-16. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after November 10, 1997.
a fine not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
B. General penalty. Whenever, in this Code or in any ordinance of the
township, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or
an offense, or whenever in this Code or in any ordinance the doing of
any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful, where no specific penalty is otherwise provided therefor, the
violator of any such provision or any ordinance shall be fined not more
than $600 and costs and, in default of payment thereof, shall be
imprisoned not more than 30 days.
§ 1-14 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 1-16
1:10
Chapter 4
AUDITOR
§ 4-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR — A certified public accountant, registered in
Pennsylvania, a firm of certified public accountants so registered, a
competent public accountant or a competent firm of public accountants.
§ 4-2. Appointment; compensation.
The accounts and accounting records of the township shall be audited by an
independent auditor. The independent auditor shall be appointed, annually,
by resolution, before the close of the fiscal year, to make an independent
examination of all the accounts and accounting records of the township
for the fiscal year then closing. The appointment shall be made at least
thirty days prior to the close of the fiscal year. Such independent auditor
shall have and possess all the powers and perform all the duties provided
in the First Class Township Code2 for elected auditors. The compensation
of the independent auditor shall be fixed by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
Chapter 6
AUTHORITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 175.
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55501 et seq.
§ 1-16 AUDITOR § 4-2
4:11

ARTICLE I
Township Authority
[Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Lower
Allen 6-10-1985 as Art. 131 of the 1985 Code of Ordinances]
§ 6-1. Statutory authorization.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Lower Allen, Cumberland
County, Pennsylvania, hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize
an Authority under the provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382,
known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,"3 its amendments and
supplements, for the purpose of exercising any and all powers conferred by
said Act.
§ 6-2. Articles of Incorporation; authorized signatories.
The President and the Secretary of the Board of Commissioners are hereby
authorized and directed to execute, on behalf of the Township of Lower
Allen, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, Articles of Incorporation for said
Authority, in substantially the following form.4
§ 6-3. Publication of notice.
The President and Secretary of the Board of Commissioners further are
directed to cause a notice of the substance of this chapter, including the
substance of the above Articles of Incorporation and of the proposed filing
of the above Articles, to be published once in a newspaper published and
of general circulation in the County of Cumberland, and in the Cumberland
Law Journal, as required by the said Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,
as amended and supplemented.5
§ 6-4. Filing.
The President and Secretary of the Board of Commissioners further are
directed to cause said Articles of Incorporation, together with the necessary
proofs of publication, to be filed with the Secretary of the Commonwealth
and to do all other acts and things necessary or appropriate to effect the
incorporation of the Lower Allen Township Authority, including the payment
of any filing fees in connection therewith.
§ 6-5. Original membership.
The following named persons be and they hereby are appointed as the first
members of the Board of the Authority, for the following terms of office:
A. Fred F. Siegle: one year.
3. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
4. Editor's Note: Said Articles of Incorporation are on file in the township offices.
5. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 6-1 AUDITOR § 6-5
4:13
§ 6-6. Purpose.
The adoption of this chapter is deemed necessary for the benefit and
preservation of the public health, peace, comfort and general welfare and
will increase the prosperity of the people of the Township of Lower Allen,
Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
§ 6-7. Project.
The project which shall be undertaken by the Lower Allen Township
Authority is to acquire, hold, construct, improve, maintain, operate, own,
lease, either as lessor or as lessee, sewers, sewer systems and sewage
treatment works, for the Township of Lower Allen and for such other
territory as it may be authorized to serve.
B. Fred W. Grabe: two years.
C. Jesse L. Startzel, Jr. three years.
D. Andrew G. Graf: four years.
E. David Putney: five years.
§ 6-5 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 6-7
4:14
ARTICLE II
Stormwater Authority
[Adopted 8-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-06]
§ 6-8. Statutory authorization.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Lower Allen, Cumberland
County, Pennsylvania, hereby expresses its intention to organize a
Stormwater Authority under the provisions of the Municipality Authorities
Act (as amended) 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5607(a)(18). The Board of Commissioners
retains the right to approve any plan of the Authority.
§ 6-9. Purpose.6
The purposes of the Lower Allen Township Stormwater Authority are to
acquire, hold, construct, improve, maintain, operate, own and lease either
in the capacity of lessor or lessee, stormwater systems or parts thereof,
including the planning, management and implementation of stormwater
systems.
§ 6-10. Articles of Incorporation.
The President and the Secretary of the Board of Commissioners are hereby
authorized and directed to execute on behalf of the Township of Lower
Allen, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, Articles of Incorporation for said
Authority.
§ 6-11. Publication of notice.
The President and Secretary of the Board of Commissioners are directed to
cause a notice of the substance of this Ordinance, including the proposed
Articles of Incorporation, and the proposed filing of the above Articles to
be published once in the newspaper, published in general circulation in
the County of Cumberland, and in the Cumberland County Law Journal as
required by the Municipality Authorities Act (as amended).7
§ 6-12. Filing.
The President and Secretary of the Board of Commissioners are further
directed to cause such Articles of Incorporation, together with the
necessary proofs of publication to be filed with the Secretary of the
Commonwealth, to do all the acts necessary to effect the incorporation of
the "Lower Allen Township Stormwater Authority," including the payment of
any filing fees in connection therewith.
6. Editor’s Note: The powers and duties of the Stormwater Authority are established in Ch.
184, Stormwater Management, Art. IX, Stormwater Authority.
7. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 6-8 AUDITOR § 6-13
4:15
§ 6-13. Appointment.
The following named persons are hereby appointed as the first members of
the Board of the Authority for the following term of office:8
§ 6-14. Effect on other provisions.
The provisions of this article, as far as they are the same as those of
Ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this article, are
intended as a continuation of such Ordinances and not as new enactments.
The provisions of this article shall not affect any such suit or prosecution
pending, or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty, or to punish any
offense under the authority of any Ordinance repealed by this article.
§ 6-15. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any of its provisions shall
be held to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such decision shall not
affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this article. It is
hereby declared as a legislative intent that this article would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid provision not been
included herein.
§ 6-16. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
8. Editor's Note: The names of the first members of the Board of the Authority are on file in
the Township offices.
§ 6-13 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 6-16
4:16
Chapter 11
COMMISSIONERS, BOARD OF
§ 11-1. Meetings. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-16]
§ 11-2. Compensation.
Beginning on January 1, 1976, the compensation of Township
Commissioners elected or appointed after the adoption of this section may
be the maximum amount permitted as the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth may, from time to time determine, except as restricted
by the provisions of Section 703 of the First Class Township Code, as
amended.9
Chapter 15
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SERVICES
§ 15-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
AGENCY — The Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency.
COUNCIL — The Pennsylvania Emergency Management Council.
DISASTER — A man-made disaster, natural disaster or war-caused disaster.
DISASTER EMERGENCY — Conditions which may, by investigation made,
be found, actually or likely, to
A. The place of the meetings of the Board of Commissioners of the
Township shall be the Municipal Building, 1993 Hummel Avenue. The
time of the regular meeting shall be 7:00 p.m. or 7:30 p.m. on the
second and fourth Mondays of each month, as the Board of
Commissioners may determine and publicly announce. Other meetings
shall be held at such times as a majority of a quorum of the Board of
Commissioners shall determine and publicly announce. [Amended
12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-11]
B. If any meeting scheduled on a Monday should fall on a legal holiday,
then the meeting shall be held on the following day or such other time
as a majority of a quorum of the Board of Commissioners shall
determine and publicly announce.
9. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55703.
§ 6-16 COMMISSIONERS, BOARD OF § 15-1
11:17
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT — The judicious planning, assignment and
coordination of all available resources in an integrated program of
prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery for
emergencies of any kind, whether from attack, man-made or natural
sources.
EMERGENCY SERVICES — The preparation for and the carrying out of
functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, to prevent, minimize and provide emergency repair of injury
and damage resulting from disasters, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of those
functions. The functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services,
police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, disaster
warning services, communications, radiological, shelter, chemical and other
special weapons defense, evacuation of persons from stricken areas,
emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, emergency
resources management, existing or properly assigned functions of plant
protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other
functions related to civilian protection.
LOCAL EMERGENCY — The condition declared by the Board of
Commissioners when in its judgment the threat or actual occurrence of a
disaster is or threatens to be of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant
coordinated local government action to prevent or alleviate the damage,
loss, hardship or suffering threatened or caused thereby. A local emergency
arising wholly or substantially out of a resource shortage may be declared
only by the Governor, upon petition of the Board of Commissioners, when
he deems the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster to be of sufficient
severity and magnitude to warrant coordinated local government action to
prevent or alleviate the damage, loss, hardship or suffering threatened or
caused thereby.
MAN-MADE DISASTER — Any industrial, nuclear or transportation
accident, explosion, conflagration, power failure, natural resource shortage
or other condition, except enemy action, resulting from man-made causes,
such as oil spills and other injurious environmental contamination, which
threatens or causes substantial damage to property, human suffering,
hardship or loss of life.
Affect seriously the safety, health or welfare of a substantial number of
residents of this Township or preclude the operation or use of essential
public facilities;
A.
Be of such magnitude or severity as to render essential state
supplementation of county and local efforts or resources exerted or
utilized in alleviating the danger, damage, suffering or hardship faced;
and
B.
Have been caused by forces beyond the control of man, by reason of
civil disorder, riot or disturbance, or by factors not foreseen and not
known to exist when appropriation bills were enacted.
C.
§ 15-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 15-1
11:18
NATURAL DISASTER — Any hurricane, tornado, storm, flood, high water,
wind-driven water, tidal wave, earthquake, landslide, mudslide, snowstorm,
drought, fire, explosion or other catastrophe which results in substantial
damage to property, hardship, suffering or possible loss of life.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — Any county, city, borough, incorporated town
or township, including the Township of Lower Allen.
RESOURCE SHORTAGE — The absence, unavailability or reduced supply
of any raw or processed natural resource, or any commodities, goods or
services of any kind which bear a substantial relationship to the health,
safety, welfare and economic well-being of the citizens of this
commonwealth.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Lower Allen, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania.
WAR-CAUSED DISASTER — Any condition following an attack upon the
United States resulting in substantial damage to property or injury to
persons in the United States caused by use of bombs, missiles, shellfire,
nuclear, radiological, chemical or biological means, or other weapons or
overt paramilitary actions, or other conditions such as sabotage.
§ 15-2. Declaration of disaster emergency. [Amended 11-10-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-16]
Under the authority granted by 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101, a disaster emergency
may be declared by the Board of Commissioners upon finding a disaster
has occurred or is imminent. The president of the Board of Commissioners
may declare a disaster emergency subject to ratification by the Board.
The declaration shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess
of seven days except by or with the consent of the Board. Any order or
resolution declaring, continuing or terminating a disaster emergency shall
be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with
Cumberland County and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Emergency
Management Agencies. The effect of a declaration of a disaster emergency
is to activate the response and recovery aspects of any and all applicable
local emergency management plans and to authorize the furnishing of aid
and assistance thereunder.
§ 15-3. Powers and duties.
In the event of declaration of a disaster emergency by the Governor or as
provided in § 15-2, the Board of Commissioners, or the President of the
Board, subject to ratification by the Board, may do the following:
A. Suspend §§ 209-19B, 209-20B, 209-22, 209-23, 209-35 and 209-37 of
Chapter 209, Vehicles and Traffic.
B. Authorize the Chief of Police or equivalent official or any police officer,
any employee of the Township, any person temporarily authorized to so
act, any member of the Pennsylvania State Police, or any member of the
Armed Forces of the United States or of the Pennsylvania National
§ 15-1 COMMISSIONERS, BOARD OF § 15-3
11:19
§ 15-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No.
97-16]
Whoever violates any provision of § 15-3B or C shall be fined for each
violation not less than $100 and not more than $1,000 and in default of
payment of the fine, be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
Chapter 17
Guard to open or close any street, whether public or private, to
establish one-way streets, to regulate traffic, to prohibit or regulate
stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, to establish speed limits, to
prohibit or restrict use of any street, to designate any streets, as a
through street, prohibit or regulate the turning of vehicles, prohibit
or regulate use of designated street remove any vehicle parked in
violation of such order, to prohibit and regulate movement of vehicles
or persons on any street and adopt such other traffic regulations as the
circumstances may reasonably require. [Amended 1-4-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-01]
C. Establish a curfew from 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., prevailing time, or at
any time to control movement on streets. During such curfew, no person
shall be or remain upon any street or alley or other public place in the
Township, unless such person is going to or from a place of lawful
employment, a hospital, a physician or other health care provider or
performing a lawful duty directly related to the disaster emergency.
D. To enter into mutual aid agreements with adjacent political subdivisions
for reciprocal emergency assistance consistent with plans and
programs of the Agency.
E. To render assistance in accordance with the provisions of the mutual
aid agreements.
F. Where the Governor declares a disaster emergency, to acquire,
temporary or permanent sites, by purchase, lease or otherwise,
required for installation of temporary housing units for disaster victims
and to enter into whatever arrangements are necessary to prepare or
equip the sites to utilize the housing units.
G. To perform public work, to enter into contracts, to incur obligations, to
employ temporary workers, to rent equipment, to purchase supplies
and materials and to appropriate and expend public funds.
H. To require personnel essential to police, fire, security, public utilities
and other governmental functions to perform such functions as
required to provide for the health, welfare and safety of the community
after evacuation.
I. To regulate and control agricultural, commercial and industrial
functions related to the security, health, welfare and safety of the
community.
§ 15-3 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 15-4
17:20
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire companies — See Ch. 21. Police Department — See Ch. 42.
§ 17-1. Provider designated.
The Lower Allen Township Emergency Medical Service is the primary
emergency medical service provider in Lower Allen Township.
§ 17-2. Notification.
To the extent required by law, the Regional Emergency Medical Service
Council and the Cumberland County Communications Center shall be
notified of this designation.
Chapter 21
FIRE COMPANIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency medical services — See Ch. 17. Police Department — See Ch. 42.
§ 21-1. Fire companies recognized.
The Lower Allen Fire Company No. 1 and the Lisburn Community Fire
Company, organized and existing in the Township of Lower Allen,
Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, are hereby designated as the officially
recognized Fire Companies for Lower Allen Township.
§ 21-2. Authorized activities.
A. The Fire Companies recognized by Lower Allen Township are hereby
authorized to provide such services to Lower Allen Township as may be
necessary for the protection of the property and persons situate
therein, which include, by example and not by limitation, the
extinguishment and prevention of loss of life and property from fire,
automobile accidents, medical emergencies, hazardous materials
incidents and other dangerous situations.
B. The Fire Companies may also provide nonemergency and public service
functions, such as, again by way of example and not by limitation,
removing water from property after storms and assisting in the
removal, abatement and prevention of damage or injury to persons or
property, whether through natural causes or man-made situations.
§ 15-4 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 21-2
17:21
§ 21-3. Authorized activities of members of the Fire Companies.
In addition to actually participating in the activities of the Fire Companies
as authorized above, or in going to or returning from any activity, the
members of the Fire Companies recognized by Lower Allen Township are
also authorized to do the following things:
§ 21-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to recognize Lower Allen Fire Company No.
1 and Lisburn Community Fire Company as the official Fire Companies of
Lower Allen Township and to state additional authorized activities for fire
fighters for workers' compensation purposes.
§ 21-5. Emergency response payment reimbursement. [Added
5-14-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
C. The Fire Companies may also conduct and participate in such training
activities and drills, either within or outside of Lower Allen Township,
as may be deemed necessary by the officers of the respective Fire
Companies to maintain proficiency in providing service.
D. The Fire Companies may also respond to calls and provide services to
municipalities outside of the Township of Lower Allen.
A. Engage in any type of drill, training, ceremony, practice, test or parade
when duly called for or authorized by an officer or officers of the fire
company.
B. Engage in fund-raising activities for the fire company, when authorized
by an officer or officers of the fire company.
C. Engage in the performance of any other activity or duty authorized by
any officer of the recognized fire company.
A. Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this Chapter
21 shall have the meanings given to them in this chapter unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
ACTUAL AND REASONABLE RESPONSE COSTS — An amount that is
consistent with what a reasonable person would pay in the same or
similar circumstances for the same business or for the same or similar
item. This term shall not include any costs for labor.
EMERGENCY — An incident that requires responsive, coordinated
action to protect an individual, the environment, critical infrastructure
or property.
FIRE COMPANY or FIRE COMPANIES — The Lower Allen Fire
Company #1 and the Lisburn Community Fire Company, singularly or
collectively.
§ 21-2 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 21-5
17:22
Chapter 23
INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid Waste — See Ch. 180.
OFFICIAL DISPATCH — The dispatch of a Fire Company to an
emergency by the Cumberland County Dispatch Office or a response to
a special call or request from the Lower Allen Police Department with
an emergency.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Lower Allen, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania.
B. Reimbursement. A person involved in an emergency that necessitates a
response from the Fire Company shall be liable for the actual and
reasonable response costs incurred by the Fire Company.
C. Procedure.
(1) Billing. The Fire Companies shall have the right and authority to
seek reimbursement for actual and reasonable response costs
related to an emergency as provided for under this chapter which
includes, but is not limited to, the actual or reasonable response
costs of materials used, or equipment damaged in an emergency. A
bill for reimbursement must clearly itemize the costs that have
been incurred by the Fire Company and shall be in accordance with
the most recent fee resolution adopted by the Board.
(2) Reimbursement. If a person receives a bill for actual and
reasonable response costs as provided for under this chapter, the
person shall be responsible for payment of the bill. A person may
elect to submit the bill to an insurance company. Submission of a
bill to an insurance company, however, shall not relieve the person
from financial responsibility for payment of the bill if an insurance
company denies payment of the bill.
(3) Failure to pay. The Fire Companies or a third-party billing service
that submits to a person a bill for actual and reasonable response
costs as provided for under this chapter may file an action in a
court of competent jurisdiction to recover the amount of actual and
reasonable response costs if the person fails to pay the amount of
the bill, which may include reasonable interest, reasonable
administrative fees, reasonable attorney fees, and court fees for the
collection of the bill.
§ 21-5 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 21-5
17:23

ARTICLE I
Agreement
[Adopted 12-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-17]
§ 23-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Intergovernmental Cooperation
Ordinance."
§ 23-2. Statutory authorization.
This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 23, Subchapter
A, Intergovernmental Cooperation, of the General Local Government Code,
53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 23-3. Agreement approved.
This Township hereby approves entering into the agreement, a copy of
which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference (and which
shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this article was
enacted), with the intent and effect that this Township shall be bounded by
the agreement.10
§ 23-4. Execution of documents.
The President or Vice President of the Board, acting alone or together
with the Secretary or Assistant Secretary, is hereby authorized and directed
on behalf of the Township to execute and deliver the agreement and to
execute and deliver such additional instruments, and to take such further
actions, as may be necessary or appropriate to carry forth the agreement
and the transactions to be effected under the agreement, including payment
to the trust of such amounts as are due by the Township pursuant to the
agreement.
§ 23-5. Ratification.
All actions of any officer, agent or other representative of this Township
heretofore taken in the pursuit of the establishment of the trust and/or
the Township's participation therein are hereby ratified and approved in all
respects.
§ 23-6. Necessary and appropriate action authorized.
The Board of the Township is hereby authorized to take such other action
as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this article
and of the agreement.
10.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 23-1 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 23-7
17:25
§ 23-7. Implementation.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Law,11 the
following matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the agreement.
B. This Township shall participate in the trust for an initial term of three
years. All renewal terms shall be as further set forth therein.
C. The purpose and objectives of the agreement are as set forth in the
preamble of this article and in the agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing the agreement are that no
borrowing will be required by the Township, funds to implement the
political subdivision's obligations under the agreement same shall come
from normal and usual budgeted amounts for such matters and other
provisions governing the manner and extent of the financing of the trust
shall be as set forth in the agreement.
E. The trust shall be managed by its Board of Trustees pursuant to the
terms of the agreement.
F. All property, real or personal, of the trust, shall be acquired, managed,
licensed or disposed of by the trust in accordance with the terms of the
agreement.
G. The trust created by the agreement shall be empowered to enter into
contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits
pursuant to the terms of the agreement.
11.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 481 et seq.
§ 23-7 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 23-7
17:26
ARTICLE II
Solid Waste and Recyclable Materials Services
[Adopted 10-28-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10]
§ 23-8. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the “Joint Municipal Solid
Waste and Recyclable Materials Collection, Transportation and Disposal
Services Ordinance.”
§ 23-9. Legislative intent and applicability.
The background of this article and the legislative intention of the Board in
enacting it are as follows:
§ 23-10. Terms of joint municipal agreement.
A. The Township of Lower Allen is a municipality of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. The Act of December 19, 1996, P.L. 1158, No. 177, referred to as the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, 53 Pa. C.S.A. § 2301, et seq.,
provides that two or more municipalities may jointly cooperate in the
exercise or in the performance of their respective governmental
functions, powers or responsibilities.
C. The Pennsylvania First Class Township Code12 authorizes townships to
enter into joint municipal agreements with other political subdivisions
in making joint purchases of services and in performing governmental
powers duties and functions.
D. The Pennsylvania First Class Township Code authorizes townships to
provide the means for the collection, destruction or removal of garbage
and other refuse material.
E. The Board finds that it is in the best interest of its citizens to arrange for
the joint contracting with other municipalities of solid waste and
recyclable materials collection, transportation and disposal services in
that the Township and its residents will realize a more economical cost.
A. The conditions of the agreement, the duration of the term of the
agreement, the purpose and objectives of the agreement, including the
powers and scope of authority delegated therein, the organizational
structure necessary to implement the agreement and the manner in
which personal property will be acquired, managed and disposed of are
set forth in the agreement, a copy of which is attached to this article as
Exhibit A and incorporated herein as if set forth in full.13
12.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
13.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 23-8 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 23-10
17:27
§ 23-11. Authority to enter agreement.
The President of the Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen Township is
hereby authorized to execute the joint municipal agreement attached as
Exhibit A.14.
B. The Township of Lower Allen shall finance its obligations under the
agreement out of its general revenues and will be reimbursed by
charging its individual residents the fees established by the Board from
time to time.
C. No real estate will be acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of under
this article or the agreement.
D. Each municipality has the power to enter into contracts for policies of
group insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for its
employees; however, the services to be provided under the agreement
will be rendered by a private contractor and no municipal insurance
coverage will be required or purchased for the contractor's employees.
14.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 23-10 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 23-11
17:28
ARTICLE III
Police, Fire and Public Safety Communications System
[Adopted 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-11]
§ 23-12. Authorization.
This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 23A,
Intergovernmental Cooperation Code, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 23-13. Approval to enter agreement.15
This Township hereby approves entering into the Revised Master
Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement 800 MHz Project, a copy of
which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference, and which
shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this article was
enacted (with the intent and effect that this Township shall be bounded by
the Revised Master Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement 800 MHz
Project to provide a county-wide communication system with the county
providing a portion of the cost to implement the 800 MHz system subject to
the terms of this agreement).
§ 23-14. Execution of documents.
The President or Vice President of the Board, acting alone or together with
the Secretary or Assistant Secretary, are hereby authorized and directed
on behalf of the Township to execute and deliver the 800 MHz Project
Agreement and to execute and deliver such additional instruments, to take
such further actions as necessary and appropriate to carry forth the Revised
Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement 800 MHz Project and the
activities to be effected under the agreement.
§ 23-15. Ratification.
Elections of any officer, agent or other representatives of the Township
heretofore taken with respect to the agreement and/or the Township's
participation therein are hereby ratified and approved in all respects.
§ 23-16. Necessary and appropriate action.
The Board of the Township is hereby authorized to take such other actions
as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this article
and of the agreement to the extent permitted by law.
§ 23-17. Implementation.
As required by the Pennsylvania Governmental Cooperation Law, the
following matters are specifically found and determined:
15.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 23-12 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 23-17
17:29
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the agreement and in
§ 23-13 of the article;
B. The term of the agreement shall commence upon the execution hereof
and will extend for a period of two years from that date; and
C. The manner and extent of financing the agreement are that no
borrowing will be required by the Township and funds to implement the
Township's obligations under the agreement shall come from normal
and usual budget amounts for such matters with the county making
available a portion of the costs to the Township to implement the 800
MHz system subject to the terms of this agreement.
§ 23-17 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 23-17
17:30
ARTICLE IV
Pennsylvania Municipal Health Insurance Cooperative
[Adopted 10-11-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-07]
§ 23-18. Incorporation of caption and preamble by reference.
The caption and preamble of this ordinance16 set forth above are
incorporated herein by reference.
§ 23-19. Agreement approved.
Lower Allen Township ("the Township") hereby approves entering into the
agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by
reference (and which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which
this article was enacted), with the intent and effect that the Township shall
be bound by the agreement.17
§ 23-20. Execution of documents.
The President or Vice President of the Board of Commissioners, acting alone
or together with the Secretary or Assistant Secretary, are hereby authorized
and directed on behalf of Lower Allen Township to execute and deliver
the agreement and to execute and deliver such additional instruments,
and to take such further actions, as may be necessary or appropriate to
carry forth the agreement and the transactions to be effected under the
agreement, including payment to the PMHIC of such amounts as are due by
the Township pursuant to the agreement.
§ 23-21. Ratification.
All actions of any officer, agent or other representative of Lower Allen
Township heretofore taken in the pursuit of the establishment of the PMHIC
and/or the Township's participation therein are hereby ratified and
approved in all respects.
§ 23-22. Necessary and appropriate action authorized.
The Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen Township is hereby authorized
to take such other action as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out
the purposes of this article and of the agreement.
§ 23-23. Implementation.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the
following matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the agreement.
16.Editor's Note: "This ordinance" refers to Ord. No. 2004-07.
17.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 23-18 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 23-23
17:31
B. Lower Allen Township shall participate in the PMHIC for an initial term
of three years. All renewal terms shall be as further set forth therein.
C. The purpose and objectives of the agreement are as set forth in the
preamble of this ordinance18 and in the agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing the agreement are that no
borrowing will be required by the Township, funds to implement Lower
Allen Township's obligations under the agreement same shall come
from normal and usual budgeted amounts for such matters and other
provisions governing the manner and extent of the financing of the
PMHIC shall be as set forth in the agreement.
E. The PMHIC shall be managed by its Board of Directors pursuant to the
terms of the agreement.
F. All property, real or personal, of the PMHIC shall be acquired,
managed, licensed or disposed of by the PMHIC in accordance with the
terms of the agreement.
G. The PMHIC created by the agreement shall be empowered to enter into
contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits
pursuant to the terms of the agreement.
18.Editor's Note: "This ordinance" refers to Ord. No. 2004-07.
§ 23-23 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 23-23
17:32
ARTICLE V
Lower Allen Township/Shiremanstown Borough Walnut Street
Cooperative Agreement
[Adopted 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-06]
§ 23-24. Short title.
This article shall be known as and may be cited as "the Lower Allen
Township/Shiremanstown Borough Walnut Street Cooperative Ordinance."
§ 23-25. Legislative intent and applicability.
§ 23-26. Terms of joint municipal agreement.
Lower Allen Township hereby approves entering into the agreement,19 a
copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated by reference (and which
shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this article was
enacted), with the intent and effect that Lower Allen Township shall be
bound by the agreement.
§ 23-27. Authority to enter agreement.
The President or Vice President of the Board of Lower Allen Township,
acting alone or together with the Secretary or Assistant Secretary, are
hereby authorized and directed on behalf of Lower Allen Township: i) to
execute and deliver the agreement, and ii) to execute and deliver such
additional instruments, and to take such further actions as may be
necessary or appropriate to carry forth the agreement and the transactions
to be effected under the agreement, including the shared expense of such
amounts as are due by Lower Allen Township pursuant to the agreement.
§ 23-28. Ratification.
All actions of any officer, agent or other representative of Lower Allen
Township heretofore taken in the pursuit of the establishment of the
intergovernmental agreement and/or Lower Allen Township's participation
therein are hereby ratified and approved in all respects.
A. Lower Allen Township and Shiremanstown Borough, Cumberland
County, PA, have agreed to prepare an intergovernmental agreement to
facilitate the construction and paving of Walnut Street between the two
municipalities.
B. Pursuant to the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq., a municipality may enter into an
intergovernmental cooperation agreement upon passage of an
ordinance by its governing body.
19.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 23-24 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 23-29
17:33
§ 23-29. Execution of documents.
The Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen Township is hereby authorized
to take such other action as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out
the purposes of this article and of the agreement.
§ 23-30. Necessary provisions.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the
following matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the agreement.
B. Lower Allen Township shall participate with Shiremanstown Borough
for an initial term of three years. All renewal terms shall be as further
set forth therein.
C. The purpose and objectives of the agreement are as set forth in the
article and in the agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing the agreement are that: i) no
borrowing will be required by Lower Allen Township; and ii) funds to
implement Lower Allen Township's obligations under the agreement
same shall come from normal and usual budgeted amounts for such
matters.
E. No property, real or personal, shall be acquired by any entity other than
Lower Allen Township and Shiremanstown Borough.
F. Lower Allen Township and Shiremanstown Borough will each acquire
necessary rights-of-way within each respective municipality to the
extent such acquisition is necessary to accomplish this agreement.
Lower Allen Township and Shiremanstown Borough shall each bear its
separate costs to acquire any such right-of-way within its respective
borders.
G. Lower Allen Township and Shiremanstown Borough will maintain
separate employee benefits, separate and apart from this agreement.
§ 23-29 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 23-30
17:34
ARTICLE VI
Cumberland County Land Partnerships Grant Program
[Adopted 9-11-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-06]
§ 23-31. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Cumberland County
Land Partnerships Grant Program Participation Ordinance."
§ 23-32. Legislative intent and applicability.
The background of this article and the legislative intention of the Board of
Commissioners in enacting it are as follows:
§ 23-33. Terms of the agreement.
A. Lower Allen Township is a Pennsylvania Township of the First Class.
B. The Act of December 19, 1996, P.L. 1158, No. 177, referred to as the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.,
provides that local governments may jointly cooperate in the exercise
or in the performance of their respective governmental functions,
powers or responsibilities.
C. The Cumberland County Land Partnerships Grant Program ("Program")
was established by the Board of Commissioners of Cumberland County
for the purpose of open space preservation and smart growth planning
for the benefit of County residents.
D. The Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen Township, Cumberland
County, Pennsylvania, determines that it is in the best interest of the
public health, safety and welfare of its citizens to participate in the
Program.
A. The conditions of membership, duration, purpose and objectives of the
Program, including the powers and scope of authority delegated
therein, manner and extent of financing, organizational structure
necessary to implement the Program and manner in which real and
personal property will be acquired, managed and disposed of are set
forth in the master Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement for
Municipal Participation in the Cumberland County Land Partnerships
Grant Program ("Agreement"), a copy of which is attached to this article
as Exhibit A and incorporated herein as if set forth in full.20
B. Any funds for the Program may be appropriated by the Board of
Commissioners of Cumberland County as it shall determine, in its sole
discretion, from time to time.
C. Real and personal property may be acquired, managed or disposed of
under this article.
20.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 23-31 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 23-33
17:35
§ 23-34. Authority to enter agreement.
The President of the Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen Township
is hereby authorized to execute all documents and perform all actions
necessary to cause the Lower Allen Township to enter the agreement.
D. Each party has the power to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for all of
their employees, including those whose duties further the purposes of
the Program.
§ 23-33 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 23-34
17:36
ARTICLE VII
Special Fire Police Mutual Aid
[Adopted 8-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-11]
§ 23-35. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Special Fire Police
Mutual Aid Ordinance."
§ 23-36. Legislative intent and applicability.
The background of this article and the legislative intention of the Board of
Commissioners in enacting it are as follows:
§ 23-37. Terms of agreement.
A. Cumberland County is a Pennsylvania fourth class county.
B. The Act of December 19, 1996, P.L. 1158, No. 177, referred to as the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.,
provided that local governments may jointly cooperate in the exercise
or in the performance of their respective governmental functions,
powers or responsibilities.
C. The use of special fire police to perform traffic and crowd control
services and other necessary functions, whether within or outside the
boundaries of the municipality by which they are confirmed, is
governed by statutory authority, 35 P.S. § 1201 et seq.
D. The Board of Commissioners of Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, and
the governing bodies of the participating municipalities recognize the
desirability of sharing special fire police resources for both emergency
and nonemergency events for the protection of the health, safety and
welfare of all residents.
A. The conditions of membership, duration, purpose and objectives of the
intergovernmental agreement, including the powers and scope of
authority delegated therein, manner and extent of financing, and
organizational structure necessary to implement the agreement are set
forth in the Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement for Special Fire
Police Mutual Aid and Emergency Assistance ("Agreement"), a copy of
which is attached to this article as Exhibit A and incorporated herein as
if set forth in full.21
B. Any funds for implementation and continuing participation in the
Agreement may be appropriated by the Board of Commissioners of
Cumberland County and the governing bodies of participating
municipalities as they shall determine, in their sole discretion, from
time to time.
21.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 23-35 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 23-37
17:37
§ 23-38. Authority to enter agreement.
The Chairman of the Board of Commissioners of Cumberland County is
hereby authorized to execute all documents and perform all actions
necessary to cause the County to enter the Agreement.
§ 23-39. Severability.
§ 23-40. Prior ordinances.
The provisions of this article, as far as they are the same as those of
ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this article, are
intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as new enactments.
The provisions of this article shall not affect any such suit or prosecution
pending or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any
offense under the authority of any ordinance repealed by this article.
§ 23-41. Repealer.
Any other ordinance or parts thereof inconsistent with this article be and
are hereby expressly repealed.
§ 23-42. When effective.
This article shall become effective as provided by law. Each agreement shall
be effective upon the effective date of the Intergovernmental Cooperation
Ordinance last enacted by the parties.
C. Real and personal property may be acquired, managed or disposed of
under this article.
D. Each party has the power to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for all of
their employees, including those whose duties further the purposes of
the Agreement.
A. If any sentence, clause, phrase or section of this article is for any reason
found to be unconstitutionality, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionally, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of
the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, phrases, sections or parts
of this article.
B. It is hereby declared as the intention of the Board of Commissioners of
Lower Allen Township that this article would have been adopted had
such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, phrase,
section or part thereof not been included therein.
§ 23-37 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 23-42
17:38
ARTICLE VIII
Lower Allen Township/Shiremanstown Borough Mutual Yard Waste
Program
[Adopted 8-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-02]
§ 23-43. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Lower Allen Township/
Shiremanstown Borough Mutual Yard Waste Program Ordinance."
§ 23-44. Legislative intent; applicability.
The background of this article and the legislative intention of the Board of
Commissioners in enacting it are as follows:
§ 23-45. Terms of the agreement.
A. The Borough of Shiremanstown is a Borough under the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania Borough Code.
B. The Act of December 19, 1996, P.L. 1158, No. 177, referred to as the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, 53 Pa. C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.,
provided that local governments may jointly cooperate in the exercise
or in the performance of their respective governmental functions,
powers or responsibilities.
C. The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act
1988, Act 101 of 1988, 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., as amended by Act
175 of 2002, and the Solid Waste Management Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S.
6018.101 banned the disposal of woody waste into the solid waste
stream and encourages the recycling of such waste.
D. The Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen Township and the Borough
Council of Shiremanstown recognize the desirability of providing the
residents of both municipalities a disposal facility for woody waste, and
the use by residents of both municipalities of the processed and
recycled material.
A. The conditions of membership, duration, and purpose of the
intergovernmental agreement, including the rights and responsibilities
of membership, are set forth in the Intergovernmental Cooperation
Agreement for the Lower Allen Township/Borough of Shiremanstown
Mutual Yard Waste Program ("Agreement"), a copy of which is attached
to this article as Exhibit A and incorporated herein as if set forth in
full.22
B. Any funds for implementation and continuing participation in the
Agreement may be appropriated by the Board of Commissioners of
22.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 23-43 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 23-45
17:39
§ 23-46. Authority to enter agreement.
The Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen Township hereby authorizes
the Township Manager to execute all documents and perform all actions
necessary to cause the Township to enter the Agreement.
§ 23-47. Severability.
§ 23-48. Prior ordinances.
The provisions of this article, as far as they are the same as those of
ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this article, are
intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as new enactments.
The provisions of this article shall not affect any such suit or prosecution
pending or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any
offense under the authority of any ordinance repealed by this article.
§ 23-49. Repealer.
Any other ordinance or parts thereof inconsistent with this article be and
are hereby expressly repealed.
§ 23-50. When effective.
This article shall become effective as provided by law. Each Agreement shall
be effective upon the effective date of the Intergovernmental Cooperation
Ordinance last enacted by the parties.
Lower Allen Township and the Borough Council of Shiremanstown as
they shall determine, in their sole discretion, from time to time.
C. No mutual acquisition of real or personal properties is contemplated by
Lower Allen Township/Borough of Shiremanstown under this article
and intergovernmental cooperation agreement.
A. If any sentence, clause, phrase or section of this article is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, phrases, sections or parts of this article.
B. It is hereby declared as the intention of the Board of Commissioners of
Lower Allen Township that this article would have been adopted had
such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, phrase,
section or part thereof not been included therein.
§ 23-45 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 23-50
17:40
ARTICLE IX
Municipal Utility Alliance Agreement
[Adopted 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-06]
§ 23-51. Authorization to join cooperative.
The President or Vice President of the Board of Commissioners of Lower
Allen Township is hereby authorized and directed to execute and deliver a
joinder to the agreement dated April 7, 2009, a copy of which is attached
hereto and made a part thereof,23 and to execute and deliver such additional
instruments, and to take such further actions, as may be necessary or
appropriate to carry forth the agreement and the transactions to be affected
under the agreement.
§ 23-52. Authorization to purchase services.
The Township Manager is hereby authorized to deliver a written
commitment to purchase the specific services through the MUA Program,
and to execute a purchase and sales agreement with the supplier on the
terms and conditions as negotiated and obtained by the MUA, provided that
the conditions set forth in Section 12 of the agreement have been met.
§ 23-53. Delivery of notices.
Written notices under Section 18(a) of the Agreement intended for Lower
Allen Township shall be sent to the following individual at the address
shown:
Lower Allen Township
2233 Gettysburg Road
Camp Hill, PA 17011
Attn: Thomas G. Vernau, Jr., Manager
With a copy to:
Lower Allen Township
2233 Gettysburg Road
Camp Hill, PA 17011
Attn: Jan E. Faust, Assistant Manager
§ 23-54. Management of property.
The conditions, duration and term, purpose and objective, scope and
authority delegated, manner and extent of financing, organizational
structure and manner in which personal property shall be acquired,
managed and disposed of, are set forth in the attached agreement.
23.Editor's Note: The agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 23-51 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 23-54
17:41

ARTICLE X
Purchasing of Electricity, Natural Gas and Liquid Fuels
[Adopted 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-1424]
§ 23-55. Authorization to enter agreement.
The President or Vice President of the Board of Commissioners of Lower
Allen Township is hereby authorized and directed to execute and deliver
a Joinder to the Agreement dated December 3, 1999, a copy of which
is attached hereto and made a part thereof, and to execute and deliver
such additional instruments, and to take such further actions, as may be
necessary or appropriate to carry forth the Agreement and the transactions
to be affected under the Agreement.25
§ 23-56. Commitment to purchase services through supplier.
The Township Manager is hereby authorized to deliver a written
commitment to purchase the specific services through Benchmark
Solutions, Inc., and to execute a purchase and sales agreement with the
supplier on the terms and conditions as negotiated and obtained by
Benchmark Solutions, Inc., provided that the conditions set forth in Section
12 of the Agreement have been met.26
§ 23-57. Sending of notices.
Written notices under Section 18(a) of the Agreement27 intended for Lower
Allen Township shall be sent to the following individual at the address
shown:
Lower Allen Township
2233 Gettysburg Road
Camp Hill, PA 17011
Attn: Thomas G. Vernau, Jr., Manager
With a copy to:
Lower Allen Township
2233 Gettysburg Road
Camp Hill, PA 17011
Attn: Jan E. Faust, Assistant Manager
24.Editor's Note: The title and preamble to this ordinance indicated that the provisions
regarded the joining of an agreement executed between the City of Harrisburg and several
local governments on 12-3-1999 for the purpose of purchasing electricity, natural gas and
liquid fuels.
25.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
26.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
27.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 23-55 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 23-58
17:43
§ 23-58. Management of property.
The conditions, duration and term, purpose and objective, scope and
authority delegated, manner and extent of financing, organizational
structure and manner in which personal property shall be acquired,
managed and disposed of, are set forth in the attached Agreement.28
28.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 23-58 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 23-58
17:44
ARTICLE XI
Lower Allen Township/Hampden Township Agreement for the
Collection, Conveyance and Treatment of Municipal Sanitary
Sewage
[Adopted 1-14-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-01]
§ 23-59. Legislative intent; applicability.
The background of this article and the legislative intention of the Board of
Commissioners of Lower Allen Township in enacting it are as follows:
§ 23-60. Terms of Agreement.
A. Hampden Township and Lower Allen Township are duly existing
townships of the first class under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. Lower Allen Township Authority and Hampden Township Authority are
municipal authorities authorized under the Municipality Authorities
Act.
C. The Act of December 19, 1996 P.L. 1158, No. 177, referred to as the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.,
provides that local governments may jointly cooperate in the exercise
or in the performance of their respective governmental functions,
powers or responsibilities.
D. Hampden Township and Lower Allen Township are geographically
adjacent municipalities, with Hampden Township having a municipal
authority owning municipal sanitary sewage collection, transmission
and treatment facilities operated by Hampden Township and Lower
Allen Township having a municipal authority owning and operating
municipal sanitary sewage collection, transmission and treatment
facilities.
E. The Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen Township has previously
entered into an interjurisdictional agreement dated September 6, 1990,
with its authority, Hampden Township and Hampden Township
Authority concerning the collection, conveyance and treatment of
sanitary sewage to and from Hampden Township and Lower Allen
Township, which agreement the parties desire to amend pursuant to the
terms of a document entitled "First Amendment to Interjurisdictional
Agreement."
A. The terms, conditions, duration, requirements, purposes and objectives
of the agreement among Hampden Township, Hampden Township
Sewer Authority, Lower Allen Township and Lower Allen Township
Authority with respect to the conveyance and treatment of sewage,
including the powers and scope of authority delegated therein, manner
and extent of financing, to the extent addressed, and manner in which
real and personal property will be acquired and managed as necessary,
§ 23-59 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 23-60
17:45
§ 23-61. Authority to enter Agreement.
The President of the Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen Township
is hereby authorized to execute all documents and perform all actions
necessary to cause Lower Allen Township to enter into the Agreement
with Hampden Township Sewer Authority, Hampden Township and Lower
Allen Township Authority. Any previous authority so given by the Board of
Commissioners is hereby approved, ratified and confirmed.
§ 23-62. Severability.
to the extent addressed, are set forth in the First Amendment to
Interjurisdictional Agreement (the "Agreement"), a copy of which is
attached to this article as Exhibit A and incorporated herein as if set
forth in full.29
B. The term of the Agreement shall be perpetual.
C. The objectives of the Agreement are to provide, inter alia, for the
diversion of certain sanitary sewage flow originating in Hampden
Township from Lower Allen Township and certain sanitary sewage flow
originating in Lower Allen Township from Hampden Township and the
abandonment and construction of new pumping stations and
transmission lines, with the respective parties having those powers and
authorities with respect to such objectives as specified in the
Agreement.
D. Financing necessary to implement the terms and requirements of the
Agreement shall be determined and implemented as necessary by the
individual parties hereto.
E. No particular or unique organizational structure will be created by or
will be necessary to implement the Agreement.
F. The Agreement does not specifically provide for the acquisition,
management, license, or disposal of real or personal property;
accordingly, such actions, to the extent necessary, will be performed by
a party to the Agreement individually.
G. No new entity is being created by the Agreement; accordingly, there are
no particular powers or authorities being established that would
otherwise be associated with the existence of a new entity.
A. If any sentence, clause, phrase or section of this article is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, phrases, sections or parts of this article
or of the Agreement.
29.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 23-60 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 23-62
17:46
§ 23-63. Benefit of Lower Allen Township Sewer Authority.
To the extent deemed necessary or otherwise required by law, the notice
of and adoption of this article shall inure to the benefit of the Lower
Allen Township Sewer Authority as a party to and participant under the
Agreement, which Agreement has been or will be separately approved by
the Lower Allen Township Sewer Authority.
B. It is hereby declared as the intention of the Board of Commissioners of
Lower Allen Township that this article and the Agreement would have
been adopted or approved, as the case may be, had such
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, phrase, section or
part thereof not been included therein.
§ 23-62 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 23-63
17:47

ARTICLE XII
Lower Allen Township/Upper Allen Township Transportation
Development District Agreement
[Adopted 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
§ 23-64. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Intergovernmental
Cooperation Ordinance Between Lower Allen Township and Upper Allen
Township."
§ 23-65. Legislative intent; applicability.
The background of this article and the legislative intention of the Board in
enacting it are as follows:
§ 23-66. Agreement approved.
Lower Allen Township ("Township") hereby approves entering into an
agreement, a copy of which is attached here and incorporated herein by
reference with the intent to cooperate with Upper Allen Township in the
A. The Township of Lower Allen is a municipality of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. The Township of Upper Allen is a municipality of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
C. The Townships are traversed by Gettysburg Road.
D. The Townships wish to cooperate to make improvements to Gettysburg
Road.
E. The Act of December 19, 1996, P.L. 1158, No. 177, referred to as the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.,
provides that two or more municipalities may jointly cooperate in the
exercise or in the performance of their respective governmental
functions, powers or responsibilities.
F. And further, the Transportation Partnership Act of July 9, 1985, P.L.
187, No. 47, referred to as the Transportation Partnership Act, 53 P.S.
§ 1621 et seq., creates its authority in municipalities to create financing
for public transportation and improvements.
G. The Pennsylvania First Class Township Code authorizes townships to
enter into joint municipal agreements with other political subdivisions
in common endeavors to enhance the performance of governmental
powers, duties and functions.
H. The Board finds that it is in the best interest of its citizens to arrange for
a Transportation Development District in cooperation with Upper Allen
Township.
§ 23-64 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 23-66
17:49
creation of Transportation Development District with the goal of improving
the function and safety of Gettysburg Road.30
§ 23-67. Execution of documents.
The President or Vice President of the Board of Commissioners, acting
alone or together with the Secretary and Assistant Secretary, are hereby
authorized and directed on behalf of Lower Allen Township to execute and
deliver the agreement to execute and deliver such additional instruments,
to take such further actions as deemed necessary or appropriate to further
carry forth the agreement and transactions to be effected under the
agreement, including the financing, construction, public bidding, etc., with
Upper Allen Township by agreement.
§ 23-68. Ratification of actions.
All actions of the President or Vice President of the Board of Commissioners
of Lower Allen Township hereto undertaken in the pursuit of the
establishment of the Transportation Development District with Upper Allen
Township are hereby ratified and approved by all respects.
§ 23-69. Implementation.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the
following matters are specifically found and determined:
§ 23-70. Severability.
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the agreement.
B. Lower Allen Township shall participate with Upper Allen Township for
an initial term of 10 years. All renewal terms shall be further set forth
therein.
C. The purpose and objectives of the agreement are set forth in the
preamble of the ordinance and the agreement.
D. The Commissioners in each Township will manage the project.
E. No property, real or personal, shall be acquired, managed, licensed and
disposed of based on this Intergovernmental Agreement.
F. Upper Allen Township and Lower Allen Township shall be empowered
to enter into contracts or policies necessary to effectuate the
agreement.
A. If any sentence, clause, phrase or section of this article is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
30.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices. Ordinance No. 2013-07,
adopted 12-9-2013, also on file in the Township offices, provided for the establishment and
boundaries of the Gettysburg Road Transportation District and the 2013 Gettysburg Road
Transportation Assessment Plan.
§ 23-66 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 23-70
17:50
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, phrases, sections or parts of this article.
B. It is hereby declared as the intention of the Board that this article would
have been adopted had such unconditional, illegal or invalid sentence,
clause, phrase, section or part thereof not been included therein.
§ 23-70 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 23-70
17:51

ARTICLE XIII
Capital Region Council of Governments' Building Code Department
[Adopted 1-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-02]
§ 23-71. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Capital Region Council
of Governments' Building Code Department Ordinance."
§ 23-72. Legislative intent and applicability.
The background of this article and the legislative intention of the Board in
enacting it are as follows:
§ 23-73. Agreement approved.
Lower Allen Township ("Township") hereby approves entering into an
agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein
by reference,31 with the intent that the Township shall be bound by the
agreement.
§ 23-74. Execution of documents.
The President or Vice President of the Board of Commissioners, acting
alone or together with the Secretary and Assistant Secretary, are hereby
authorized and directed on behalf of Lower Allen Township to execute and
deliver the agreement, to execute and deliver such additional instruments,
to take such further actions as deemed necessary, or appropriate to carry
forth the agreement and transactions to be effected under the agreement,
A. The Township of Lower Allen is a municipality of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. The Capital Region Council of Governments is a consortium of central
Pennsylvania municipalities.
C. The Act of December 19, 1996, P.L. 1158, No. 177, referred to as the
"Intergovernmental Cooperation Law," 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
provides that two or more municipalities may jointly cooperate in the
exercise or in the performance of their respective governmental
functions, powers or responsibilities.
D. The Pennsylvania First Class Township Code authorizes townships to
enter into joint municipal agreements with other political subdivisions
and member organizations, in making a joint purchase of services or to
perform governmental powers and duties.
E. The Board finds that it is in the best interest of its citizens to arrange for
a joint contract with other municipalities for the purchase of building
codes inspection services and plan reviews.
31.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 23-71 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES § 23-74
17:53
including payment of necessary fees to the Capital Region Council of
Governments of such amounts that are due from the Township to participate
in the agreement.
§ 23-75. Ratification.
All actions of the President or Vice President of Lower Allen Township,
heretofore taken in the pursuit of the establishment of the Capital Region
Council of Governments Agreement for the Uniform Construction Code
Building Code Department, are hereby ratified and approved in all respects.
§ 23-76. Authorization.
The Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen Township is hereby authorized
to take such other action as deemed necessary or appropriate to carry out
the purpose of this article and the accompanying agreement.
§ 23-77. Implementation.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the
following matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the agreement.
B. Lower Allen Township shall participate in the Capital Region Council of
Governments' Department for Uniform Construction and Code
Enforcement and Inspection and Plan Review for an initial term of one
year to end December 31, 2017. The agreement shall thereafter renew
automatically for one-year periods, unless terminated according to the
agreement.
C. The purpose and objectives of the agreement are set forth in the
preamble of the ordinance and the agreement.
D. The initial expense of financing the Building Code Department will be
based on a start-up fee, and there will be obligations on Lower Allen
Township which will come from normal and usual budgetary amounts
for such matters, and also as needed for inspection or enforcement
services.
E. The Capital Region Council of Governments' Uniform Construction
Code Building Code Department shall be managed by the Capital
Region Council of Governments with necessary staffing.
F. All property, whether real or personal, necessary for implementation of
the agreement will be the property of the Capital Region Council of
Governments and its Building Code Department.
G. The Capital Region Council of Governments shall be empowered to
enter into contracts for policies of group insurance or other employee
benefits for any staff required by the implementation of the Uniform
Construction Code Building Code Department Agreement.
§ 23-74 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 23-77
17:54
Chapter 25
INVESTMENT PROGRAM
§ 25-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Pennsylvania Municipal Investment
Program Ordinance."
§ 25-2. Declaration of trust.
The Declaration of Trust as presented to this meeting (a copy of which,
together with the accompanying information statement, shall be filed with
the records of this participant) is hereby adopted and this participant shall,
and is hereby authorized and directed to, become a participant in the
Program and, from time to time, to invest and withdraw its funds all in
accordance with the provisions of the Declaration of Trust.
§ 25-3. Investment. [Amended 10-9-1993 by Ord. No. 95-6]
For purposes of the investment of moneys pursuant to the program, the
President of Board of Commissioners, Township Manager or Director of
Finance, and their respective successors, are hereby designated as
"authorized officers" of this participant and are authorized, directed and
empowered to effectuate, from time to time, the investment and withdrawal
of funds of this participant and to otherwise give effect to this participant's
rights, as a participant of the Trust described herein, including the right to
vote, from time to time, in accordance with the Declaration of Trust. Such
Authorized officers are hereby further authorized, directed and empowered
to take such actions and to execute and deliver counterparts of the
Declaration of Trust and any and all other documents as they may deem
necessary and appropriate to evidence this participant's approval of the
Declaration of Trust and participation in the program and otherwise to carry
out the purpose of this chapter (the execution of such documents shall
conclusively evidence their approval).
§ 25-4. Custody of funds.
This participant hereby acknowledges and approves the Trustees of the
Trust as having official custody of this participant's funds as are invested in
accordance with the Declaration of Trust.
Chapter 32
MANAGER
§ 23-77 INVESTMENT PROGRAM § 32-1
25:55
§ 32-1. Office established.
The office of Township Manager is hereby created by the Board of
Commissioners, subject to the right of the Board, by ordinance, at any time
to abolish such office.
§ 32-2. Appointment; term; vacancy; removal. [Amended 11-10-1997
by Ord. No. 97-16]
The Manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of all the members of
the Board of Commissioners, and he shall serve until the first Monday of
January of the even-numbered year succeeding his appointment or until his
successor is appointed and qualifies for office. In the event of a vacancy, the
Board shall appoint a replacement by a majority vote of all its members for
the unexpired term. The Manager is an at-will employee. The Manager may
be removed at any time by a majority vote of all the members of the Board.
At least 30 days before such removal becomes effective, the Board shall
furnish the Manager with a written statement setting forth their intentions
to remove him and the reasons therefor.
§ 32-3. Qualifications. [Amended 12-12-1994 by Ord. No. 94-10]
The Township Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive
and administrative abilities, with special reference to his actual experience
in or his knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of the
office as herein outlined. The Township Manager need not be a resident of
the Township.
§ 32-4. Bond. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-16]
Before entering upon his duties, the Manager shall give a bond to the
Township with a bonding company as surety, subject to approval by the
Board of Commissioners, in the sum of $5,000 or such other amount as may
be specified by the First Class Township Code32 conditioned for the faithful
performance of his duties, premium for the bond to be paid by the Township.
The Manager may be included in and covered by any comprehensive bond
now or hereafter in force or effect for all Township employees in the
aforesaid amount.
§ 32-5. Powers and duties.
A. The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Township
and shall be responsible to the Board of Commissioners as a whole for
the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the Township.
His powers and duties shall relate to the general management of all
Township business not expressly by statute or ordinance imposed or
conferred upon other Township officers. The Board is hereby authorized
to delegate to the Manager, subject to change by written notification at
any time, any of its nonlegislative and nonjudicial powers and duties.
32.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55501 et seq.
§ 32-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 32-5
25:56
Subject to change by ordinance of the Board, the powers and duties of
the Manager shall include the following:
(1) Supervise and be responsible for the activities of all municipal
departments except the Police Department and such other
departments the supervision of which have not been delegated to
the Manager by the Board.
(2) Notify the Board of any vacancy in employment under his
supervision and hire such employees as are qualified to fill such
vacancy. When necessary for the good of the service, he shall
suspend any employee under his supervision and shall report, at
the next meeting thereafter of the Board, such suspension. Persons
covered by the civil service provisions of the First Class Township
Code33 shall be hired, suspended or discharged in accordance with
such Code.
(3) Prepare and submit to the Board before the close of each fiscal
year, or on such alternate date as the Board shall determine, a
budget for the next fiscal year and an explanatory budget message.
In preparing the budget the Manager, or an officer designated by
him, shall obtain from the head of each department, agency, board
or officer, estimates of revenues and expenditures and other
supporting data as he shall request. The Manager shall review such
estimates and may revise them before submitting the budget to the
Board.
(4) Be responsible for the administration of the budget after its
adoption by the Board.
(5) Hold such other Township offices or head one or more of the
municipal departments as the Board may from time to time direct
including, but not limited to Township Secretary.
(6) Attend all meetings of the Board and its committees with the right
to take part in the discussion and he shall receive notice of all
special meetings of the Board or its committees.
(7) Prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Board and supply facts
pertaining thereto.
(8) Keep the Board informed as to the conduct of Township affairs,
submit periodic reports on the condition of the Township's finances
and such other reports as the Board requests and make such
recommendations to the Board that he deems necessary or
appropriate.
(9) Submit to the Board, as soon as possible after the close of the fiscal
year, a complete report on the financial and administrative
activities of the Township for the preceding fiscal year.
33.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55626.
§ 32-5 INVESTMENT PROGRAM § 32-5
25:57
(10) See that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and
privileges granted by the Township are observed.
(11) Under the direction of the Board, execute and enforce the laws of
the commonwealth and the ordinances, resolutions and bylaws of
the Township, except where such powers and duties have been
delegated by the Board to other officers of the Township.
(12) Employ, by and with approval of the Board, experts and consultants
to perform work and to advise in connection with any of the
functions of the Township.
(13) Attend to the letting of contracts, with prior approval of the
majority of the Board, in due form of law and he shall supervise the
performance and faithful execution of the same except insofar as
such duties are expressly imposed upon some other Township office
by statute or ordinances.
(14) See that all money owed the Township is properly paid and the
proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all
the Township's claims.
(15) Be the purchasing officer of the Township. He shall purchase, in
accordance with the provisions of the First Class Township Code,
all supplies and equipment for the various agencies, boards,
departments and other offices of the Township. Prior approval of a
majority of the Board shall be obtained for capital purchases
exceeding $5,000. He shall keep an account of all purchases and
shall, from time to time or when directed by the Board, make a full
written report thereof. He shall also issue rules and regulations
subject to the approval of the Board governing the requisition and
purchasing of all Township supplies and equipment.
Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the
Manager shall not have the power and authority to make purchases
or to enter into contracts where, according to the First Class
Township Code,34 advertising is required, except with the prior
approval of a majority of the Board. [Amended 4-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-02]
(16) Cooperate with the Board at all times in all matters so that the best
interest of the Township and of the general public may be
maintained.
B. All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Township shall be
referred to the Manager except in cases otherwise authorized by law or
by contract. He or an officer designated by him shall investigate and
dispose of such complaints, and the Manager shall report thereon to the
Board.
34.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
§ 32-5 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 32-6
25:58
§ 32-6. Disability or absence of the Manager.
If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the Township he
shall designate one qualified member of his staff to perform the duties of the
Manager during his absence or disability. The person so designated shall
not perform such duties for a period longer than two weeks without the
prior approval of a majority of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 32-7. Compensation. [Last amended 12-10-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-14]
The Township Manager shall receive compensation in the amount of
$115,000 per annum for his services as Township Manager, effective
January 1, 2019.
Chapter 36
OFFICIAL MAP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 36-1. Official Map.
The map attached to and made a part of this chapter35 designated "Official
Map of Lower Allen Township," prepared for Herbert, Rowland & Grubic,
Inc. by Greenhorne & O'Mara, Inc., be and is hereby adopted (effective
January 2, 1985) as the Official Map of Lower Allen Township or Official
Map.
Chapter 40
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
192.
§ 40-1. Commission established; powers and duties.
A. A Planning Commission of the Township consisting of five members is
hereby created in accordance with law.
35.Editor's Note: The Official Map is on file in the township offices.
§ 32-6 OFFICIAL MAP § 40-1
36:59
Chapter 42
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire companies — See Ch. 21. Regional Police Department — See Ch. 44.
§ 42-1. Department established.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township shall maintain and equip a
Township Police Department and shall, subject to applicable civil service
provisions, appoint and fix the number, rank and compensation of its
members.
§ 42-2. Organization.
The Board of Commissioners shall prescribe all necessary rules and
regulations for the organization of the Township Police Department.
§ 42-3. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Police Department are prescribed in various
laws, to include but not be limited to the First Class Township Code (53 P.S.
§§ 56403 and 56404), the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure (Title
34), the Pennsylvania Crimes Code (Title 18) and the Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code (Title 75). These powers and duties essentially permit the police to
enforce and take action or arrest for the violations of the Pennsylvania
Crimes Code, the Vehicle Code, ordinances of Lower Allen Township and
other statutes as passed by the legislature. Additional duties may be
assigned to be performed by the Police Department by the Board of
Commissioners of Lower Allen Township.37,38
§ 42-4. Supervision.
Members of the Police Department shall obey the orders of the Board of
Commissioners or such other person or committee as may be designated by
ordinance or resolution of the Board of Commissioners for such purposes.
B. The Planning Commission shall have the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S.
§ 10209.1.36
36.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
37.Editor's Note: Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-16.
38.Editor's Note: Chapter 44 was enacted to facilitate formation of a joint municipal Police
Department. Unless and until mutual police protection is established and operating under
terms of the Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement referred to in § 44-2, Ch. 42 shall
remain in full force and effect.
§ 40-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 42-4
42:60
Chapter 43
POLICE MUTUAL AID
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 42.
§ 43-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Intergovernmental Cooperation - Police
Mutual Aid Ordinance."
§ 43-2. Statutory authorization.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 23,
Subchapter A, Intergovernmental Cooperation, of the General Local
Government Code, 53 Pa. C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 43-3. Intergovernmental cooperation.
This township hereby approves entering into the mutual aid agreement, a
copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference (and
which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this chapter
was enacted), with the intent and effect that this township shall be bounded
by the Mutual Aid Agreement to provide mutual aid and cooperative law
enforcement efforts and thereby furthering the safety and welfare of the
community.
§ 43-4. Execution of documents.
The President or Vice President of the Board, acting alone or together with
the Secretary or Assistant Secretary, are hereby authorized and directed on
behalf of the township to execute and deliver the mutual aid agreement and
to execute and deliver such additional instruments, and to take such further
actions, as may be necessary or appropriate to carry forth the mutual aid
agreement and the activities to be effected under the mutual aid agreement.
§ 43-5. Ratification.
All actions of any officer, agent or other representative of this township
heretofore taken with respect to the mutual aid agreement and/or the
township's participation therein are hereby ratified and approved in all
respects.
§ 42-4 POLICE MUTUAL AID § 43-6
43:61
§ 43-6. Necessary and appropriate action.
The Board of the Township is hereby authorized to take such other action as
may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this chapter
and of the mutual aid agreement to the extent permitted by law.
§ 43-7. Implementation.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, the
following matters are specifically found and determined:
Chapter 44
(RESERVED)
Chapter 45
RECORDS
A. The conditions of the mutual aid agreement are set forth in the mutual
aid agreement and § 43-3 of this chapter.
B. The term of the mutual aid agreement shall commence upon execution
thereof and may be terminated at any time upon 30 days' prior written
notice by the township.
C. The purpose and objectives of the agreement are as set forth in § 43-3
of this chapter and in the mutual aid agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing the agreement are that no
borrowing will be required by the township and funds to implement the
township's obligations under the mutual aid agreement shall come from
normal and usual budgeted amounts for such matters.
§ 43-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 43-7
44:62
ARTICLE I
Custodian of Records
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 45-1. Custodian of records established.
The Secretary and Assistant Secretary of the Township are the custodian of
all records of the township.
§ 45-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
RECORDS — Includes any account, voucher or contract dealing with the
receipt of disbursement of funds or its acquisition, use or disposal of
services or supplies, materials, equipment or other property, any minute,
resolution, ordinance, order or decision, report, map, plan, communication
or other paper, transcript, record, document, material, exhibit, pleading,
memorandum, ledger, journal, book of accounts, personnel file and any
other writing relating to the township, its officers, officials, agents, servants
or employees. The term shall not include matters relating to the
investigation of a possible criminal offense.
§ 45-3. Storage of records.
The custodian of the records of the township shall provide a safe place for
the keeping and storage of such records and to protect such records from
loss, damage or alterations to ensure their integrity.
§ 45-4. Access to records.
No person shall have access to records of the township without the
permission of the custodian or his designee and only in accordance with law.
§ 45-5. Certification of authenticity.
The custodian of the records of the township shall be authorized to certify,
when requested or required, the authenticity of such records under the seal
of the township.
§ 45-1 RECORDS § 45-5
45:63

ARTICLE II
Disposition of Records
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 45-6. Schedule of disposition.
The Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen Township, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania, intends to follow the schedules and procedures for disposition
of records as set forth in the Municipal Records Manual, approved by the
Local Governments Records Committee on July 16, 1993.
§ 45-6 RECORDS § 45-6
45:65
Chapter 47
RECREATION AND PARKS BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 151.
§ 47-1. Board established. [Amended 8-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-3]
There is hereby established a Recreation and Park Board consisting of not
fewer than five members and not more than seven members appointed by
the Board of Commissioners, the size of which shall be determined from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 47-2. Term; compensation; removal; vacancies.39
The members of the Recreation and Parks Board shall serve for terms of
five years or until their successors are appointed, except that members of
the Board first appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the terms
of not more than two members shall expire annually thereafter. Members
of the Board shall serve without pay. All persons so appointed shall serve
their full terms unless they voluntarily resign or are removed by the Board
of Commissioners for malfeasance or nonfeasance of duty. Vacancies on the
Board, occurring other than by expiration of term, shall be filled for the
unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments.
§ 47-3. Recommendations by Board.
The Recreation and Parks Board shall review and make recommendations
to the Board of Commissioners with respect to the following:
A. Acquisition of land, whether by gift, dedication, devise, purchase, lease,
condemnation or otherwise, for the purpose of making, enlarging and
maintaining public parks and recreation areas and facilities.
B. Acquisition, construction, improvement, maintenance, care and
replacement of facilities and equipment.
C. Supervision, maintenance and regulation of parks, recreation areas and
facilities.
D. Development and reevaluation of the objectives of public recreation
services in the township according to current and future needs, and
plans and general policies to meet those objectives.
E. Maintenance of the highest quality of recreation service.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 45-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 47-3
47:66
§ 47-4. Election of officers; procedures; meetings.
The members of the Recreation and Parks Board shall elect their own
Chairman and such other officers as they may deem necessary for the
orderly procedure of its business. Terms shall be for a period of one year.
The Board may adopt rules and procedures for the conduct of all business
within its jurisdiction. The Board shall hold regular meetings at such time
and place as it may designate.
§ 47-5. Annual report.
The Recreation and Parks Board shall submit an annual report at the
regular December meeting of the Board of Commissioners including an
analysis of the township recreation areas, facilities and leadership with
particular reference to the extent and adequacy of the program and its
effectiveness in view of the public expenditure involved and the public
needs to be met.
Chapter 51
TAX COLLECTOR AND TREASURER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 197.
§ 51-1. Compensation.
The compensation of the Township Tax Collector for his/her duties as Tax
Collector for the Township is hereby fixed at the sum of $7,500. This shall
be his/her entire compensation, and he/she shall not receive the statutory
percentage on all the monies received or collected by him/her for the
Township. Annual compensation for the Township Tax Collector shall be
paid in monthly installments.
F. A comprehensive recreation and parks plan to provide an adequate
system of recreation areas and facilities.
G. The introduction of new ideas, programs, policies and procedures for
which the Board will serve as a forum for citizen participation.
H. A sound fiscal plan and budget to achieve recreation goals.
I. To review and make recommendations to the Planning Commission or
Board of Commissioners with respect to public or private recreation
land and related facilities of applicants or developers when so
requested by the Planning Commission or Board of Commissioners.
J. Such other related matters as shall be determined by the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 47-3 RECREATION AND PARKS BOARD § 51-2
47:67
§ 51-2. Allowable expenses.
The Township Tax Collector shall be allowed such actual printing and
postage expenses as shall be incurred in the performance of his/her duties
under the provisions of the Local Tax Collection Law.40
§ 51-3. Certification of information with respect to real estate taxes.
The Township Tax Collector shall be and is hereby authorized to provide
certification of, or information with respect to, taxes paid on real estate
upon request by any person and is authorized to charge not more than
the expenses of the Township Tax Collector in connection therewith in
an amount not to exceed a maximum amount set from time to time by
resolution of the the Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen Township per
certification or request for information. All such fees shall be collected
by the Township Tax Collector and shall be retained by the Township Tax
Collector.
§ 51-4. Service charge for checks returned for insufficient funds.
The Township Tax Collector shall be and is hereby authorized to charge
a service fee to taxpayers whose checks are returned by their bank for
insufficient funds. The amount of this charge shall be set from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen Township. All
such fees shall be collected by the Township Tax Collector and shall be
retained by the Township Tax Collector.
§ 51-5. Service charge for duplicate bills and research time.
The Township Tax Collector shall be and is hereby authorized to charge a
duplicate memo bill and research fee in an amount that shall be set from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen
Township. All such fees shall be collected by the Township Tax Collector and
shall be retained by the Township Tax Collector.
§ 51-6. Service charge for photocopies.
The Township Tax Collector shall be and is hereby authorized to charge a
fee for photocopies in an amount that shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen Township. All such
fees shall be collected by the Township Tax Collector and shall be retained
by the Township Tax Collector.
§ 51-7. Appointment; duties and compensation of Township
Treasurer.
A. Appointment. The office of Township Treasurer is an appointed office
created by 53 P.S. § 55801-A of the First Class Township Code. The
Treasurer shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners.
40.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 51-2 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 51-7
47:68
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 58
(RESERVED)
Chapter 59
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Massage establishments — See Ch. 140. Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 59-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Lower Allen Township Sexually
Oriented Businesses Ordinance, 1999."
§ 59-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses
in order to protect the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens of Lower Allen Township ("township") and to establish reasonable
and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and
concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the township. The
provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing
a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect
of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented
materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to
condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. The adjudication
of the Board in the matter of amending, changing and modifying the Code
of the Township of Lower Allen, 1997, by repealing Chapter 58, Adult
Bookstores, by adding Chapter 59, Sexually Oriented Businesses, amending
Chapter 220, Zoning, by dispersing sexually oriented businesses and
limiting them to specific zoning districts, prescribing definitions of sexually
oriented businesses and regulation of sexually oriented businesses shall be
incorporated herein by reference as though fully set forth herein and made
a part of this chapter and the Ordinance Book with respect to this chapter.41
B. Duties. The duties of the Township Treasurer shall be determined by
the Board of Commissioners.
C. Compensation. The Board of Township Commissioners shall determine
the compensation of the Township Treasurer.
§ 51-7 (RESERVED) § 59-3
58:69
§ 59-3. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this Chapter 59, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
EMPLOYEE — A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually
oriented business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary,
wage or other compensation by the operator of said business.
ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any of the following
NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY —
OPERATOR — Includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager,
operator or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.
PERMITTED OR LICENSED PREMISES — Any premises that requires a
license and/or permit and that is classified as a sexually oriented business.
PERMITTEE and/or LICENSEE — A person in whose name a permit and/or
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as
the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or
license.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any building owned, leased or held by the United
States, the state, the county, the township, any special district, school
district or any other agency or political subdivision of the state or the United
States, which building is used for governmental purposes.
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
A.
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in
this chapter;
B.
The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this
chapter to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
C.
D. The relocation of any such sexually oriented business.
The appearance of human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female
genitals or the areola or nipple of the female breast;
A.
A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human
buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple
of the female breast; or
B.
C. The showing of the covered male genital in a discernible turgid state.
41.Editor's Note: Said adjudication is on file in the township offices.
§ 59-3 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 59-3
58:70
PUBLIC PARK or RECREATION AREA — Public land which has been
designated for park or recreational activities, including but not limited
to a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic
field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space,
wilderness areas or similar public land within the township which is under
the control, operation or management of the township park and recreation
authorities.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION — Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or
building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious
activities.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR USE — R-1 Single-Family Established
Residential District, R-2 Single-Family Rural Residential District, MUN
Mixed Use Neighborhood District, and R-3 Multifamily Residential District;
or any type of dwelling, family care facility, manufactured home park,
campground, subdivision or land development designed and planned for
residential use as defined in the Lower Allen Township Zoning Ordinance,
2009. 42 [Amended 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-13]
SCHOOL — Any public or private educational facility, including but not
limited to child day-care facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
colleges and universities. "School" includes the school grounds but does
not include the facilities used primarily for another purpose and only
incidentally as a school.
SEMINUDE — A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region and areolae and nipple of the female breast, as well
as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES — Those businesses defined as
follows:
ADULT ARCADE — An establishment where, for any form of
consideration, one or more still- or motion-picture projectors, slide
projectors or similar machines, or other image-producing machines,
for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are regularly used to show
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
A.
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO
STORE:
A commercial establishment which has as a significant or
substantial portion of its stock-in-trade or derives a significant
or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or
substantial portion of its interior business or advertising to the sale
(1)
B.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 59-3 (RESERVED) § 59-3
58:71
or rental for any form of consideration of any one or more of the
following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
other visual representations which are characterized by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
(a)
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for
use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital
organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or
others.
(b)
An establishment may have other principal business purposes that
do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore,
adult novelty store or adult video store. Such other business
purposes will not serve to exempt such establishments from being
categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult
video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is
offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, the
specified materials characterized by an emphasis on depicting or a
description which depicts or describes specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
(2)
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant bottle club or similar
commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are
served, which regularly features persons who appear nude or in a
state of nudity or seminude; live performances which are characterized
by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual
activities; or films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
C.
ADULT MOTEL — A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment
which offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration,
which provide patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which
advertise the availability of this sexually oriented type of material by
means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way or by means of
any off-premises advertising, including but not limited to newspapers,
magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television; or offers a
sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than 10 hours; or allows
a tenant or occupant to subrent the sleeping room for a time period of
less than 10 hours.
D.
§ 59-3 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 59-3
58:72
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
E.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration,
regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live
performances which are characterized by an emphasis on exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
F.
ESCORT — A person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or
offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person or who
agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a
striptease for another person.
G.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who or which
furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its
primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
H.
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any place where, for any form of consideration
or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations,
electric or magnetic treatments or any other treatment manipulation of
the human body which occurs as part of or in connection with specified
sexual activities, or where any person providing such treatment,
manipulation or service related thereto, exposes his or her specified
anatomical areas. The definition of massage parlor shall not include
the practice of massage therapy as defined by Act 118 of 2008, known
as the "Massage Therapy Law.43" [Amended 6-29-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-11; 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-05]
I.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who regularly
appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas
is provided for money or any form of consideration to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed or similarly depicted
by other persons.
J.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT — A business or commercial
establishment that as one of its primary business purposes offers for
any form of consideration a place where two or more persons may
congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of specified sexual
activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas or activities
when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.
The definition of "sexually oriented businesses" shall not include an
establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist
or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
K.
43.Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 627.1 et seq.
§ 59-3 (RESERVED) § 59-3
58:73
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — As used in this chapter, includes any
of the following:
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — As used in this chapter, includes any of
the following:
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
— Increase in the floor areas occupied by the business by more than 15%,
as the floor areas exist on the effective date of this chapter.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS — Includes any of the following:
§ 59-4. Establishment and classification of businesses regulated.
[Amended 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-13]
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; or
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts.
A.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy.
B.
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated.
D. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsections A through D of this definition.
E.
A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business.
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means.
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise which
transfers ownership or control of the business except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing
ownership or control.
C.
A. The establishment of a sexually oriented business shall be permitted
only in the C-3 Business Park District, C-4 Regional Commercial
District, and I-3 Industrial/Commercial District and shall be subject to
the following regulations. No person shall cause or permit the
establishment of any of the following sexually oriented businesses, as
defined above and hereinafter classified, within 750 feet of another
such business or within 1,000 feet of any religious institution, school,
boys' club, girls' club or similar existing youth organization or public
§ 59-3 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 59-4
58:74
§ 59-5. Measurement of distance.
As regarding § 59-4A, distance between any two sexually oriented
businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each
business. The distance between any sexually oriented business and any
religious institution, public or private elementary or secondary school, boys'
club, girls' club or similar existing youth organization, or public park or
public building or any properties zoned for residential use or used for
residential purposes shall also be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects from the nearest point of the
property line of the premises where the sexually oriented business is
conducted, to the nearest point of the property line of the premises of any
religious institution, public or private elementary or secondary school, boys'
club, girls' club or similar existing youth organization, or public park or
park or public building, or within 500 feet of any property zoned for
residential district and use or used for residential purposes. When a
limited-access highway or railroad right-of-way is situated between a
proposed sexually oriented business and a use from which an isolation
distance is required, the distance will terminate at the edge of the
highway or railroad right-of-way that is farthest from the proposed
sexually oriented business location.
(1) Adult arcade;
(2) Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store;
(3) Adult cabaret;
(4) Adult motel;
(5) Adult motion-picture theater;
(6) Adult theater;
(7) Massage parlor;
(8) Sexual encounter establishment;
(9) Escort agency; or
(10) Nude model studio.
B. Nothing in this section prohibits the location of sexually oriented
businesses within retail shopping centers in the C-4 Regional
Commercial Districts where such activities will have their only frontage
upon enclosed malls or malls isolated from direct view from public
streets, parks, schools, religious institutions, boys' clubs, girls' clubs or
similar existing youth organizations, public buildings or residential
districts or uses without regard to the distance requirements of
Subsection A above.
§ 59-4 (RESERVED) § 59-5
58:75
public building or any properties zoned for residential district or use or used
for residential purposes.
§ 59-6. Location; prohibitions.
The Zoning Ordinance hereby requires that sexually oriented businesses
shall be permitted only as provided in § 59-5 in which such use is listed as
permissible. Permits for sexually oriented businesses shall be required and
governed by the procedures and policies specified in § 59-9 et seq. of this
chapter. In addition, any sexually oriented business shall be subject to the
following restrictions:
A. The person commits a violation of this Chapter 59 if he operates or
causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a permit,
except as provided in § 59-4.
B. The person commits violation of this Chapter 59 if he operates or
causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of
any religious institution; any school; a public park adjacent to any
residential district and use; or a boys' or girls' club, or similar existing
youth organization, except as provided in § 59-4B.
C. A person commits a violation of this Chapter 59 if he operates or causes
to be operated a sexually oriented business within 750 feet of another
such business, which will include any adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult
motion-picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor or any sexual
encounter establishment, except as provided in § 59-4B.
D. A person commits a violation of this Chapter 59 if he causes or permits
the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually
oriented business within the same building, structure or portion
thereof, except as provided in § 59-4B, or causes the substantial
enlargement of any sexually oriented business in any building,
structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented
business.
E. A person commits a violation of this Chapter 59 if he operates or causes
to be operated a sexually oriented business within 500 feet of any
property zoned for residential district and use or used for residential
purposes.
F. It is a defense to prosecution under this section if a person appearing in
a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
(1) By a proprietary school, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a
§ 59-5 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 59-6
58:76
§ 59-7. Regulations governing existing businesses.
college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or
(3) In a structure:
(a) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available
for viewing;
(b) Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll
at least three days in advance of the class; and
(c) Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at one
time.
A. Any sexually oriented businesses lawfully operating on the effective
date of Chapter 59 that is in violation of § 59-4 and 59-6 of this chapter
shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Such nonconforming uses shall
not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may
be changed to a conforming use, except as provided in the Zoning
Ordinance, and not increased, enlarged, expanded or altered by more
than 15% of the floor areas existing on the effective date of this chapter.
If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 750 feet of one
another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented
business which was first established and continually operating at the
particular location is the conforming use and the later established
business(es) is nonconforming, except as provided in § 59-4B.
B. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the
grant or renewal of a sexually oriented business permit and/or license,
of a religious institution, school, public park adjacent to any residential
district and use, public building or a boys' or girls' club, or similar
existing youth organization within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented
business or within 500 feet of any property zoned for residential district
and use or used for residential purposes. This provision applies only to
the renewal of a valid permit and/or license and does not apply when an
application for a permit and/or license is submitted after a permit and/
or license has expired or has been revoked.
C. Any establishment subject to the provisions of this chapter shall apply
for the permit provided for by § 59-11 within 30 days of the effective
date of this chapter. Any establishment, existing prior to the effective
date of this chapter, shall comply with the regulations pertaining to
§§ 59-21, 59-23 and 59-32, within 60 days of the effective date of this
chapter, and all other applicable permit regulations within 30 days of
the effective date of this chapter.
§ 59-6 (RESERVED) § 59-8
58:77
§ 59-8. Injunction.
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business without having a valid license due to locational restrictions is
subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for a summary offense.
If an injunction must be sought, attorneys fees and costs will be assessed at
the discretion of the court against the sexually oriented business. Each day
a sexually oriented business so operates is a separate offense or violation.
§ 59-9. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses to
promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the
township and to establish reasonably and uniform regulations to prevent
deleterious effects of sexually oriented businesses within the township. The
provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing
a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect
of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented
materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent or effect of this chapter to in any
way condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials or harmful
materials to minors.
§ 59-10. Permit required.
A. No sexually oriented business shall be permitted to operate without a
valid sexually oriented business permit issued by the township for the
particular type of business. It shall be unlawful and a person commits a
summary offense if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business without said permit.
B. The Township Manager or his designee is responsible for granting,
denying, revoking, renewing, suspending and canceling sexually
oriented business permits for proposed or existing sexually oriented
businesses. The Township Manager or his designee is also responsible
for ascertaining whether a proposed sexually oriented business for
which a permit is being applied for complies with all locational
requirements of §§ 59-4, 59-6 and 59-7 of this chapter, all applicable
zoning laws and/or regulations now in effect or as amended or enacted
subsequent to the effective date of this chapter in the township and the
Zoning Ordinance.44
C. The Police Department is responsible for providing information on
whether an applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act
during the time period set forth.
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 59-8 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 59-10
58:78
D. The Director of Community Development is responsible for inspecting a
proposed, permitted or nonpermitted sexually oriented business in
order to ascertain whether it is in compliance with applicable statutes
and ordinances.
E. An application for a permit must be made on a form provided by the
township. Any person desiring to operate a sexually oriented business
shall file with the township an original and two copies of a sworn permit
application on the standard application form supplied by the Township
Manager or his designee.
F. The completed application shall contain the following information and
shall be accompanied by the following documents:
(1) If the applicant is:
(a) An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and
any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he/she is 18
years of age.
(b) A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name
and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is
general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if
any.
(c) A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in
good standing under the laws of the state of incorporation, the
names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal
stockholders involved in the day-to-day running of the business
and the name of the registered corporate agent and the
address of the registered office for service or process.
(2) If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, he must state the
sexually oriented business' fictitious name and submit the required
registration documents.
(3) Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed
pursuant to § 59-10 of this chapter has, within the two- or five-year
period as specified in § 59-12 immediately preceding the date of the
application, been convicted of a specified criminal act, and, if so,
the specified criminal act involved, the date of conviction and the
place of conviction.
(4) Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals pursuant to
§ 59-10 and/or licensees of this chapter has had a previous permit
under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business
ordinances from another municipality or county denied, suspended
or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually
oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or
revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation,
§ 59-10 (RESERVED) § 59-10
58:79
and whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant
to § 59-10 have been a partner in a partnership or an officer,
director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is permitted
under this chapter whose permit has previously been denied,
suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the
sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied,
suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or
revocation.
(5) Whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to
§ 59-10 holds any other permits and/or licenses under this chapter
or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another
municipality or county and, if so, the names and locations of such
other permitted businesses.
(6) The single classification of permit for which the applicant is filing.
(7) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a
legal description of the property, street address and telephone
number(s), if any.
(8) The applicant's mailing addresses and residential address.
(9) A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
(10) The applicant's driver's license number, social security number, if
there is no violation of any privacy legislation or case law, birth
certificate and/or his/her state or federally issued tax identification
number.
(11) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.
The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.
(12) A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30
days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting
the property lines and the structures containing any established
existing uses regulated by this chapter within 500 feet of the
property to be certified; the property lines of any established
religious institution/synagogue, school or public park or recreation
area within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified; and the
property lines of any residentially zoned area or residential
property within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified. For
purposes of this chapter, a use shall be considered existing or
established if it is in existence at the time an application is
submitted. Section 59-4B is excepted from this requirement.
(13) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, he/she must sign the application for a permit as
§ 59-10 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 59-10
58:80
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is other than an individual, each individual who has a
twenty-percent or greater interest in the business must sign the
application for a permit as applicant. If a corporation is listed as
owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity which wishes
to operate such a business, each individual having a ten-percent or
greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for a
permit as applicant.
(14) If a person wishes to operate a sexually oriented business which
shall exhibit on the premises films, video cassettes or other video
reproductions which depict specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, then said person shall comply with the
application requirements stated at § 59-21 et seq.
G. Applications for a permit under this section shall have a continuing duty
to promptly supplement application information required by this
section in the event that said information changes in any way from what
is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing
duty within 30 days from the date of such change, by supplementing the
application on file with the Township Manager or his designee, shall be
grounds for suspension of a permit.
H. In the event that the Township Manager or his designee determines or
learns at any time that the applicant has improperly completed the
application for a proposed sexually oriented business, he shall promptly
notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant 10 days to
properly complete the application. (The time period for granting or
denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the
applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the
application.)
I. The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter, and the premises must be inspected and found to be in
compliance with health, fire and building codes and laws.
J. The applicant shall be required to pay a nonrefundable application fee
as determined from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
K. Prior to obtaining any permit or license to operate any sexually oriented
business defined in this chapter, and as part of any application for a
permit under this section, the applicant shall obtain from the township
or its designee a certification that the proposed location of such
business complies within the locational requirements of § 59-6 and
59-7.
L. The fact that a person possesses other types of state or township
permits and/or licenses does not exempt him/her from the requirement
of obtaining a sexually oriented business permit.
§ 59-10 (RESERVED) § 59-10
58:81
§ 59-11. Investigation and application.
§ 59-12. Issuance of permit.
M. By applying for a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall be
deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to the
exercise by the Township Manager or his designee, the Police
Department and all other township agencies charged with enforcing the
laws, ordinances and codes applicable in the township of their
respective responsibilities under this chapter.
N. The applicant shall be required to provide the township with the names
of any and all employees who are required to be licensed pursuant to
§ 59-20 of this chapter. This shall be a continuing requirement even
after a permit is granted or renewed.
A. Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the township and
upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the Township
Manager or his designee shall immediately stamp the application as
received and shall immediately thereafter send photocopies of the
application to the Police Department and any other township agencies
responsible for enforcement of health, fire and building codes and laws.
Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an investigation of
the applicant, application and the proposed sexually oriented business
in accordance with its responsibilities under law as set forth in this
chapter. Said investigation shall be completed within 20 days of receipt
of the application by the Township Manager or his designee. At the
conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency shall
indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval
of the application, date it, sign it and, in the event it disapproves, state
the reasons therefor. The Police Department shall only be required to
certify the NCIC records request check mentioned at § 59-12. The
Police Department shall not be required to approve or disapprove
applications.
B. A department or agency shall disapprove an application if it finds that
the proposed sexually oriented business will be in violation of any
provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation or other law in
effect in the township. After its indication of approval or disapproval,
each department or agency shall immediately return the photocopy of
the application to the Township Manager or his designee.
A. The Township Manager or his designee shall grant or deny an
application for a permit within 30 days from the date of its proper filing.
Upon the expiration of the 30th day, unless the applicant requests and
is granted a reasonable extension of time, the applicant shall be
permitted to begin operating the business for which the permit is
sought, unless and until the Township Manager or his designee notifies
the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reason(s) for
that denial.
§ 59-10 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 59-12
58:82
B. Grant of application for permit.
(1) The Township Manager or his designee shall grant the application
unless one or more of the criteria set forth in § 59-12C below is
present.
(2) The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person
or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the
address of the sexually oriented business. The permit shall also
indicate that the sexually oriented business, whether permitted or
not, may be subject to prohibitions against public nudity and
indecency pursuant to the United States Supreme Court decision in
Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991). The permit shall
be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the
sexually oriented business so that it can be read easily at any time.
C. Denial of application for permit.
(1) The Township Manager or his designee shall deny the application
for any of the following reasons:
(a) The applicant is under 18 years of age.
(b) An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue on his/her
payment to the township of taxes, fees, fines or penalties
assessed against him/her or imposed upon him/her in relation
to a sexually oriented business.
(c) An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a
permit by any federal, state or municipal authority or agency to
operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12
months or residing with a person whose permit to operate a
sexually oriented business has been revoked within the
preceding 12 months.
(d) An applicant has failed to provide information required by this
section or permit application for the issuance of the permit or
has falsely answered a question or request for information on
the application form.
(e) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business
have not been approved as being in compliance with health,
fire and building codes by the department or agency
responsible under law for investigating said compliance.
(f) The application or permit fees required by this chapter have
not been paid.
(g) An application of the proposed business is in violation of, or is
not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this chapter,
including but not limited to the zoning locational requirements
for a sexually oriented business under §§ 59-4, 59-6 and 59-7.
§ 59-12 (RESERVED) § 59-12
58:83
(h) The granting of the application would violate a statute,
ordinance or court order.
(i) The applicant has a permit under this chapter which has been
suspended or revoked.
(j) Specified criminal acts.
[1] An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act
for which:
[a] Less than two years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense for the specified criminal acts
which are sexual crimes against children, sexual
abuse, rape or crimes connected with another sexually
oriented business, including but not limited to
distribution of obscenity or material harmful to
minors, prostitution, pandering or tax violations;
[b] Less than five years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
felony offense for the specified criminal acts which are
sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or
crimes connected with another sexually oriented
business, including but not limited to distribution of
obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution,
pandering or tax violations; or
[c] Less than five years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of
two or more misdemeanor offenses for specified
criminal acts which are sexual crimes against
children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes connected with
another sexually oriented business, including but not
limited to distribution of obscenity or materials
harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering or tax
violations; offenses occurring within any twenty-fourmonth
period;
[2] The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on disqualification of the applicant;
[3] An applicant who has been convicted of the above
described specified criminal acts may qualify for a sexually
oriented business permit only when the time period
required above in Subsection C(1) has elapsed.
§ 59-12 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 59-12
58:84
§ 59-13. Annual permit fee.
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit shall be determined
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 59-14. Inspection.
§ 59-15. Expiration of permit.
§ 59-16. Suspension of permit.
(k) An applicant knowingly has in his or her employ an employee
who does not have a valid license as required in § 59-20 of this
chapter.
(2) If the Township Manager or his designee denies the application, he
shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the reason(s) for
the denial.
(3) If a person applies for a permit for a particular location within a
period of 12 months from the date of denial of a previous
application for a permit at the location, and there has not been an
intervening change in the circumstances which could reasonably
be expected to lead to a different decision regarding the former
reasons for denial, the application shall be denied.
A. An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the
Community Development Office, the Police Department and the Fire
Department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for
the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time it is
occupied or open for business.
B. It shall be unlawful and a person who operates a sexually oriented
business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said
business under this chapter, or his/her agent or employee commits a
misdemeanor if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the
premises at any time that it is occupied or open for business.
A. Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in § 59-12 (for
renewals, filing of the original survey shall be sufficient) of this chapter.
Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the
expiration date, and, when made less than 30 days before the expiration
date, the expiration of the permit will not be affected.
B. When the Township Manager or his designee denies renewal of the
permit, the applicant shall not be issued a permit under this chapter for
one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the Township
Manager or his designee finds that the basis for denial or the renewal of
the permit has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit
if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final.
§ 59-12 (RESERVED) § 59-16
58:85
§ 59-17. Revocation of permit.
A. The Township Manager or his designee shall suspend a permit for a
period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a permittee, or an
employee of a permittee, has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter;
(2) Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter;
(3) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually
oriented business premises;
(4) Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of a building,
fire, health or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation,
whether federal, state or local, said determination being based on
investigation by the division, department or agency charged with
enforcing said rules or laws. In the event of such statute, code,
ordinance or regulation violation, the Township Manager or his
designee shall promptly notify the permittee of the violation and
shall allow the permittee a seven-day period in which to correct the
violation. If the permittee fails to correct the violation before the
expiration of the seven-day period, the Township Manager or his
designee shall forthwith suspend the permit and shall notify the
permittee of the suspension;
(5) Engaged in permit transfer contrary to § 59-19 of this chapter. In
the event that the Township Manager or his designee suspends a
permit on the grounds that a permittee engaged in a permit
transfer contrary to § 59-19 of this chapter, the Township Manager
or his designee shall forthwith notify the permittee of the
suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the
applicable section of this chapter has been satisfied;
(6) Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours of
operation in § 59-24; or
(7) Knowingly employs a person who does not have a valid license as
required in § 59-20 of this chapter.
B. The suspension shall remain in effect until the violation of the statute,
code, ordinance or regulation in question has been corrected.
A. The Township Manager or his designee shall revoke a permit if a cause
of suspension in § 59-16 of this chapter occurs and the permit has been
suspended within the preceding 12 months.
B. The Township Manager or his designee shall revoke a permit upon
determining that:
§ 59-16 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 59-17
58:86
§ 59-18. Judicial review of permit denial, suspension or revocation.
(1) A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process that tended to enhance
the applicant's opportunity for obtaining a permit;
(2) A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use
or sale of controlled substances in or on the premises;
(3) A permittee or an employee knows or should have known that there
was prostitution on the premises;
(4) A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually
oriented business during a period of time when the permittee's
permit was suspended;
(5) A permittee has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which
the time period required in § 59-12 of this chapter has not elapsed;
(6) On two or more occasions within a twelve-month period, a person
or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the permitted
premises, constituting a specified criminal act for which a
conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were
employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses
were committed. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect on the revocation of the permit;
(7) A permittee is convicted of tax violations for any taxes or fees
related to a sexually oriented business;
(8) A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of
sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or any
other specified sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted
premises; or
(9) A permittee has been operating more than one sexually oriented
business under a single roof except as provided in § 59-4B.
C. When the Township Manager or his designee revokes a permit, the
revocation shall continue for one year and the permittee shall not be
issued a sexually oriented business permit for one year from the date
revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the Township
Manager or his designee finds that the basis for revocation under
§ 59-17 of this chapter has been corrected, the applicant shall be
granted a permit if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date of
revocation became effective. If the permit was revoked under § 59-17 of
this chapter, an applicant may not be granted another permit until the
number of years required under § 59-12 have elapsed.
A. If the Township Manager determines that grounds exist for denial,
suspension or revocation of a license or permit under this chapter, the
following procedure shall apply:
§ 59-17 (RESERVED) § 59-18
58:87
(1) He shall notify the applicant or permittee (respondent), in writing,
of his intent to deny, suspend or revoke, including a summary of the
grounds therefor. The notification shall be by certified mail to the
address on file with the Township Manager.
(2) Within 10 working days of receipt of such notice, the respondent
may provide to the Township Manager, in writing, a response which
shall include a statement of reasons why the license or permit
should not be denied, suspended or revoked and may include a
request for a hearing.
(3) If a response is not received by the Township Manager in the time
stated, the notification shall be final administrative action of denial,
suspension or revocation and notice of same will be sent to the
respondent within five working days after expiration of the period
for submitting a response.
(4) Within five working days after receipt of a response the Township
Manager shall either withdraw the intent to deny, suspend or
revoke and send notification of the withdrawal to the respondent,
in writing, by certified mail, or shall schedule a hearing before the
Board of Commissioners and shall send notification to the
respondent, in writing, by certified mail, of the date, time and place
of the hearing. If the Township Manager fails to send a timely
notification either withdrawing the intent or scheduling a hearing,
the intent to deny, suspend or revoke shall be deemed withdrawn.
(5) The hearing, if requested, shall be scheduled not less than 15 nor
more than 20 working days after receipt by the Township Manager
of the request for a hearing.
(6) The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the Local
Agency Law.45 The respondent may be represented by counsel. The
technical rules of evidence shall not apply, provided that the
decision of the Board shall in all cases be based upon substantial
and reliable evidence.
(7) The Board shall render a written decision within five working days
after completion of the hearing and shall mail a copy of the
decision, by certified mail, to the address of the respondent on file
with the Township Manager.
(8) If more than 45 days elapse between receipt by the Township
Manager of a request for a hearing and mailing by the Board of a
final decision to the respondent, a decision in favor of the
respondent shall be deemed to have been rendered.
(9) In the case of an intent to suspend, revoke or not renew a license or
permit, or to deny a regular permit, or to deny a license to a
sexually oriented business that was established prior to the
45.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105.
§ 59-18 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 59-18
58:88
§ 59-19. Transfer of permit.
§ 59-20. Sexually oriented business employee license.
effective date of this chapter, and that had applied for such license
within 120 days after the effective date of this chapter, the
respondent may continue to work or operate pending receipt of
the final decision of the Board. The decision shall be final at the
end of five working days after it is mailed and shall constitute final
administrative action.
B. When the decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license or permit
becomes final, the respondent shall have the right to seek judicial
review of the decision. Subject to judicial approval, the township shall
consent to an expedited hearing to be held no later than 20 days after
the filing of the action and disposition. If the final decision being
reviewed is to suspend, revoke or not renew a license or permit, or to
deny a regular permit, or to deny a license to a sexually oriented
business that was established prior to the effective date of this chapter
and that had applied for such license within 120 days after the effective
date of this chapter, the township shall consent to the granting of a stay
to maintain the status quo pending final judicial decision.
A. A permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the
authority of a permit at any place other than the address designated in
the application for permit.
B. A permittee shall not transfer his/her permit to another permit unless
and until such other person satisfies the following requirements:
(1) Obtains an amendment to the permit from the Township Manager
or his designee which provides that he/she is now the permittee,
which amendment may be obtained only if he/she has completed
and properly filed an application with the Township Manager or his
designee setting forth the information called for under § 59-12 of
this chapter in the application; and
(2) Pays a transfer fee of 20% of the annual permit fee set by this
chapter.
C. No permit may be transferred when the Township Manager or his
designee has notified the permittee that suspension or revocation
proceedings have been or will be brought against the permittee.
D. A permittee shall not transfer his permit to another location.
E. Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation
of this section is hereby declared void and the permit shall be deemed
revoked.
A. Each individual to be employed in a sexually oriented business, as
defined in § 59-3 of this chapter, who engages in the services rendered
§ 59-18 (RESERVED) § 59-20
58:89
by a nude model studio, escort or escort agency, sexual encounter
establishment, massage parlor or a live performer or entertainer shall
be required to obtain a sexually oriented business employee license.
Each applicant shall pay a permit fee as determined from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners. Said fee is to cover
reasonable administrative costs of the licensing application process.
B. Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business
employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by
the Township Manager or his designee the following information:
(1) The applicant's name or any other names (including stage names)
or aliases used by the individual.
(2) Age, date and place of birth.
(3) Height, weight, hair and eye color.
(4) Present residence address and telephone number.
(5) Present business address and telephone number.
(6) State driver's license or identification number.
(7) Social security number.
(8) Acceptable written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of
age, such as birth certificate or driver's license.
(9) Attached to the application form as provided above, a color
photograph of the applicant, clearly showing the applicant's face,
and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the Police
Department.
(10) A statement detailing the license or permit history of the applicant
for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application, including whether such applicant previously operating
or seeking to operate, in this or any other municipality, county,
state or country, has ever had a license, permit or authorization to
do business denied, revoked or suspended or had any professional
or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or suspended. In
the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, state the
date and the name of the denying jurisdiction and describe in full
the reasons for the denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of any
order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to the
application.
(11) Whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
act as defined in § 59-12C(1)(j) of this chapter. This information
shall include the date, place, nature of each conviction or plea of
nolo contendere and identifying the convicting jurisdiction.
§ 59-20 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 59-20
58:90
§ 59-21. Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit
films or videos in video booths.
(12) The Township Manager or his designee shall refer the sexually
oriented business employee license application to the Police
Department for an investigation to be made of such information as
is contained on the application. The application process shall be
completed within 10 days from the date the completed application
is filed. After the investigation, the Township Manager or his
designee shall issue a license unless the report from the Police
Department finds that one or more of the following findings is true:
(a) That the applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a
license or in any report or record required to be filed with the
Police Department or other department or agency of the
township.
(b) That the applicant is under 18 years of age.
(c) That the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
act as defined in § 59-12C(1)(j) of this chapter.
(d) That the sexually oriented business employee license is to be
used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state
law, statute, rule or regulation or prohibited by a particular
provision of this chapter.
(e) That the applicant has had a sexually oriented business
employee license revoked by the township or any other federal,
state or local municipal agency or authority within two years of
the date of the current application.
C. Renewal of license.
(1) A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual
renewal by the Township Manager or his designee upon written
application of the applicant and a finding by the Township Manager
or his designee and the Police Department that the applicant has
not been convicted of any specified criminal act as defined in
§ 59-12C(1)(j) of this chapter or committed any act during the
existence of the previous license period which would be grounds to
deny the initial permit application.
(2) The renewal of the license shall be subject to payment of a fee as
determined from time to time by resolution by the Board of
Commissioners.
A. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than a sexually oriented motel/hotel and regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued to said business under this
chapter, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than
§ 59-20 (RESERVED) § 59-21
58:91
150 square feet of floor space a film, video cassette or other video
reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Upon application for a sexually oriented business permit, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises
showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more
manager's stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures
and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will
not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square
feet of floor area with no dimension greater than eight feet. The
diagram shall also designate the place at which this permit will be
conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall
not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the
north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn
to a designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to show
the various internal dimension of all areas of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The Township
Manager or his designee may waive the foregoing diagram for
renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the
premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station
may be made without the prior approval of the Township Manager
or his designee.
(4) It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure
that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each
manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from the manager's station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain
video reproduction equipment. If the premises have two or more
manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises
shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations.
The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight
from the manager's station.
(6) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be
the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to
ensure that the view area specified in Subsection A(5) remains
§ 59-21 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 59-21
58:92
§ 59-22. Prohibitions regarding minors.
unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or
other materials or persons at all times and to ensure that no patron
is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to Subsection A of this section.
(7) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any
one time. No holes, commonly known as "glory holes," shall be
allowed in the walls or partitions which separate each viewing
room from an adjoining viewing room or restroom.
(8) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access and an illumination of not less than two
footcandles as measured at the floor level.
(9) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be
the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to
ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all
times that any patron is present on the premises.
B. A person having a duty under § 59-21A(1) through (9) commits a
summary offense if he/she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
A. Except as set forth in § 59-22B, a person commits a summary offense if
he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business
under this chapter, and knowingly or with reasonable cause to know,
permit, suffer or allow:
(1) Admittance of a person under 18 years of age to the business
premises unless accompanied by a parent or guardian;
(2) A person under 18 years of age to remain at the business premises
unless accompanied by a parent or guardian;
(3) A person under 18 years of age to purchase goods or services at the
business premises without the specific consent of a parent or
guardian; or
(4) A person who is under 18 years of age to work at the business
premises as an employee.
B. No adult bookstore shall at any time display any item listed in § 59-3,
the definition of "sexually oriented businesses," Subsection B, in any
public place which is accessible to a person under 18 years of age
unless:
(1) The item is behind a checkout counter or cash register stand or
adjacent to such counter or stand, provided that there is no access
other than by employees and, if the cover of the item or the
§ 59-21 (RESERVED) § 59-22
58:93
§ 59-23. Advertising and lighting regulations.
container in which it is packaged displays a visual representation
of a specified anatomical area or a specified sexual activity, which
cover or container is visible to minors lawfully on the premises,
such cover or container must have an opaque screen or border of
sufficient height to block the aforesaid display from public view; or
(2) The items are displayed in a specific area where no minors are
allowed entry; a sign stating "no minors" or "adults only" in letters
at least two inches in height must be posted at the entrance to such
area.
C. The presence of a person under 18 years of age in such adult bookstore
which complies with and enforces § 59-22B shall not constitute a
summary offense under Chapter 59.
A. It shall be unlawful and a person commits a summary offense if he/she
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business
under this chapter, and advertises the presentation of any activity
prohibited by any applicable state statute or local ordinance.
B. It shall be unlawful and a person commits a summary offense if he/she
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business
under this chapter, and displays or otherwise exhibits the materials
and/or performances at such sexually oriented business in any
advertising which is visible outside the premises. This prohibition shall
not extend to advertising of the existence or location of such sexually
oriented business.
C. The permittee shall not allow any portion of the interior premises to be
visible from outside the premises.
D. All off-street parking areas and premise entries of the sexually oriented
business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation
with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal
illumination of one footcandle of light on the parking surface and/or
walkways. This required lighting level is established in order to provide
sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the
sexually oriented business of the personal safety of patrons and
employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal
conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram
of the premises.
E. Nothing contained in this section of the chapter shall relieve the
operator(s) of a sexually oriented business from complying with the
requirements of this chapter, as it may be amended from time to time,
or any subsequently enacted township ordinances or regulations.
§ 59-22 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 59-23
58:94
§ 59-24. Hours of operation.
§ 59-25. Nudity prohibited.
§ 59-26. Regulations pertaining to live entertainment.
F. All signs shall be in accordance with Article XX, Signs, of the Zoning
Ordinance.
A. It shall be unlawful and a person commits a summary offense if he/she
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business
under this chapter, and allows such business to remain open for
business, or to permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit
a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a
service, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular
day.
B. It shall be unlawful and a person commits a summary offense if,
working as an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this
chapter, said employee engages in a performance, solicits a
performance, makes a sale, solicits a sale, provides a service or solicits
a service between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular
day.
A. The United States Supreme Court Decision in Barnes v. Glen Theater,
Inc., 501 U.S. 560, 111 (1991) which upheld the rights of cities to
prohibit live public exposure of a person's private parts, specifically
applies to sexually oriented businesses (regardless of whether or not a
permit has been issued to said businesses under this chapter), including
said businesses where no alcoholic beverages are sold, served or
consumed on the premises.
B. Knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appearing
in a state of nudity or depicting a specified anatomical area or by
specified sexual activities is prohibited within the township, including
any sexually oriented business. Any sexually oriented business which is
found in violation of this § 59-25 shall have its permit suspended
pursuant to the provisions of § 59-16.
A. For purposes of this section, "live entertainment" is defined as a person
who appears nude or seminude or a performance which is
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
specified sexual activities.
B. No person shall perform live entertainment for patron(s) in a sexually
oriented business establishment except upon a stage at least 18 inches
above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least
10 feet from the nearest area occupied by a patron(s). No patron shall
§ 59-23 (RESERVED) § 59-26
58:95
be permitted within 10 feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by
a performer.
C. The sexually oriented business establishment shall provide separate
dressing room facilities for female and male performers which shall not
be occupied or used in any way by anyone other than performers.
D. The sexually oriented business establishment shall provide access for
performers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is
completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not
physically feasible, the establishment shall provide a minimum fourfoot-
wide walk aisle for performers between the dressing room area
and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the
patrons and the performers which prevents any physical contact
between patrons and performers.
E. No entertainer, either before, during or after a performance, shall have
physical contact with any patron, and no patron shall have physical
contact with any entertainer either before, during or after a
performance. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact while
in or on the premises of the establishment.
F. Fixed rail(s) at least 30 inches in height shall be maintained
establishing the separations between performers and patrons required
by this section.
G. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer. A
patron who wishes to pay or give a gratuity to a performer shall place
the gratuity in a container that is at all times located separately from
the performers for the purpose of preventing any physical contact
between a patron and a performer. No performer shall solicit any
gratuity from any patron.
H. Section 59-26 shall not apply to an employee of an establishment who,
while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess or bartender, comes
within 10 feet of a patron. No employee shall engage in any specified
sexual activity or display or expose any specified anatomical area while
acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess or bartender.
I. Compliance with this section shall be as follows:
(1) For purposes of this section, "establishment" is defined as it is in
§ 59-3C of this chapter. No establishment shall be in compliance
with this section unless the township-designated agent(s) has
inspected and approved of the establishment's compliance. The
township shall have 10 days from the date it receives written notice
from the operator that the establishment is ready for inspection to
approve or disapprove of compliance required by this section.
Failure to approve or disapprove of compliance within 10 days shall
constitute a finding of compliance under this section.
§ 59-26 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 59-26
58:96
§ 59-27. Operation without valid permit.
(2) The operator of an establishment that has been providing live
entertainment under a valid sexually oriented business permit shall
have the time periods listed below in which to bring the
establishment into compliance with this section. Failure to do so
while continuing to provide live entertainment shall cause the
establishment's permit to be suspended under § 59-16 of this
chapter. The permit shall remain suspended until the establishment
is approved by the township's designated agent(s) as being in full
compliance with this section.
(3) The operator of an establishment that has been operating under a
valid permit for another classification of sexually oriented business
and who wishes to provide live entertainment at that establishment
shall apply for and receive a sexually oriented business permit for
the operation of an establishment providing live entertainment
before any live entertainment is provided at that establishment. No
live entertainment permit shall be issued until the establishment is
approved as being in full compliance with this section and all other
applicable requirements of this chapter.
(4) The applicant for a permit to operate a new establishment who
wishes to provide live entertainment shall apply for and receive a
sexually oriented business permit for the operation of an
establishment providing live entertainment before any live
entertainment is provided. No live entertainment permit shall be
issued until the establishment is approved as being in full
compliance with this section and all other applicable requirements
of this chapter.
(5) Subsection B: 60 days from the date this section becomes effective.
(6) Subsection C: 90 days from the date this section becomes effective.
(7) Subsection D: 90 days from the date this section becomes effective.
(8) Subsection E: upon the date this section becomes effective.
(9) Subsection F: 60 days from the date this section becomes effective.
(10) Subsection G: upon the date this section becomes effective.
(11) Subsection H: upon the date this section becomes effective.
A. In addition to the summary offense provisions found at other sections of
this chapter, the following additional summary offenses shall also apply
to sexually oriented businesses.
B. It shall be unlawful and a person commits a summary offense if he/she
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business
under this chapter, and said person knows or should know that:
§ 59-26 (RESERVED) § 59-27
58:97
§ 59-28. Exemptions.
§ 59-29. Violations and penalties; additional relief.
(1) The business does not have a sexually oriented business permit
under this chapter for any applicable classification;
(2) The business has a permit which is under suspension;
(3) The business has a permit which has been revoked; or
(4) The business has a permit which has expired.
A. It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this chapter that a
person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class
operated:
(1) By a college, junior college or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a
college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or
(3) In a structure:
(a) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available
for viewing;
(b) Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll
at least three days in advance of the class; and
(c) Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any
one time.
B. It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this chapter that an
employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not
it is permitted under this chapter, exposed any specified anatomical
area during the employee's bona fide use of a restroom or during the
employee's bona fide use of a dressing room which is accessible only to
employees.
A. In addition to whatever penalties are applicable under the Crimes Code,
if any person fails or refuses to obey or comply with or violates any of
the provisions of this chapter, such person, upon conviction of such
offense, shall be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punished by a
fine not less than $300 and not more than $600 and costs of the action.
Upon default of payment of such fines and costs, such person shall
undergo imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each
violation or noncompliance shall be considered a separate and distinct
§ 59-27 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 59-29
58:98
Chapter 61
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and safety
standards — See Ch. 70.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 103.
Key lock boxes — See Ch. 126.
§ 61-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to impose administrative sanctions and
criminal penalties to reduce the frequency of false alarms originating from
homes, businesses and other establishments located within Lower Allen
Township.
§ 61-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "False Alarm
Ordinance."
§ 61-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have
the meanings herein ascribed thereto unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ALARM SUPPLIER — The business by any individual, partnership,
corporation or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or
causing any alarm system to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired,
offense. Further, each day of continued violation or noncompliance shall
be considered as a separate offense.
B. Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the township from
taking such other lawful action in any court of competent jurisdiction as
is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation or noncompliance. Such
other lawful actions shall include, but shall not be limited to, an
equitable action for injunctive relief or an action at law for damages.
C. Further, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the
township from prosecuting any violation of other ordinances of the
township.
D. All remedies and penalties provided for in this chapter shall be
cumulative and independently available to the township, and the
township shall be authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in
this chapter to the full extent allowed by law.
§ 59-29 (RESERVED) § 61-3
58:99
altered, replaced, moved or installed in or on any building, structure or
facility.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any assembly of equipment, mechanical, electrical or
battery-operated, arranged to signal the occurrence of a police, fire or
medical emergency, or hazard requiring urgent attention to which police,
EMS or fire units are expected to respond.
ANSWERING SERVICE — Service whereby trained employees, in
attendance at all times, receive prerecorded voice messages from automatic
dialing devices reporting an emergency at a stated location, which such
employees have the duty to relay immediately by live voice any such
emergency message via current telecommunication technology platforms to
the Communications Center of the Police Department, Fire Companies or
EMS.
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any device, bell, horn or siren which is attached to the
interior or exterior of a building, structure or facility and emits a warning
signal audible outside of the building, structure or facility and which is
designed to attract attention when activated by a criminal act or other
emergency requiring Police Department, Fire Companies or EMS response.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — A device which is interconnected to
a telephone line or current technology used to facilitate one-to-one
communication via land-line or cellular telephony and is programmed to
transmit a signal by a voice or coded message that indicates that an
emergency condition exists and the need for an emergency response is
required.
CENTRAL STATION — A protective system or group of such systems
operated privately for customers by a person, firm or corporation which
accept recorded messages from automatic dialing devices at a central
station having operators and guards in attendance at all times who have
the duty to take appropriate action upon receipt of a signal or message,
including the relaying of messages to the Communications Center of the
Police Department, Fire Companies or EMS.
CHIEF OF POLICE or EQUIVALENT OFFICIAL — The chief executive
officer of the police department, sworn or civilian, or designee.
EMERGENCY — A police, fire, or medical emergency, or hazard.
EMS — Emergency medical services.
FALSE ALARM —
An alarm activated in the absence of an emergency, whether willfully
or by inadvertence, negligence or unintentional act, including the
malfunction of the alarm system, to which the Police Department, Fire
Companies, or EMS respond. It excludes alarms caused by malfunctions
of the Police, Fire or EMS Communications Center receiving equipment
if such alarm is directly connected to the alarm board; testing or
repairing of telephone or electrical lines or equipment outside the
premises; acts of God, such as earthquake, flood, windstorm, thunder or
lightning; an attempted illegal entry of which there is visible evidence;
A.
§ 61-3 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 61-3
58:100
FIRE COMPANIES — All members and equipment of the Lower Allen Fire
Company No. 1 and Lisburn Community Fire Company and assisting or
next-due departments.
FIRE EMERGENCY — A fire.
HAZARD EMERGENCY — An explosion or leak of toxic gas, liquid or solid,
or a potential explosion or leak.
INTERMEDIARY — A central station protective system or an answering
service as herein defined.
KEY — To use a telephone line and equipment for transmitting a message
either directly or indirectly by an automatic dialing device.
MANAGER — The Manager of the Township.
MEDICAL EMERGENCY — An emergency involving the health of a person
or persons.
MONITORING AGENCY — A central answering point for receiving alarms
that may or may not be associated with an alarm supplier, and which then
relays information to a communications center to take appropriate action
upon receipt of a signal or message, including the relaying of message,
including the relaying of messages to the Communications Center of the
Police Department, Fire Companies or EMS.
PERMIT — Written permission duly granted to an applicant by the Township
upon payment of the required fee.
PERSON — Any person, group, firm, partnership, association, company,
corporation or organization of any kind.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — All members of the Lower Allen Township Police
Department.
POLICE EMERGENCY — An incident requiring prompt response by the
Police Department.
POLICE, FIRE AND EMS COMMUNICATIONS CENTER — The Cumberland
County Department of Public Safety Communications Center.
a crime in progress; or, in the case of an emergency medical alarm,
an actual medical emergency requiring police, fire and/or medical
personnel. If doubt exists as to the cause of the false alarm, the Chief of
Police or equivalent official or designee shall make a decision regarding
the circumstances of the activation.
Multiple alarms received by the Police Department, Fire Company or
EMS within a twelve-hour period shall not be considered a separate
false alarm for purposes of this ordinance.
B.
False alarms. It also includes the intentional activation of a holdup
alarm for other than a holdup in progress, the intentional activation of
a burglary alarm for other than a burglary, the intentional activation of
a medical alarm for other than a medical emergency or the intentional
activation of a fire alarm for other than a fire or hazard.
C.
§ 61-3 (RESERVED) § 61-3
58:101
TELEPHONE LINE — Any signal carrier, be it fiber optic, copper, or
wireless, that facilitates one-to-one communication between persons or
devices. This includes wired and wireless telephones and automated dialing
devices.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Lower Allen.
TRUNK LINE — A telephone line leading into the Communications Centers
of the Police Department, Fire Companies or EMS that is for the purpose
of handling calls on a person-to-person basis and which is identified by a
specific listing among the white pages of the telephone directory issued by
the telephone company.
§ 61-4. Alarms without timing mechanisms prohibited.
On and after the effective date of this chapter, the owner or user of an
alarm system or audible alarm shall equip such alarm system or audible
alarm with a timing mechanism that will disengage the alarm system or
audible alarm after a maximum of 15 minutes. An alarm system or audible
alarm without such a timing mechanism shall be unlawful in the Township.
Where an alarm system or audible alarm is activated and continuously
transmits a signal, either through malfunction or defect in the system, a
police officer is authorized to direct that a device be discontinued or to
disconnect the device until such time as repairs are made or contact the
owner or user to disconnect the device until such time as repairs are made.
Such disconnection may be made by measures up to and including the
severing of wired connections to the speaker or enunciator.
§ 61-5. Direct keying of automatic dialing devices.
All automatic dialing devices that transmit recorded messages directly to
the Police Department, Fire Companies or EMS shall be keyed to the
Police, Fire and EMS Communications Centers. Alarm systems in multiple
occupancies, where activation alerts all units, must have a method of
identifying the specific location of the originating alarm.
§ 61-6. Listing of installations.
A. Every alarm supplier who installs or has installed an alarm system in
the Township shall furnish to Police, Fire and EMS Communications
Center and the Chief of Police or equivalent official on a form provided
by the Township the following information:
(1) The name, home and business address and home and business
telephone number, and cellular phone number, if applicable, of the
owner or user of the alarm system and the name, address and
telephone number of the home and business of the property where
the device is installed.
(2) The name, address and best telephone contact number of at least
two persons who are authorized to gain access to the premises
where the device is installed.
§ 61-3 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 61-6
58:102
§ 61-7. Supplier, installer, and monitoring company licensing.
(3) The name, home and business address and home and business
telephone number of any other person, if any, other than the alarm
supplier, who is responsible for maintenance and repair of the
system.
(4) A general written description of the device other than schematics.
(5) List the alarm monitoring agency if it differs from the alarm
supplier and inform the alarm monitoring agency of the licensing
requirement for alarm monitoring agencies.
(6) For installations prior to this amendment date, the alarm supplier
shall, upon renewal of the annual license, supply Lower Allen
Township with a complete list of alarmed businesses and
residences along with the alarm monitoring service for the same
alarm if different from the supplier.
(7) The supplier shall notify Lower Allen Township, in writing, of any
changes in ownership of the alarms or any change of alarm
monitoring agency.
B. The owner and user of alarm systems or audible alarms whose device
was installed prior to the effective date of this chapter shall, within 90
days after such enactment, supply the Chief of Police or equivalent
official with the information specified in § 61-6A.
C. All information furnished pursuant to this section shall be kept
confidential and shall be for the authorized use of the Police
Department only. Exceptions include providing necessary information
to Township Administration, Fire, and Codes Enforcement officials for
the purpose of identifying responsible parties relevant to alarm
maintenance and administration.
A. No person except an alarm supplier or alarm monitoring service
holding a valid license from the Township shall sell, install, service or
monitor any alarm system within the Township.
B. The Manager or designee shall issue an alarm supplier's license or
monitor's license to an alarm supplier or alarm monitoring service
meeting the requirements of this § 61-7 upon the filing of the required
application and payment of a fee as set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners. Each license shall bear the
signature of the Manager or designee and be for a one calendar-year
period. A copy of the license shall be physically displayed upon each of
the premises using the alarm system and shall be available for
inspection solely by the Chief of Police or equivalent official, the
Manager or designee.
C. Each alarm supplier and alarm monitoring agency that installs one or
more alarm systems in the Township shall make service available
§ 61-6 (RESERVED) § 61-7
58:103
§ 61-8. User permit fee.
directly or through an agent on a twenty-four-hour-per-day basis, seven
days a week, to service such devices and to correct malfunctions as they
occur. Any person using an alarm system shall make arrangements for
service to be available for such device on a twenty-four-hour-per-day,
seven-day-per-week basis.
D. No corporation, sole proprietor, partner, joint venturer, trustee,
executor, administrator, employee, fiduciary or stockholder with a 5%
or greater interest in a corporation (except a corporation whose stock is
publicly traded and registered with the Securities and Exchange
Commission or with a state securities commission) applying for a
license shall have been convicted of a felony or pleaded nolo contendere
to any felony charge or indictment.
E. The supplier applicant shall furnish an insurance certificate annually
confirming that the applicant has in force general liability insurance
coverage in an amount of not less than $300,000 for each occurrence.
An applicant who self-insures such coverage shall furnish evidence of
financial ability satisfactory to the Manager.
F. The licensee shall pay an annual license fee as set forth from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
(1) No alarm supplier or alarm monitoring agency license shall be
required:
(a) Where no alarm permit is required; or
(b) When the installation of such alarm system shall be made
personally by the owner or occupant of the premises.
(2) A license may be revoked, or renewal denied if:
(a) The licensee fails to meet the requirements necessary to obtain
a license.
(b) The license fee is not paid.
(c) The Chief of Police or equivalent official has reason to believe
the licensee's or alarm monitoring agency's services are the
cause of false alarms.
(d) The licensee fails to provide emergency service as required by
this chapter.
(e) The licensee is more than 365 days overdue on payments for
false alarm violations pursuant to this chapter or on fines
related to criminal proceedings relevant to false alarms.
A. The user's fee for an alarm system permit shall be $25 for each alarm
system and said permit shall be obtained by or on behalf of the owner or
§ 61-7 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 61-8
58:104
§ 61-9. Certain audible alarm systems; no permit required.
lessee of the premises upon which the alarm system is installed from
the Manager or designee prior to the installation of the alarm system.
The Manager or designee shall furnish to the user a copy of this
chapter.
(1) By arrangement with suppliers, installers, and/or monitoring
companies, this fee and/or any other fees or penalties identified in
this chapter may be passed on to the supplier, installer, and/or
monitoring company and may be invoiced directly upon declaration
of this arrangement.
(2) Proof of such arrangement must be furnished, upon request, to the
Township Manager or designee.
B. The permit shall bear the signature of the Manager or designee and be
valid for the period that the owner owns the premises upon which the
alarm system is installed, a new lessee assumes occupancy of the
premises, or until revoked. The permit shall be physically present upon
the premises using the alarm system and shall be available for
inspection by the Chief of Police or equivalent official, the Manager or
designee.
C. The permit shall contain the address of the property, the name of the
business (if applicable), the name of the owner, tenant or agent
responsible for the property, the name, address and home and business
telephone number of the alarm supplier, alarm monitoring agency or
other entity responsible for servicing the system (if applicable), the type
of alarm (burglary, holdup, medical), how the alarm signal will be
received by the communications center (tape, central station, etc.), at
least two alternative telephone numbers of persons to be contacted who
are authorized to gain access to the premises and any additional
information as may be determined to be necessary. It shall be the
owner's responsibility to notify the Township Manager or designee of
any change in the information or usage within 30 days after the change.
D. Exception. An alarm user who is over the age of 65 and is the primary
occupant of a residence, and if no business is conducted at the
residence, may obtain a user's permit from the Township without
paying the above-stated fee.
E. Users who fail to obtain a permit within 60 days after the alarm system
is activated shall be liable to pay a late charge penalty of $20 for each
calendar year that the permit is not obtained.
F. All locations in the Township equipped with alarm systems, except as
stated in this chapter, must secure and possess a valid permit for each
alarm system.
A. A battery-powered (9-volt, 12.2-volt or similar voltage) audible alarm
system or any electrically energized audible alarm system whose sole
§ 61-8 (RESERVED) § 61-9
58:105
§ 61-10. Technical information to be provided.
Each alarm supplier and alarm monitoring agency, who after the effective
date of this amended chapter, sells or leases in the Township an alarm
system shall furnish operating instructions and a manual to the buyer or
lessee.
§ 61-11. Inspection of devices.
purpose is to notify the occupants of that location of an emergency
situation shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter
if all of the following conditions exist:
(1) The alarm is not connected to any mechanical, electrical, or
wireless device that automatically notifies a person or agency
outside that location, other than the owner or occupants of that
location, that the alarm system is activated.
(2) That the audible alarm does not sound outside the location (no
external speakers).
(3) The audible signal emitted by the audible alarm does not exceed 90
decibels.
(4) The audible alarm does not cause undue annoyance or alarm to
occupants of adjoining premises.
B. Alarm users who are not required to pay a fee or who are exempt from
obtaining an alarm user's permit as stated above shall nevertheless be
subject to the penalty provisions described in this chapter.
C. No one except an alarm supplier or alarm monitoring agency holding a
valid license from the Township shall install or service any alarm system
on the property of another within the confines of the Township.
A. Public safety requires that the incidence of false alarms and
malfunctioning automatic dialing devices be kept to a minimum so as to
reduce unnecessary calls to the Police Department, EMS Department,
and Fire Companies and to increase the effectiveness of properly
functioning alarm systems. In order to enforce this and to reduce the
incidence of false alarms and malfunctioning alarm systems, it is
necessary that appropriate Township officials have the right to inspect
the installation and operation of any alarm system installed in the
Township.
B. Application for a permit for the installation of an alarm system and
subsequent installation of such a system pursuant to a permit issued or
the continuance of the use of any alarm system already installed at the
effective date of this chapter shall constitute by the owner or lessee
thereof an authorization for the inspection of any such installation and/
or operation by the Chief of Police or equivalent official, the Manager or
designee.
§ 61-9 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 61-11
58:106
§ 61-12. Conformance with installation, inspection and testing
standards.
§ 61-13. Notification preceding testing device.
No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of any alarm system
without first notifying the shift supervisor of the Township Police, Fire or
EMS radio network, as applicable.
§ 61-14. Alarm reporting.
C. All such entries upon the premises where an alarm system is installed,
and all such inspections of the installation and operation of alarm
systems shall be at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice,
except in emergency situations.
A. Every alarm supplier selling, leasing or furnishing to any user or a user
who privately installs an alarm system which is located on premises
within the Township shall be:
(1) Permitted to install only equipment that is listed by Underwriter's
Laboratories, Inc., as being electrically safe and meeting the
Township requirements for the alarm system. Wiring for the alarm
system must conform within all applicable Township codes.
(2) Required to cause each alarm system installed to be provided with
standby battery power which shall automatically and immediately
take over in the event of a power failure.
(3) Required to install equipment in such a way as to neutralize
electrical surges on the alarm system.
(4) Required to deactivate any alarm system within a reasonable
period of time when multiple false alarms are received.
B. Every alarm monitoring agency providing a monitoring service on an
alarm system which is located on premises within the Township shall
be:
(1) Required to recommend deactivation within a reasonable period of
time, to the alarm supplier, for any alarm system when multiple
false alarms are received.
(2) Permitted to monitor only equipment that has been inspected and
found to meet all conditions of § 61-12A above.
(3) Prohibited from monitoring any alarm system that has not been
properly registered within the Township, permitted by the
Township and correctly installed by a Township-licensed supplier or
installer.
A. Any police officer or fireman responding to an alarm which is
determined to be false shall promptly notify the Chief of Police or
§ 61-11 (RESERVED) § 61-14
58:107
equivalent official of such alarm, in writing, and the Chief of Police
or equivalent official or designee shall, not less than quarterly, have
notification of such false alarm sent via United States mail to the
person(s) in whose name(s) the alarm(s) is(are) registered.
B. By submitting an application for a permit for the installation of an alarm
system and the subsequent installation of such a system or by the
continuation of the use of an alarm system already installed at the
effective date of this chapter, the owner, lessee or user thereof shall
agree that such permit application constitutes a waiver by such person
of the right to bring or file any action, claim or complaint whatsoever
against any police officer or fireman who makes a forced entry in
response to such an alarm into the premises on which such an alarm is
installed as a result of entry into the subject premises or a
disconnection of an alarm. In the event that the owner of such premises
is a person other than a permit applicant, as in the instance of a lessee
or other user not the owner of the premises on which the alarm is
installed, such permit application shall constitute an indemnification
agreement by the applicant to hold harmless any such police officer,
EMT or fireman, the Township, its officials or agents, the Police
Department, the EMS Department and the Fire Companies, as
appropriate, from any and all damages whatsoever claimed by the
lessor or owner of the premises on which the alarm is installed.
C. Any alarm system which has 10 or more false alarms within a calendar
year may be subject to enhanced financial penalties, criminal
prosecution, and/or permit revocation.
(1) The Chief of Police or equivalent official or designee shall notify the
alarm user and the alarm supplier providing the service or
inspection to the user by first class postage prepaid, certified mail,
of such fact and direct that the user submit a report to the Chief of
Police or equivalent official or designee within 15 days of receipt of
the notice describing actions taken or to be taken to discover and
eliminate the cause of the false alarms.
(2) If the alarm user submits a report as directed, the Chief of Police or
equivalent official or designee shall determine if the action taken or
to be taken will substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms.
If he determines that the action will substantially reduce the
likelihood of false alarms, he shall notify the alarm user, in writing,
that his permit will not be revoked at this time and that if three
more false alarms occur within the permit year, the user's permit
may be revoked.
(3) If no report is submitted, or if the Chief of Police or equivalent
official or designee determines that the action taken or to be taken
will not substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms, the
Chief of Police or equivalent official or designee shall give notice by
first class postage prepaid, certified mail, to the user that the
§ 61-14 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 61-14
58:108
§ 61-15. False alarms.
permit will be revoked without further notice, if the user does not
file within 10 days a written request for a hearing.
(4) If a hearing is requested, the Township Manager shall provide
written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant,
the Chief of Police or equivalent official or designee, and any
required witnesses via interoffice mail for Township employees or
by first class postage prepaid, certified mail to non-employees, at
least 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing.
(5) The hearing shall be before the Board of Commissioners of the
Township. If the Board of Commissioners determines that 10 or
more false alarms have occurred, and that the user has not taken
action which substantially reduces the likelihood of false alarms, it
shall issue an order revoking the user's permit.
(6) An alarm user shall immediately discontinue use of this alarm
system upon being notified by first class postage prepaid, certified
mail, of the revocation of his permit.
(7) An alarm user whose permit has been revoked may apply for a
probationary user's permit. The Manager shall not be required to
issue a probationary user's permit, unless he is satisfied that the
user's system has been properly serviced and its deficiencies
corrected. The Manager may impose reasonable restrictions and
conditions upon the user, before issuing a probationary user's
permit, which restrictions and conditions shall be written on the
permit. A probationary user's permit shall be issued for only a oneyear
period. If the alarm user does not have three or more false
alarms during that period, they may apply for a permanent permit
under the provisions of § 61-8.
A. For the purpose of defraying the costs to the Police Department and
Fire Companies of responding to false alarms, the owner, lessee or user
of any alarm system, person using the service of an intermediary, user
of audible alarms and user of any other kind of alarm systems or any
other kind of direct or indirect connections with the Police, Fire or EMS
Communications Centers, except a person using the two-way live voice
communication by telephone, shall, as a condition to installation and
continued operation of such equipment or service, execute a consent in
such form as may be prescribed by the Manager that such owner, lessee
or user shall pay the Township for all false alarms upon the following
schedule for each false alarm originating from the owner's, lessee's or
user's premises.
(1) First three false alarms, per calendar year: warning.
(2) Fourth false alarm, per calendar year: $25.
§ 61-14 (RESERVED) § 61-15
58:109
Chapter 63
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 83.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 87.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 63-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is regulating and licensing the operation of coinoperated
amusement devices, excluding musical devices.
§ 63-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates
otherwise, the following words or phrases have the meanings indicated
below:
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any mechanical or electrical
device, machine or apparatus whatsoever for the playing of a game,
entertainment or for amusement, including but not limited to a device
commonly known as a "pinball machine," "video game" or any other such
machine or device upon which baseball, football, shuffleboard, bowling,
tennis, billiards or any other sport, game or amusement is played which is
operated or played from the insertion therein of a coin, disc, slug, plate, key,
or card or by the payment of any price, excluding musical devices such as a
jukebox.[Amended 5-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-05]
(3) Fifth and subsequent false alarm per calendar year: $100 each
alarm.
(4) Following the sixth and each subsequent false alarm per calendar
year, it will be at the discretion of the alarm officer to issue a
nontraffic citation under Title 18, Section 7511 or continue with
fees under § 61-15A(3) above.
B. Any such owner, lessee or user who fails to execute the consent
described in § 61-15A within 90 days of the installation of an alarm
shall, within the ninety-day period, disconnect the alarm system.
C. Any owner, lessee or user of an alarm system may revoke or refuse to
consent as set forth in § 61-15A above only by disconnecting the alarm
system.
D. Violation of any provision of this chapter other than § 61-15 shall
constitute a summary offense punishable by a fine of not less than $100
and not more than $300 and costs of prosecution.
§ 61-15 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 63-2
58:110
PERSON — Any person, partnership, firm, association or corporation,
except a nonprofit organization exempt under Section 501(c) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
§ 63-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, lease or maintain for
purposes of operation a coin-operated amusement device without first
having obtained the proper license from the Township Manager as provided
in this chapter.
§ 63-4. Posting of license.
The license required by this chapter shall be posted at all times by affixing
it in a conspicuous place on the premises so as to be easily seen and read by
any person who visits the premises wherein the coin-operated amusement
devices are operated.
§ 63-5. License application. [Amended 5-8-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-05]
An application for a license shall be filed, in writing, with the Township
Manager or his designee on a form to be provided by the Township
Manager, or his designee, and shall specify as follows:
§ 63-6. License fee. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-16;
5-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-05]
No license shall be issued under this chapter for any coin-operated
amusement device until the annual fees have been paid to the Township
Manager or his designee. The annual license fee shall be as set forth from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners for each coinoperated
amusement device on the premises, but in no event shall the
license fee exceed $100 per coin-operated amusement device. For purpose
of yearly renewal, the fee shall be paid on or before April 30 of each year,
or before any new coin-operated amusement devices are installed. If any
A. Name and address of the applicant and, in addition thereto, if a
partnership, firm, association or corporation, the name and address of a
principal partner, officer or manager.
B. Name and address of the owner of the coin-operated device if different
from the applicant.
C. Name and address of premises where the coin-operated amusement
device is to be operated.
D. Fee that is paid and the effective date of the application, which shall be
from whatever date the applicant starts the business of that year until
December 31 of the same year.
E. Number of coin-operated amusement devices to be licensed.
§ 63-2 (RESERVED) § 63-6
58:111
coin-operated amusement device is installed after July 1 of any year and
application is made after that date, then the license fee of such device for
that year shall be as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Commissioners. A license shall not be transferable from one application
to another. A new owner, proprietor or operator shall secure a new license
and shall pay the fee herein required. A new or different license shall not be
required when one such device is replaced by another such device as long
as the total number of such devices on the premises remain the same.
§ 63-7. Restrictions. [Amended 5-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-05]
§ 63-8. Inspections.
The Township Police Department, Township Zoning Officer and the
Township Manager, or their duly authorized representatives, shall make
periodic inspection of all premises where coin-operated amusement devices
are licensed, operated, maintained, placed or used.
§ 63-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No.
97-16]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of no less than $100 and not more than
$600, and the costs of the action. In default of payment of such fine and
A. No coin-operated amusement device whether operable or inoperable
shall remain upon any premises unless the license fee provided for in
§ 63-6 shall have been paid.
B. No minor (under the age of 18 years), unless accompanied by a parent,
guardian or responsible adult, shall operate or play a coin-operated
amusement device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
C. Coin-operated amusement devices may dispense prizes or other
awards, credits, or tickets redeemable for prizes or other awards,
subject to the restrictions contained herein. Coin-operated amusement
devices may award the player extended or additional game play. Prizes
or other awards, credits, or tickets redeemable for prizes or other
awards, with a wholesale value not to exceed $10 per play of a coinoperated
amusement device, may be offered or given by any person.
The player of a coin-operated amusement device may aggregate the
credits or tickets won from multiple plays of a coin-operated
amusement device and redeem them for prizes or other awards. Prizes
awarded by a coin-operated amusement device, and prizes awarded
upon the redemption of credits or tickets dispensed by a coin-operated
amusement device, may not include tobacco products, alcoholic
beverages, cash, or cash equivalents (other than prepared food
products or nonalcoholic beverages sold on the premises on which the
coin-operated amusement device is located). No person shall permit
any coin-operated amusement device to be used for any gambling
purpose.
§ 63-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 63-9
58:112
costs, such person shall undergo imprisonment for a period not to exceed
30 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
Chapter 65
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise control — See Ch. 147.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. .151.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 65-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context in which the word
is used clearly indicates otherwise:
ANIMAL — Any dog, cat, domesticated animal or nondomesticated animal.
CAREGIVER — Any person who provides care, including food, water,
shelter, and, in some cases, medical care to feral cats, and in accordance
with a program approved by the Township to trap, neuter, vaccinate, eartip,
and return feral cats to the location at which they were trapped.
FERAL CAT — An unowned free-roaming cat that is partially socialized or
unsocialized to humans and tends to resist contact with humans.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is self-propelled, except one which is
propelled solely by human power or electric power obtained by overhead
trolley wires, but not operated upon rails.
NUISANCE — An animal shall be considered a nuisance if it habitually
trespasses upon or damages either private or public property or annoys or
harms lawful users or occupants thereof.
OWNER — Any person having a right of property in, having custody of or
who harbors or permits a dog, cat, domestic animal or any nondomesticated
animal to remain on or around his or her property, excluding feral cat
caregivers as defined herein.
PERSON — A natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
POLICE OFFICER — Any person employed by the Township whose duty it
is to preserve peace or to make arrests or to enforce the law, including
auxiliary policemen.
RUNNING AT LARGE — Being upon any public highway, street, alley, park
or any other public land or upon property of another person other than the
owner and not being firmly secured by means of a collar and chain or other
§ 63-9 (RESERVED) § 65-1
58:113
device so that it cannot stray or not being accompanied by or under the
reasonable contact of some person.
SPONSOR — An eligible animal welfare organization appointed by the
Township to run a TNR program in the Township.
STRAY CAT — Any cat whose owner or keeper from time to time allows the
cat to run free off of the property of the owner or keeper.
TOWNSHIP — Lower Allen Township.
TRAP, NEUTER AND RETURN (TNR) — A nonlethal approach to feral
cat population control where feral cats are humanely trapped, sterilized,
vaccinated, ear-tipped, and then returned to the location where they were
originally trapped.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or driven upon any highway, street, road or alley, except
devices used exclusively upon rails or tracks.
§ 65-2. Disturbing or loud noise.
No person shall allow any animal confined on that person's premises to
make any loud or harsh noise or disturbance which shall interfere with or
deprive the peace, quiet, rest or sleep of any person within the Township.
§ 65-3. Unsanitary nuisance; exemptions.
§ 65-4. Running at large.
A. No person shall allow any animal owned by him or under his control to
defecate on any sidewalk, walkway or the property of another without
immediately cleaning it up.
B. Any vision- or mobility-impaired person who relies upon a dog
specifically trained for such purposes shall be exempt from compliance
with this section.
A. No person shall permit any animal owned by him or under his
supervision or control to run at large at any time upon the public
streets, alleys, highways, or public grounds of the Township or upon the
private property of any other person or upon any property other than
property belonging to the owner of such animal or to a person under
whose supervision or control such animal is being kept. An animal must
be firmly secured by means of a collar and chain or other device so that
it cannot stray or must be accompanied by or under the reasonable
control of some person.
B. Any police officer or law enforcement officer is hereby authorized and
empowered to seize and detain any animal which is found running at
large in the Township, or upon any property other than the property of
the owner of such animal, and unaccompanied by the owner when such
§ 65-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 65-4
58:114
§ 65-5. Impounding.
Any police officer or law enforcement officer of the Township is hereby
authorized to seize and detain any animal running at large in violation of
§ 65-4 or any animal concerning which information has been received that
such animal has been running at large. Any animal so seized shall be held
by the Township for 48 hours. Immediate notice of such seizure, either
personally or by certified mail or e-mail, with return receipt requested, shall
be given to the person in whose name the license, if any, was issued, or
his agent, to claim such animal within 48 hours after receipt hereof. In the
event that the animal does not bear a proper license tag, immediate notice,
either personally or by certified mail or e-mail, return receipt requested,
shall be given to the person, or his agent, known to be the owner of such
animal. The owner or claimant of an animal so detained shall pay a penalty
of $50 to the Township, together with a charge as set forth from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners, per day for room and board or
the daily charge of the shelter where the animal is kept, whichever amount
is greater. No animal shall be returned to the owner or claimant until said
penalty and expense or charges shall have been paid.
§ 65-6. Disposition of any unclaimed animal.
If, after 48 hours of such notice, as set forth in § 65-5, such animal has
not been claimed, the police officer or law enforcement officer shall convey
such animal to a shelter, animal rescue, or foster care. No licensed animal
shall be adopted, sold or otherwise disposed of unless such licensed animal
remains unclaimed five days after notification, evidenced by obtaining the
return receipt if notified by certified mail or e-mail. Where the owner
or agent of an unlicensed animal is not known, the police officer or law
enforcement officer shall convey such animal to a shelter, animal rescue,
or foster care. No animal shall be sold for the purpose of vivisection or
research or be conveyed in any manner for these purposes.
§ 65-7. Transportation of animals.
No person other than a person actually working a dog or other animal for
agricultural purposes shall transport or carry on any public highway, street,
road or alley such dog or other animal, unless such dog or other animal is
safely enclosed within the motor vehicle or protected by a container, cage,
police officer or law enforcement officer is in immediate pursuit of such
animal.
C. The provisions of this section shall apply to all animals found running at
large in violation of this section, irrespective of payment for or issuance
of any license in respect to the animal involved.
D. The Board of Commissioners is hereby empowered and authorized to
engage the services of a qualified and suitable person to enforce the
provisions of this section.
§ 65-4 (RESERVED) § 65-7
58:115
cross tether or other device to prevent the dog or other animal from falling
from, being thrown from or out of or jumping from said motor vehicle.
§ 65-8. Unattended animal.
No person shall leave a dog or other animal in any unattended motor vehicle
without adequate ventilation, sanitary conditions or in such a manner as to
subject the dog or other animal to extreme temperature which adversely
affects the health or safety of the dog or other animal.
§ 65-9. Responsibilities of cat owners regarding stray cats.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any cat to permit such cat to run free
outside the residence of its owner or keeper unless said cat has been:
§ 65-10. Feeding of stray or feral cats.
It shall be unlawful for any person to continue to feed stray or feral cats,
where such feeding causes a nuisance to neighbors or creates a condition
contrary to the health, safety and welfare of the community, unless that
person participates in a trap, neuter and return program managed by the
Township or a sponsor of the Township.
§ 65-11. Responsibilities of TNR program sponsors.
Animal welfare organizations may make application to the Township to
serve as the sponsor of a TNR program. Sponsors appointed by the
Township shall have the following responsibilities:
A. Neutered or spayed to prevent it from procreating;
B. Immunized against rabies in compliance with Pennsylvania law; and
C. Appropriately "tipped" on the left ear to signify that it has been
neutered/spayed and immunized.
A. Register each feral cat colony they are managing with the Township.
Information submitted to the Township shall include general location
(neighborhood), number of cats in the colony, and number of caretakers
working with the colony.
B. Record and report to the Township, on an annual basis, the intake and
disposition of each feral cat brought to their facility.
C. Record and report to the Township, on an annual basis, the total
number of members and the number of sterilized members of each feral
cat colony within the Township for which they have implemented a TNR
program.
D. Record and report to the Township, on an annual basis, the number of
kittens born into each feral cat colony within the Township for which
they have implemented a TNR program.
§ 65-7 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 65-11
58:116
§ 65-12. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 70
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 61.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 73.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 100.
Fire suppression equipment — See Ch. 106.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 110.
Key lock boxes — See Ch. 126.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 162.
Sewers — See Ch. 175.
§ 70-1. Intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the general health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Township and to conform to the requirements
of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act (PCCA) and regulations to the
PCCA promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry.
§ 70-2. Election to administer and enforce.
The Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of the
PCCA, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, as amended
from time to time, and its regulations.
E. Address complaints received by the Township and passed along to the
sponsor regarding caretaker behavior, and serve as an intermediary to
address and, where possible, remediate the behavior within a
reasonable period of time, based on the matters at issue and utilizing
Township resources where necessary.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be charged
with a summary offense and shall be fined not less than $100 nor more
than $500 and all costs of prosecution for the first offense or be
imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both.
B. For any subsequent offense that occurs within one year of sentencing
for the prior violation, a person shall be charged with a misdemeanor of
the third degree and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $500
nor more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, or to imprisonment of
not more than one year, or both.
C. Each day there is a violation may count as a separate violation.
§ 65-11 (RESERVED) § 70-3
58:117
§ 70-3. Adoption of code standards.
The Uniform Construction Code (UCC), contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401 through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of the
Township.
§ 70-4. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the PCCA and UCC within the Township
shall be undertaken by the designation of an employee of the Township to
serve as the municipal Building Code Official (BCO) to act on behalf of the
Township. The BCO may delegate duties to construction code officials and
current code administrators, either employed by the Township or retained
by the Township through contracts with qualified individuals and/or third
party agencies.
§ 70-5. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners of Lower Allen Township in conformity with the
requirements of the relevant provisions of the UCC, as amended from time
to time, and for the purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement
and administration is undertaken jointly with one or more other
municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall be established by joint action of
the participating municipalities.
§ 70-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Township for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the UCC shall be established by
the governing body by resolution from time to time.
§ 70-7. Revisions to UCC standards.
Pursuant to UCC Section 403.102. (l), the following regulations are hereby
enacted to facilitate municipal administration and enforcement of the UCC,
including insertion of local climatic and geographic information.
A. The text of the 2003 International Building Code, adopted as a
referenced standard by the UCC, is hereby amended as follows:
(1) Section 1612.3 is amended to insert "Lower Allen Township," and,
"September 30, 1977."
(2) Section 1805.2.1.1 shall be deleted and replaced with the following
text:
1805.2.1.1 Frost Protection. Extending below the frost line of
Lower Allen Township, which shall extend a minimum of 36 inches
in depth, measured from the bottom of the footing to the surface.
§ 70-3 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 70-7
58:118
(3) Section 3410.2 shall be amended by inserting "November 20,
1964," as the date that building codes first became effective in
Lower Allen Township.
B. The text of the 2003 International Residential Code for One and Two
Family Dwellings, adopted as a referenced standard by the UCC, is
hereby revised as follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, is amended to insert "Lower Allen Township."
(2) Section 103 is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
103.1 Enforcement agency. The Department of Community
Development shall be charged with the task of administering this
Code. The executive official in charge thereof shall be known as
the "Building Official." The Board of Commissioners shall appoint
the Building Official and his deputies.
(3) Table R301.2(1) is amended to insert the appropriate climatic and
geographic design criteria, as follows:
Ground snow load = 25 psf.
Wind speed = 90 mph.
Seismic design category = B.
Weathering of concrete probability = severe.
Frost line depth = 36 inches.
Termite probability = moderate to heavy.
Decay probability = slight to moderate.
Winter design temperature = 10º F.
Ice shield underlayment required = yes.
Flood hazards = Consult 9-30-77 FIRM and FBFM.
Air freezing index = 784.
Mean annual temperature = 53.1º F.
(4) Section P2603.6.1 shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
P2603.6.2 Sewer depth. Building sewers shall be a minimum of
36 inches below grade.
(5) Section P3103.1 shall be amended by inserting "12" as the number
of inches that a vent pipe shall extend above a roof through which it
penetrates, and also inserting "12" as the number of inches that a
roof-penetrating vent pipe shall extend above anticipated snow
accumulation.
C. The text of the 2003 International Plumbing Code, adopted as a
referenced standard by the UCC, is hereby amended as follows:
§ 70-7 (RESERVED) § 70-7
58:119
(1) Section 101.1, Title, is amended to insert "Lower Allen Township."
(2) Section 103 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
103.1 Enforcement agency. The Department of Community
Development shall be charged with the task of administering and
enforcing this Code. The executive official in charge thereof shall
be known as the "Code Official." The Board of Commissioners shall
appoint the Code Official and his deputies.
(3) Section 106.6.2 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with
the following:
106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all plumbing work shall be
indicated on a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
(4) Section 106.6.3 is amended by inserting "50" into the relevant
space for item No. 2 and "90" into the relevant space for item No. 3
as the maximum percentages for refunds of fees.
(5) Section 108.4, Violation penalties, shall be amended by inserting
"summary offense" and "1,000" in the appropriate spaces, and by
deleting "...or by imprisonment not exceeding (NUMBER OF
DAYS), or both such fine and imprisonment."
(6) Section 108.5, Stop work orders, shall be amended as follows:
"...condition, shall be liable to pay a fine of not more than $1,000."
(7) Section 305.6.1 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with
the following:
305.6.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 36
inches below grade.
(8) Section 904.1 shall be amended by inserting "12" as the number of
inches that a vent pipe must extend beyond a roof through which it
penetrates.
D. The text of the 2003 International Code Council Electrical Code,
adopted as a referenced standard by the UCC, is hereby amended as
follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, is amended to insert "Lower Allen Township."
(2) Section 301 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
§ 70-7 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 70-7
58:120
303.1 Enforcement agency. The Department of Community
Development shall be charged with the task of administering and
enforcing this Code. The executive official in charge thereof shall
be known as the "Code Official." The Board of Commissioners shall
appoint the Code Official and his deputies.
(3) Section 404.2 is amended by replacing the last sentence of this
section with "The fees for electrical work shall be as indicated on a
fee schedule, adopted by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners."
E. The text of the 2003 International Mechanical Code, adopted as a
referenced standard by the UCC, is hereby amended as follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, shall be amended by inserting "Lower Allen
Township" in the relevant space.
(2) Section 103 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
103.1 Enforcement agency. The Department of Community
Development shall be charged with the task of administering and
enforcing this Code. The executive official in charge thereof shall
be known as the "Code Official." The Board of Commissioners shall
appoint the Code Official and his deputies.
(3) Section 106.5.2, Fee schedule, shall be deleted and replaced by
"The fees for mechanical work shall be as indicated on a fee
schedule, adopted by resolution of the Board of Commissioners."
(4) Section 106.5.3 is amended by inserting "50" into the relevant
space for item 2 and "90" into the relevant space for item No. 3.
(5) Section 108.4, Violation penalties, shall be amended by inserting
"summary offense" and "1,000" in the appropriate spaces, and by
deleting "...or by imprisonment not exceeding (NUMBER OF
DAYS), or both such fine and imprisonment."
(6) Section 108.5, Stop work orders, shall be amended as follows:
"...condition, shall be liable to pay a fine of not more than $1,000."
F. The text of the 2009 International Fire Code, adopted as a referenced
standard by the UCC, is amended as follows: [Amended 5-26-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-02]
(1) Section 101.1, Title, is amended by inserting "Lower Allen
Township."
(2) Section 103 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
103.1 Enforcement agency. The Department of Community
Development shall be charged with the task of administering and
§ 70-7 (RESERVED) § 70-7
58:121
enforcing this Code. The executive official in charge thereof shall
be known as the "Code Official." The Board of Commissioners shall
appoint the Code Official and his deputies.
(3) Section 109.3, Violation penalties, is amended by inserting
"summary offense" at [SPECIFY OFFENSE], "$1,000" at
[AMOUNT] and "10" at [NUMBER OF DAYS].
(4) Section 111.4, Failure to comply, is amended as follows: "condition,
shall be liable to a fine of not more than $1,000."
(5) Section 113.2, Schedule of permit fees, is amended as follows: ". .
.schedule as established by a resolution of the Board of
Commissioners."
(6) Section 3404.2.9.6.1, Locations where above-ground tanks are
prohibited, is deleted in its entirety and replaced with a new
Section 3404.2.9.6.1, Locations where aboveground storage tanks
are prohibited, as follows: "Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in
aboveground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within any
zoning district depicted on the Zoning Map of Lower Allen
Township except the C-2, I-1 and I-3 Districts."
(7) Section 3406.2.4.4, Locations where above-ground tanks are
prohibited, is deleted in its entirety and replaced with a new
Section 3406.2.4.4, Locations where aboveground storage tanks
are prohibited, as follows: "Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in
aboveground tanks is prohibited within any zoning district depicted
on the Zoning Map of Lower Allen Township except the C-2, I-1 and
I-3 Districts."
(8) Section 3506.2, Limitations, is deleted in its entirety and replaced
with a new Section 3506.2, Limitations, as follows: "Storage of
flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited
within any zoning district depicted on the Zoning Map of Lower
Allen Township except the C-2, I-1 and I-3 Districts."
(9) Section 3804.2, Maximum capacity within established limits, is
deleted in its entirety and replaced with a new Section 3804.2,
Maximum capacity within established limits, as follows: "The
geographic limits in which the aggregate capacity of any one
installation of liquefied petroleum gas shall not exceed a water
capacity of 2,000 gallons (7570 L) for the protection of heavily
populated or congested areas cannot be established by Lower Allen
Township because the Propane and Liquefied Petroleum Gas Act
(35 P.S. §§ 1329.1 through 1329.19) does not permit municipalities
to prohibit or regulate storage of these materials."
G. The text of the 2003 International Energy Conservation Code, adopted
as a referenced standard by the UCC, is hereby amended as follows:
§ 70-7 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 70-7
58:122
(1) Section 101.1, Title, shall be amended by inserting "Lower Allen
Township" in the relevant space.
H. The text of the 2003 International Existing Building Code, adopted as a
referenced standard by the UCC, is hereby amended as follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, shall be amended by inserting "Lower Allen
Township" in the relevant space.
(2) Section 1201.2 is amended by inserting "November 20, 1964," as
the date that building codes first became effective in Lower Allen
Township.
I. The text of the 2003 International Fuel Gas Code, adopted as a
referenced standard by the UCC, is hereby amended as follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, shall be amended by inserting "Lower Allen
Township" in the relevant space.
(2) Section 103 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
103.1 Enforcement agency. The Department of Community
Development shall be charged with the task of administering and
enforcing this Code. The executive official in charge thereof shall
be known as the "Code Official." The Board of Commissioners shall
appoint the Code Official and his deputies.
(3) Section 106.5.2, Fee schedule, shall be deleted and replaced by
"The fees for work regulated by this Code shall be as indicated on a
fee schedule, adopted by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners."
(4) Section 106.5.3 is amended by inserting "50" into the relevant
space for item No. 2 and "90" into the relevant space for item No.
3.
(5) Section 108.4, Violation penalties, shall be amended by inserting
"summary offense" and "1,000" in the appropriate spaces, and by
deleting "...or by imprisonment not exceeding (NUMBER OF
DAYS), or both such fine and imprisonment."
(6) Section 108.5, Stop work orders, shall be amended as follows:
"...condition, shall be liable to pay a fine of not more than $1,000."
J. The text of the 2003 International Urban-Wildland Interface Code,
adopted as a referenced standard by the UCC, is hereby amended as
follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, shall be amended by inserting "Lower Allen
Township" in the relevant space.
§ 70-7 (RESERVED) § 70-7
58:123
§ 70-8. Municipal enactment of stricter standards than required by
the UCC. [Added 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-03]
Pursuant to PCCA Section 503. (c), as amended by Act 92 of 2004, the
following regulations are hereby enacted to provide for municipal
regulations that are more stringent than standards contained in the UCC
administrative and enforcement regulations.
K. The text of the 2003 International Code Council Performance Code,
adopted as a referenced standard by the UCC, is hereby amended as
follows:
(1) Add the following new section after Section 101.1, Purpose:
Section 101.1.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the
"Performance Code of Lower Allen Township," hereinafter referred
to as "this Code."
A. The exclusion from UCC application to carports, detached private
garages, greenhouses and sheds that are accessory to a detached onefamily
dwelling, and having a building area less than 1,000 square feet,
contained in UCC Section 403.1 (b) (3), is hereby amended to exclude
these same structures when the building area is less than 200 square
feet, provided that these same structures are not equipped with
nonportable heating or cooling equipment or electric, water or sewer
service.
B. The exclusion from UCC application to alterations to residential
buildings which do not make structural changes or changes to means of
egress, contained in Section 104 (B) (5) of Act 92 of 2004, is hereby
deleted. Permit exclusions stated in Section R 105.2 of the IRC, 2003
Edition, shall apply.
C. The exclusion from UCC application to repairs to residential buildings,
contained in Section 104 (B) (6) of Act 92 of 2004, is hereby deleted.
Permit exclusions stated in Section R 105.2 of the IRC, 2003 Edition,
shall apply.
D. The exemption from UCC application to installation of residential decks
contained in UCC Section 403.62 (c) (xvii) is hereby amended to read
"Installation of a detached, uncovered deck where the entire floor level
of the deck is not more than 30 inches above grade."46
46.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E, regarding amendments to the text of the 2003
International Fire Code, was repealed 5-26-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02. See now also Ch.
103, Fire Prevention.
§ 70-7 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 70-8
58:124
Chapter 73
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
192.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 73-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any structure used or intended to be used as a dwelling or
place of business or industry.
§ 73-2. Owner's responsibility.
Every owner of every building in the township shall cause the same to be
numbered as assigned by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 73-3. Notice; compliance required.
The Township Secretary shall send to the owner of every building to which
a number has been assigned notice of such number, directing that such
number be affixed to such building or elsewhere upon the property in the
manner prescribed by this article within 15 days of such notice. Every
property owner who fails to comply with such notice, within the time stated
therein, shall be guilty of a violation of this article.
§ 73-4. Posting of numbers.
Numbers as assigned to buildings in the township according to the
provisions of this article shall be affixed to or painted upon or carved upon
such building or upon a standard base or support between such building
and street. Each number shall be of such height, color and material as to be
visible from the street and shall be constantly maintained in complete and
legible form. However in the case of buildings occupied by other than the
owner thereof, the occupant, as well as the owner shall be responsible for
maintaining numbers upon such buildings as hereby required.
§ 73-5. Numbering of proposed buildings.
Hereafter whenever a building is erected in the township, the owner thereof
shall forthwith apply to the Board of Commissioners for the official number
thereof. The number assigned to such building shall, within 15 days after
notice of such assignment, in writing, by the Township Secretary to the
owner, be affixed in the manner required by this article in the case of
§ 70-8 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 73-5
73:125
existing buildings and shall thereafter be maintained as hereby required for
the numbers of existing buildings.
§ 73-6. Violations and penalties.47
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$100 and not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, shall be imprisoned for not more than 30
days. Each week's continuance of a violation of this chapter shall constitute
a separate offense.
Chapter 76
(RESERVED)
Chapter 80
CONTRACTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 70.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 94.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 159.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 162.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 73-5 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 73-6
76:126
ARTICLE I
Verification of Workers’ Compensation Insurance
[Adopted 6-29-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-1248]
§ 80-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Lower Allen Township
Contractors' Workers' Compensation Insurance Verification Ordinance."
§ 80-2. Definitions; word usage.
A. The following words, terms and phrases as used in this article shall
have the meanings given herein except where the context in which the
word or phrase is used clearly indicates otherwise. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular include the
plural, words used in the plural include the singular, and words used in
the present tense include the future. The word "shall" is mandatory.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT — An agreement, whether oral or
written, to perform work on real property located in whole or in part in
this Township.
CONTRACTOR — A person authorized or engaged by an owner to
improve real property or who is responsible for all means, methods,
techniques, sequences and procedures and for coordinating all or any
portions of the improvement of real property, pursuant to a building
permit authorized by the Pennsylvania Construction Code49 as
administered by Lower Allen Township.
IMPROVE — To erect, construct, reconstruct, design, effect, alter,
provide professional or skilled services, repair, remodel or demolish
any improvement upon, connected with, in or beneath the surface
of any real property, to excavate, clear, grade, fill or landscape any
real property, to construct driveways and private roadways, curbs and
sidewalks, to furnish materials, including trees and shrubbery, for any
of these purposes, or to perform any labor, services or work upon
improvements, pursuant to a building permit authorized by the
Pennsylvania Construction Code as administered by Lower Allen
Township.
IMPROVEMENT — Includes:
(1) All or any part of a building or structure.
48.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 80, Registration of Contractors,
adopted 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 96-9 (Art. 315 of the 1985 Code of Ordinances), as
amended.
49.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
§ 80-1 (RESERVED) § 80-2
76:127
§ 80-3. Verification required.
No building permit will be issued with respect to any improvements until
the contractor has first verified workers' compensation insurance with the
township. Verification is also required for subcontractors under the
supervision of the general contractor.
§ 80-4. Application.
Application for verification shall be made, in writing, and in the form
prescribed by the Board of Commissioners and shall contain the following:
(2) The erection, construction, reconstruction, effect, alteration,
repair, remodeling, demolition, excavation, clearing, grading or
filling of real property.
(3) Installation, reinstallation, alteration, repair or removal of building
equipment or systems, including but not limited to plumbing,
heating or air conditioning.
OWNER — A person who has an interest in real property that
is improved and who ordered the improvement to be made. The
term includes successors in interest of the owner and agents of the
owner acting with his or her authority.
PERSON — A corporation, partnership, business interest or other
association, estate, trust or foundation, or a natural person.
REAL PROPERTY — Real estate that is improved, including land,
leasehold, tenements and hereditaments and improvements placed
thereon.
TOWNSHIP — Lower Allen Township, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The Manager appointed by the Board of
Commissioners of the Township.
A. Name of contractor.
B. Business address of contractor.
C. Business telephone number of contractor.
D. Type of work of contractor.
E. Federal or state employer identification number.
F. If a corporation, the name, address, and business telephone number of
each officer.
G. If a partnership, the name, address, and business telephone number of
each partner.
§ 80-2 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 80-4
76:128
§ 80-5. Verification fee; term; renewal.
Every contractor shall pay an annual verification fee of such amount as shall
be established by resolution of the Board of Commissioners from time to
time. Verification is valid for only one year, from January 1 to December 31,
and shall be renewed each calendar year.
§ 80-6. Administration.
This article shall be administered by the Township Manager or his designee,
who shall collect the verification fee and maintain records with respect to
verification.
§ 80-7. Stop-work orders; violations and penalties.
§ 80-8. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to conflict with Act 132 of 2008,
the Home Improvement Consumer Protection Act.50
H. Proof of workers' compensation insurance or an affidavit that the
contractor does not employ individuals and is not required to carry
workers' compensation insurance.
A. A stop-work order shall be issued to any contractor who violates any of
the provisions of this article. The stop-work order shall remain in effect
until the contractor has complied with the provisions of this article.
B. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction before a District Justice, pay a fine or have judgment entered
against such person of not less than $100 and not more than $600 and,
in default of payment of said fine, be imprisoned in the Cumberland
County Prison for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day's violation of
any provision of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
50.Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 517.1 et seq.
§ 80-4 (RESERVED) § 80-8
76:129
Chapter 83
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 63. Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 87.
§ 83-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context in which the word
is used clearly indicates otherwise:
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business carried on for
a profit or any place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is
invited.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
OFFICIAL TOWNSHIP TIME — Eastern standard time except during those
months when Eastern daylight saving time is observed in the Township of
Lower Allen.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment, and whenever used
in any clause prescribing a penalty, the term operator as applied to
associations or partnerships includes the members or partners thereof and
as applied to corporations, includes the officers thereof.
PARENT — Any natural parent, guardian or other person having the legal
care or custody of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground,
wharf, dock, public building or vacant lot.
REMAIN — To loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon.
§ 83-2. Hours specified and defenses. [Amended 10-10-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-7]
A. No minor shall be or remain in or upon any public place or any
establishment between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following days,
except as hereinafter set forth in Subsection B.
B. It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection A that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by a minor's parent or guardian.
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop.
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel.
§ 80-8 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 83-2
83:130
§ 83-3. Compliance by minor.
No minor shall remain in or upon any public place or any establishment
during the time prohibited in § 83-2, except as therein provided.
§ 83-4. Compliance by parent.
No parent shall allow or permit any minor to remain in or upon any public
place or any establishment during the time prohibited in § 83-2, except as
therein provided.
§ 83-5. Compliance by establishment.
No operator of an establishment or the servants, agents or employees of
such operator shall allow or permit any minor to be or to remain in or upon
the premises of such establishment during the time prohibited in § 83-2,
except as therein provided.
§ 83-6. Applicability of Juvenile Act of 1972.
To the extent applicable, and notwithstanding any provision herein to the
contrary, the Juvenile Act of 1972,51 and all amendments thereto shall be
followed in the application of this chapter.
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop.
(5) Involved in an emergency.
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain
to the police department about the minor's presence.
(7) Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the West Shore School
District, Township of Lower Allen, a civic organization or other
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor or going to or
returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the West Shore School District, the Township of
Lower Allen, a civic organization or another similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor.
(8) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority
removed in accordance with law.
C. It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection A that the owner,
operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police
department that a minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
51.Editor's Note: See 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 6301 et seq.
§ 83-2 CURFEW § 83-7
83:131
§ 83-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 87
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 63. Curfew — See Ch. 83.
§ 87-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. Any minor who violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined $10
for the first offense, $20 for the second offense, $50 for the third
offense, $100 for the fourth offense, and $300 for the fifth offense, and
each offense thereafter, and costs of suit, and, in default of the payment
of such fine and costs, shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.52
B. Any parent who violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined $10
for the first offense, $20 for the second offense, $50 for the third
offense, $100 for the fourth offense, and $300 for the fifth offense and
each offense thereafter, and costs of suit, and, in default of the payment
of such fine and costs, shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.53
C. Any operator of an establishment and any agent, servant or employee of
such operator violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not
less than $100 nor more than $600 and costs of suit and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for not more than 30
days.54
D. Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases or words
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context in which the word is used clearly indicates otherwise:
OBSTRUCT — To render impassable without unreasonable
inconvenience or hazard.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm,
organization or corporation.
PUBLIC — Affecting or likely to affect persons in a place to which the
public or a substantial group has access not limited to but including
highways, alleys, thoroughfares, sidewalks, parks, transport facilities,
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 83-7 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 87-1
87:132
§ 87-2. Disorderly practices.55
A person is guilty of disorderly practice if in a public place with purpose
to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a
risk thereof, he:
§ 87-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less
than $25 and not more than $300 and costs of prosecution or, in default of
the payment of such fines and costs, shall be imprisoned not more than 30
days.
Chapter 90
schools, apartment houses, places of business or amusement or any
neighborhood.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Lower Allen, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania.
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
A. Engages in fighting or threatening or in violent or tumultuous behavior.
B. Makes unreasonable noise or offensively coarse utterance, gesture or
display or addresses abusive language to any person present.
C. Creates a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act which
serves no legitimate purpose of the actor.
D. Appears in any public place manifestly under the influence of alcohol,
narcotics or other drug, not therapeutically administered, to the degree
that he may endanger himself or other persons or property, or annoy
persons in his vicinity.
E. Having no legal privilege to do so, purposely or recklessly obstructs any
highway, street, alley, thoroughfare, sidewalk or public ground of the
township, whether alone or with others, except that no person shall be
guilty of violating this subsection solely because of a gathering of
persons to hear him speak or otherwise communicate, or solely because
of being a member of such a gathering.
F. Refuses to obey a reasonable official request or order to move:
(1) To prevent obstruction of a highway, street, alley, thoroughfare,
sidewalk or other public passage.
(2) To maintain public safety by dispersing those gathered in
dangerous proximity to a fire or other hazard.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 87-1 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 87-3
90:133
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 90-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings hereby ascribed thereto, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ADVERTISEMENT — Any representation, disseminated in any manner or by
any means other than by labeling.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — A drug, substance or immediate precursor
as defined in the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act of
1972, April 14, P.L. 233, 35 P.S. § 780-101 et seq., as amended from time to
time.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA — All equipment, products and materials of any
kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use, in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body
a controlled substance in violation of the Controlled Substance, Drug,
Device, and Cosmetic Act of 1972, April 14, P. L. 233, 35 P.S. § 780-101 et
seq., as amended from time to time. It includes, but is not limited to:
Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is
a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be
derived.
A.
Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances.
B.
Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance.
C.
Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances.
D.
Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances.
E.
Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for
use in cutting controlled substances.
F.
Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use
in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana.
G.
§ 87-3 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 90-1
90:134
PERSON — Individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership or association, or any other legal entity.
PRACTITIONER — Includes:
Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended
for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances.
H.
Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for
use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances.
I.
Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use
in storing or concealing controlled substances.
J.
Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use
or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body.
K.
Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling
or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into
the human body, such as:
Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with
or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctured metal bowls.
(1)
(2) Water pipes.
(3) Carburetion tubes and devices.
(4) Smoking and carburetion masks.
Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such
as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to
be held in the hand.
(5)
(6) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
(7) Chamber pipes.
(8) Carburetor pipes.
(9) Electric pipes.
(10)Air-driven pipes.
(11)Chillums.
(12)Bongs.
(13) Ice pipes or chillers.
L.
A physician, osteopath, dentist, veterinarian, pharmacist, podiatrist,
nurse, scientific investigator or other person licensed, registered or
otherwise permitted to distribute, dispense, conduct research with
A.
§ 90-1 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 90-1
90:135
§ 90-2. Conduct prohibited.
§ 90-3. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to practitioners as defined in this chapter
who have complied with the provisions of the Controlled Substance, Drug,
Device and Cosmetic Act of 1972, April 14, P.L. 233, 35 P.S. § 780-101 et
seq., as amended from time to time.
§ 90-4. Violations and penalties.56
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable, upon
summary conviction for a first offense and upon summary conviction for
each subsequent offense, to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $600,
together with costs of prosecution, in each case. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be punishable as
such. Fines and costs imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall
be enforceable and recoverable in the manner and at the time provided by
applicable law. Upon refusal of any person convicted of a violation of this
chapter to pay such fine and costs, such person shall be imprisoned for a
period not exceeding 30 days.
respect to or to administer a controlled substance or other drug or
device in the course of professional practice or research in the
commonwealth.
A pharmacy, hospital, clinic or other institution licensed, registered
or otherwise permitted to distribute, dispense, conduct research with
respect to or to administer a controlled substance, other drug or device
in the course of professional practice or research in the commonwealth.
B.
A. No person shall offer to sell, or deliver, by sale or gift, or manufacture
with intent to deliver, by sale or gift, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or
under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be
used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise
introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of
this chapter.
B. No person shall place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other
publication any advertisement, knowing or under circumstances where
one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in
whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended
for use as drug paraphernalia.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 90-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 90-4
90:136
Chapter 94
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
Chapter 98
FILLING AND EXCAVATING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 70.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 187.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
192.
§ 98-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CODE OFFICIAL — The Code Official of Lower Allen Township, or other
person designated by the Board of Commissioners to perform the function
of Code Official as herein provided.
CONTRACTOR — Any person engaging in the business or act of excavating
or filling.
EXCAVATION — The butting, grading, digging or removal of earth or
natural materials in such manner as to change the natural or existing
terrain.
FILL — The placing, carrying or depositing of earth or natural materials in
such manner as to change the natural or existing terrain.
GRADING PLAN — A plan showing the existing contours at two-foot
intervals of the area involved and the proposed final contours for grade.
OWNER — Any person who owns land, or any interest therein, sufficient to
permit excavation or fill thereon.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association or corporation.
§ 98-2. Permit for excavation or fill; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or permit to be made any
excavation or fill in the township except in accordance with a permit issued
as specified herein; provided, however, that no permit shall be required to
fill or excavate:
A. By the federal government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
political subdivision thereof.
B. Where less than 10 cubic yards of earth or material are moved and no
drainage is involved.
§ 90-4 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 98-2
94:137
§ 98-3. Application for permit.
An application for a permit to excavate or fill shall be made in duplicate by
the contractor and owner, in writing, on forms furnished by the Township,
filed with the Code Official, who shall forthwith deliver one copy to the
Township Manager. Said application shall set forth the following
information:
§ 98-4. Schedule of fees.
At the time of filing the application for a permit to excavate or fill, the
applicant shall pay a filing fee as set by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners, which fee schedule shall be posted for public inspection in
the office of the Code Official and shall be based on costs.
C. Where excavation or fill for a building site is being done for the purpose
of immediate construction of a building or improvement thereon for
which a building permit has been issued or excavation or fill
accomplished under an approved subdivision or development plan for
which a building permit has been issued, if, in the opinion of the Code
Official evidenced, in writing, on such building permit, no hazard to
property rights of the township or adjoining land owners will be
encountered or created by such excavation or fill.
D. Trenching for utilities covered by other township ordinances.
A. The name, identity, address and telephone number of the owner.
B. The name, identity, address and telephone number of the contractor.
C. The description, location of the property involved and grading plan
shall be furnished, when requested by the Code Official.
D. A statement of the exact nature of the proposed excavation or fill,
indicating the slope of the sides and the level of the finished surface, the
type of earth or material to be moved, the method, manner and
equipment to be used in the work and the disposition of material at the
site.
E. Proposed time of commencement and completion of the work.
F. An agreement that if the excavation of fill is not completed in
accordance with the plans and specifications therefor and the permit
issued therefor, then the work may be completed by the township, the
cost thereof to be paid by the owner. Failure to execute such agreement
shall not constitute a waiver of this provision.
G. An agreement to indemnify and save harmless Lower Allen Township
and its agents from all liabilities, costs and expenses which may result
from, or be a consequence of, the granting of such permit. Failure to
execute such agreement shall not constitute a waiver of this provision.
§ 98-2 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 98-5
98:138
§ 98-5. Additional costs in special cases.
When, in the opinion of the Code Official, the proper investigation of an
application for a permit to excavate or fill will require the services of
an engineer for technical help and advise, the Code Official may consult
with such engineer and required him to make inspections of the work in
progress. In such cases, prior to the issuance of the permit, the Code Official
shall notify the applicant of the necessity for engineering inspection, and
the applicant shall pay, prior to commencing work, reasonable engineering
fees at current rates, to be determined in advance of the issuance of the
permit, and the amount thereof shall be deposited with the township.
§ 98-6. Investigation of application.
Within 10 days after the filing of the application for a permit to excavate
or fill, the Code Official shall cause an investigation to be made and shall
either issue the permit upon such conditions expressed in the permit as he
shall deem necessary to comply with all of the provisions of this chapter or
deny such permit.
§ 98-7. Matters to be considered concerning applications.
In investigating and taking action on applications for a permit to excavate
or fill, the Code Official shall consider the public health, safety and general
welfare and the effect thereof upon neighboring properties; and he shall
deny such permit if, in his opinion, the excavation or fill would:
§ 98-8. Notice of action on application and appeal.57
The Code Official shall forthwith notify the applicant of the issuance or
denial of the permit, and if the applicant shall be dissatisfied therewith,
he may appeal to the Board of Commissioners by filing a written notice
of appeal with the Township Manager within 30 days after such notice
from the Code Official, and at the same time, the applicant shall deliver
to the Township Manager a list of the names and addresses of all owners
A. Unlawfully remove the lateral or subjacent support of any adjacent
land.
B. Create a dangerous topographic condition.
C. Cause seepage or slides.
D. Improperly divert the flow of drainage waters or increase the velocity
thereof.
E. Create a nuisance.
F. In any manner endanger the health, safety or property of any other
person.
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 98-5 FILLING AND EXCAVATING § 98-8
98:139
of property within a radius of 300 feet from the exterior boundaries of the
proposed excavation or fill.
§ 98-9. Hearing on appeal.58
The appeal shall be heard at the next succeeding regular meeting of the
Board of Commissioners held not more than 45 days after the filing of the
appeal. The Township Manager shall mail notice of such hearing at least 10
days prior thereto, to all owners within a radius of 300 feet of the exterior
boundaries of the proposed excavation or fill. The hearing on the appeal
may be continued from time to time. At the conclusion of the hearing,
the Board of Commissioners may deny or issue a permit upon such terms
and conditions as it shall deem necessary to conform to the provisions of
this chapter. The action of the Board of Commissioners shall be final and
conclusive; and no similar application may be filed for the same property for
a period of 12 months.
§ 98-10. Slope of sides of excavations or fill.
In order to minimize the danger of slides on, to or from adjacent land, the
Code Official may specify in the permit the permissible angle of slope of
the sides of the excavation or fill. No side of such excavation or fill may be
made steeper at any point than the angle so specified in the permit unless
supported by a substantial, permanent retaining wall of sufficient strength
to permanently support such sides of the excavation or fill and constructed
in accordance with a permit to do so, as herein provided. Such retaining
wall shall be of concrete, brick, stone or other material not subject to rapid
deterioration and shall extend the full height and length of each side of such
excavation or fill which is at any point made steeper in slope than the angle
specified in the permit to excavate or fill. If the applicant desires to make
any side of the excavation or fill steeper than the angle specified he shall
file therewith, in duplicate, as aforesaid, detailed plans and specifications
for such retaining wall. Upon the approval of such plans and specifications,
the permit or supplemental permit to excavate or fill shall authorize the
sides thereof to be made steeper than the angle of slope specified therein,
if supported by a retaining wall constructed in accordance with such plans
and specifications.
§ 98-11. General conditions.
Any applicant to whom a permit to excavate is granted shall comply with
the following requirements:
A. The bottom of the excavation shall not be lower than the level specified
in the permit and shall be capable of being drained.
B. If, in the opinion of the Code Official, any excavation will create or
aggravate a dangerous condition if left open, such excavation shall be
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 98-8 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 98-11
98:140
§ 98-12. Completion bond and insurance.59
The Code Official shall require, as a condition to the granting of any permit
under this chapter, that the contractor deposit with the Township Manager
a completion bond with such surety and in such amount as required by the
Code Official, taking into consideration the estimated costs of completion,
insuring to the benefit of the township and the general public, guaranteeing
that the contractor will complete the work in accordance with the permit.
The Code Official may also require, as a condition to the granting of any
permit under this chapter, that the contractor deposit with the Township
Manager the certificate of a responsible insurance company, certifying the
contractor is insured for an amount of not less than the sum of $100,000
against any injury or damage to persons or property arising directly or
indirectly from the performance of the contractor in making the excavation
or fill for which such permit is issued.
§ 98-13. Revocation or suspension of permit.
Any permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the Code Official
for any reason for which the issuance of a permit might be lawfully denied
or for the failure of the contractor to comply with any of the terms or
conditions of the permit. Revocation shall be made only after a hearing
before the Code Official after five days' written notice to the applicants,
given by personal service or deposited in the United States mail, addressed
to the applicants at the addresses given in the application. The action of the
Code Official may be appealed to the Board of Commissioners as heretofore.
If, in the opinion of the Code Official, public health, safety or welfare is
endangered the Code Official may suspend any permit. Such revocation
or suspension shall be in addition to any other penalties provided in this
chapter.
§ 98-14. Expiration and issuance of supplemental permit.
In the event that any excavation or fill for which a permit has been granted
under this chapter is not commenced within six months from the date of
enclosed by a fence sufficiently high, tight and strong to eliminate such
dangerous condition.
C. Any rock, earth or other material which may be dropped or deposited
on any public road or place from any vehicle transporting such
materials from any such excavation shall be immediately removed in a
manner and to an extent satisfactory to the Code Official at the expense
of the applicant.
D. The applicant shall agree to indemnify and save the township and its
agents harmless from all liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses
which may result from or be a consequence of the granting of such
permit.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 98-11 FILLING AND EXCAVATING § 98-14
98:141
such permit, or in the event that the work of excavation or fill is at any
time abandoned for a period of six consecutive months, such permit shall
automatically terminate, without notice, and no further excavation or fill
shall be made; provided, however, that the conditions and responsibilities
in such permit shall remain binding upon the person or firm to whom such
permit was issued, and all legal and equitable remedies shall be available
against such person or firm for any breach thereof. When the amount of
material excavated or filled equals the number of cubic yards authorized by
the permit, no further excavation or fill shall be made until a supplemental
permit has been issued. An excavation or fill shall set forth the same
information required in the original application correcting, however, the
quantity of excavation or fill and paying the proper fee therefor.
§ 98-15. Violations and penalties.60
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon summary conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
dollars nor more than $600 dollars and, in default of payment of said fine,
to be imprisoned in Cumberland County Prison, for a period not exceeding
30 days. Each day's violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 100
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
§ 100-1. Use of fire insurance proceeds.
A. No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the
"insurer") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall
pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located
within Lower Allen Township (the "township") where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds
$7,500, unless the insurer is furnished by the Township's Treasurer
with a certificate pursuant to Section 508(b) of the Insurance Company
Law of 1921, as amended by Act 98 of 1992 and Act 93 of 1994
(collectively, the "Act") and unless there is compliance with the
procedure set forth in Section 508(c) and (d) of the Act.61
B. Delinquent taxes.
(1) Where there are delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user
charges against the property (municipal claims), or there are
expenses which the township has incurred as costs for the removal,
repair or securing of a building or other structure on the property
(collectively, municipal expenses), the Township Manager shall
immediately render a bill for such work if he has not already done
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
61.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 341 et seq.
§ 98-14 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 100-1
100:142
so. Upon written request of the named insured specifying the tax
description of the property, the name and address of the insurer
and the date of receipt by the insurer of a loss report of the claim,
the Treasurer shall furnish a certificate within 14 working days
after the request, to the insurer, a certificate (or at his discretion
an oral notification confirmed, in writing) either:
(a) Stating that there are no unpaid municipal claims or municipal
expenses against the property; or
(b) Specifying the nature and amount of such claims or expenses,
accompanied by a bill for such amounts.
(2) Taxes, assessments, penalties and user charges shall be deemed
delinquent for this purpose if a lien could have been filed for such
claims under applicable law.
(3) Upon receipt of a certificate and bill pursuant to Subsection B(1)(b)
above, the insurer shall transfer to the Treasurer an amount from
the insurance proceeds sufficient to pay such sums prior to making
payment to the named insured, subject to the provisions of
Subsection C hereof.
C. When all municipal claims and municipal expenses have been paid
pursuant to Subsection B of this section, or where the Treasurer has
issued a certificate described in Subsection B(1)(a) indicating that
there are no municipal claims or municipal expenses against the
property, the insurer shall pay the claim of the named insured;
provided, however, that if the loss agreed upon by the named insured
and the insurer equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of
liability on all fire policies covering the building or structure, the
following procedures must be followed:
(1) The insurer shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
Treasurer, in the aggregate, $2,000 for each $15,000 of such claim
or fraction thereof.
(2) If at the time a loss report is submitted by the insured, such insured
has submitted to the insurer, with a copy to the township, a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure in an amount less than the
amount calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the
insurer shall transfer to the Treasurer from the insurance proceeds
the amount specified in the estimate. If there is more than one
insurer, the transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all
insurers insuring the building or other structure.
(3) Upon receipt of the above described portion of the insurance
proceeds, the Treasurer shall do the following:
(a) Place the proceeds in a separate fund to be used solely as
security against the total municipal expenses anticipated by
§ 100-1 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 100-1
100:143
§ 100-2. Distribution of copies.
The Township Secretary shall transmit a certified copy of this ordinance
promptly to the Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs.
the township to be required in removing, repairing, or securing
the building or structure as required by this chapter. Such
costs shall include, without limitation, any engineering, legal
or administrative costs incurred by the township in connection
with such removal, repair or securing or any proceedings
related thereto; and
(b) Mail to the named insured, at the address received from the
insurer, a notice that the proceeds have been received by the
township and that the procedures under this subsection shall
be followed.
(c) After the transfer, the named insured may submit to the
township a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of
removing, repairing or securing the building or other
structure, in which event the Treasurer shall, if such estimate
is deemed by the Treasurer to be reasonable, return to the
insured the amount of the funds transferred to the township in
excess of that required to pay the municipal expenses,
provided that the township has not commenced to remove,
repair or secure the building or other structure, in which case
the township will complete the work.
(d) Pay to the Manager, for reimbursement to the township
general fund, the amount of the municipal expenses paid by the
township.
(e) Pay the remaining balance in the fund (without interest) to the
named insured upon receipt of a certificate issued by the Code
Official that the repair, removal or securing of the building or
other structure has been completed in accordance with all
applicable codes and regulations of the township.
D. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
township to recover any deficiency in the amount of municipal claims or
municipal expenses recovered pursuant to this chapter or to insurance
proceeds by an action at law or equity to enforce the codes of the
municipality or to enter into an agreement with the named insured with
regard to such other disposition of the proceeds as the township may
deem reasonable.
§ 100-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 100-3
100:144
§ 100-3. Violations and penalties.62
Any owner of property, any named insured or insurer who violates the
provisions of this section or who shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements hereof shall be liable, upon summary conviction, to fines and
penalties not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not exceeding
30 days, which fines and penalties may be collected by suit or summary
proceeding brought in the name of the township before any District Justice
or recovered as debts of the like amount are now by law recoverable.
Chapter 103
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management services — See Ch.
15.
Fire companies — See Ch. 21.
Police, fire and public safety communications
system — See Ch. 23, Art. III.
Special fire police mutual aid — See Ch. 24,
Art. VII.
Alarms — See Ch. 61.
Building construction — See Ch. 70.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 100.
Key lock boxes — See Ch. 126.
§ 103-1. Intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the minimum requirements
consistent with nationally recognized good practice for providing a
reasonable level of life safety and property protection from hazards of fire,
explosion, or dangerous conditions in new and existing buildings, structures
and premises, and to provide safety to firefighters and emergency
responders during emergency operations.
§ 103-2. Adoption of standards.
The International Fire Code, 2009 Edition, is hereby adopted as the Fire
Code of Lower Allen Township.
§ 103-3. Applicability.
The Fire Code of Lower Allen Township shall apply to any situation where
the requirements of the International Fire Code 2009 are not referenced in
the International Building Code 2009 and administered and enforced under
the Township's Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code (UCC) program
established in Chapter 70 of this Code.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 100-3 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 103-4
100:145
§ 103-4. Revisions to International Fire Code 2009 standards.
The following regulations are hereby enacted to facilitate administration
and enforcement of a national model code within Lower Allen Township.
A. The text of Chapter 1, Scope and Administration, is amended as follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, is amended by inserting "Lower Allen
Township."
(2) Section 103, Department of Fire Prevention, is deleted in its
entirety and replaced with new Section 103, Fire Prevention
Agencies, as follows:
103.1 General. The Department of Community Development shall
be charged with the task of implementing, administering and
enforcing this code. Police officers and law enforcement officers
within the Department of Public Safety are hereby authorized to
institute appropriate action for violations of Section 104.11.2,
Obstruction of Fire Department operations; Section 307.1.1,
Prohibited open burning; Section 307.3, Extinguishment authority
for open burning; and Section 503.4, Obstruction of fire apparatus
access roads, including fire lanes.
103.2 Appointment. The Community Development Director is
hereby authorized to designate law enforcement officers from
within the Department to serve as Fire Code Official and Deputy
Fire Code Officials for the purpose of administering and enforcing
this code in accordance with this chapter. The Board of
Commissioners shall appoint the Community Development
Director, the law enforcement officers within that department, and
all Public Safety Department police and law enforcement officers.
(3) Section 105.1.1, Permits required, is amended by replacing the first
sentence as follows: "Permits required by this code, not issued by
the Building Code Official for matters subject to the UCC and
regulated by Chapter 70, shall be issued by the Fire Code Official."
(4) Section 105.6, Required operational permits, is amended by adding
new section 105.6.47, Fire suppression and detection systems, as
follows: "An operational permit is required for all occupancies
except those classified as R-3 in Section 202 of this code, General
Definitions, Occupancy Classification, that are equipped with fire
suppression and/or fire detection systems that must be maintained
in accordance with NFPA 25 or NFPA 72 standards."
(5) Section 108.1, Board of appeals established, is deleted in its
entirety and replaced with a new Section 108.1, Board of Appeals
established, as follows: "For matters not subject to the UCC and
regulated by Chapter 70 of this Code, for which a Board of Appeals
has been established in accordance with § 70-5, a Board of Appeals
for this code is hereby created to hear and decide appeals of
§ 103-4 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 103-4
100:146
orders, decisions or determinations made by the Fire Code Official
relative to the application and interpretation of this code. The
Board of Commissioners shall serve as the Fire Code of Lower
Allen Township Board of Appeals, shall adopt rules of procedure for
conduction its business, and shall render all decisions and findings
in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Fire Code
Official. When deemed necessary to address technical matters,
the Board may retain individuals who are qualified by experience
and training to advise it on matters pertaining to hazards of fire,
explosions, hazardous conditions or fire-protection systems. These
technical advisors may not be employees of the Township."
(6) Section 109.3, Violation penalties, is amended by inserting
"summary offense" at [SPECIFY OFFENSE], "$1,000" at
[AMOUNT] and "10" at [NUMBER OF DAYS].
(7) Section 109, Violations, is amended by adding new Section 109.3.2,
Penalty for obstruction of fire apparatus, as follows: "When a
violation of Section 503.4, Obstruction of fire apparatus access
roads, involves a parked vehicle within a fire apparatus access road
that is posted with signs or other markings approved by the Fire
Code Official that contain the words, NO PARKING-FIRE LANE, an
enforcement action shall be initiated by any authorized police
officer or law enforcement officer in accordance with Chapter 209,
Vehicles and traffic, § 209-8, Violation notice issuance; payment.
The penalty shall be a fine of $50; however, failure to comply with
provisions of § 209-8A shall subject the person receiving the
violations notice to a summary offense proceeding authorized by
§ 209-8B, and the penalty provisions of this code contained in
Section 109.3 shall apply."
(8) Section 111.4, Failure to comply, is amended as follows: "condition,
shall be liable to a fine of not more than $1,000."
(9) Section 113.2, Schedule of permit fees, is amended as follows: ". .
.schedule as established by a resolution of the Board of
Commissioners."
(10) Section 307.1.1, Prohibited open burning, is deleted in its entirety
and replaced with a new Section 307.1.1, Prohibited open burning,
as follows: "Open burning that is offensive or objectionable because
of smoke emissions or when atmospheric or local conditions make
such fires hazardous shall be prohibited. Burning of any material
that must be recycled, or disposed at an approved solid waste
facility in accordance with a Township ordinance or state statute is
also prohibited."
(11) Section 307.3, Extinguishment authority, is amended as follows:
"The Fire Code Official and any other person authorized by Section
103.1 to enforce this code is authorized . . .".
§ 103-4 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 103-4
100:147
Chapter 106
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 106, Fire Suppression Equipment, adopted 6-10-1985 as
Art. 749 of the 1985 Code of Ordinances, as amended, was repealed
5-26-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02. See now Ch. 70, Building
Construction and Safety Standards, and Ch. 103, Fire Prevention.]
Chapter 110
(12) Section 307.4.2, Recreational fires, is deleted in its entirety and
replaced as follows: "Recreational fires shall not be conducted
within 25 feet of a structure or combustible material unless
contained in a noncombustible outdoor fireplace, fire pit or fire
ring. Recreational fires in Township parks shall be further
restricted by applicable regulations in Chapter 151, Parks and
Playgrounds."
(13) Section 3404.2.9.6.1, Locations where above-ground tanks are
prohibited, is deleted in its entirety and replaced with a new
Section 3404.2.9.6.1, Locations where aboveground storage tanks
are prohibited, as follows: "Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in
aboveground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within any
zoning district depicted on the Zoning Map of Lower Allen
Township except the C-2, I-1 and I-3 Districts."
(14) Section 3406.2.4.4, Locations where above-ground tanks are
prohibited, is deleted in its entirety and replaced with a new
Section 3406.2.4.4, Locations where aboveground storage tanks
are prohibited, as follows: "Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in
aboveground tanks is prohibited within any zoning district depicted
on the Zoning Map of Lower Allen Township except the C-2, I-1 and
I-3 Districts."
(15) Section 3506.2, Limitations, is deleted in its entirety and replaced
with a new Section 3506.2, Limitations, as follows:" Storage of
flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited
within any zoning district depicted on the Zoning Map of Lower
Allen Township except the C-2, I-1 and I-3 Districts."
(16) Section 3804.2, Maximum capacity within established limits, is
deleted in its entirety and replaced with a new Section 3804.2,
Maximum capacity within established limits, as follows: "The
geographic limits in which the aggregate capacity of any one
installation of liquefied petroleum gas shall not exceed a water
capacity of 2,000 gallons (7570 L) for the protection of heavily
populated or congested areas cannot be established by Lower Allen
Township because the Propane and Liquefied Petroleum Gas Act
(35 P.S. §§ 1329.1 through 1329.19) does not permit municipalities
to prohibit or regulate storage of these materials."
§ 103-4 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 103-4
100:148
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and safety
standards — See Ch. 70.
Filling and excavating — See Ch. 98.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 184.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
192.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
§ 110-1. Intent.
Consistent with the general purposes of this chapter, the specific intent of
this chapter is to:
§ 110-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings hereby ascribed thereto, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or to the main building and located on the same lot with such
principal use or main building.
BASEMENT OR FIRST FLOOR — Any area of a building having its floor
below ground level on all sides.
BUILDING — Any structure or edifice intended for the shelter, housing
or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels, having a roof supported by
columns or walls, including mobile homes and trailers.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally dry during
flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent the passage
of water vapor.
A. Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the Township.
B. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the Township and its individuals
by preventing excessive development in areas subject to periodic
flooding and mudslides.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Promote responsible floodproofing measures within the designated
floodplain districts.
E. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage.
§ 103-4 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 110-2
100:149
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or structure,
including the placement of mobile homes.
DESIGNATED FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS — Those floodplain districts
specifically designated in Chapter 220, Zoning, of the Code of the Township
of Lower Allen, as amended, as being inundated primarily by the onehundred-
year flood, which areas are identified as the Floodway District
(FW), the Flood-Fringe District (FF) and the General Floodplain
Conservation District (FA).
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, streets
and other paving, utilities, mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or
drilling operations.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during
flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage; the
structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
ESTABLISHED FLOOD ELEVATION — The elevation at a point on the
boundary of the identified flood-prone area which is nearest to the
construction site in question.
FLOOD-FRINGE OR FF — That portion of the floodplain outside the
floodway in which detailed study data and water surface profile have been
provided by the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland
waters, or the unusual or rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
FLOODPLAIN AREA HAVING SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARDS, FLOOD
HAZARD AREA AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The maximum
area of the floodplain that, on the average, is likely to be flooded once every
100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent chance of being flooded each year).
FLOODPLAIN ENCROACHMENT LINES — The lines marking the limits of
the floodplain on official federal, state and local floodplain maps.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Includes:
FLOOD-PRONE AREA — A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river,
stream or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation, or
any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source and/or any flood-prone area as identified in Chapter
220, Zoning.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to buildings or structures which reduce
A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, watercourse,
bay or lake, which is subject to partial or complete inundation;
A.
B. An area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
§ 110-2 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 110-2
100:150
or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures or buildings and their contents.
FLOODWAY OR FW OR REGULATORY FLOODWAY OR RFW — The channel
of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas reasonably
required to carry and discharge the one-hundred-year flood without
increasing the water surface elevation at any point more than one foot
above the existing conditions as demonstrated in the Flood Insurance Study.
HEIGHT OF ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — The highest level of the onehundred-
year flood at a particular point or location within the designated
floodplain districts. Unless other data exists within the General Floodplain
Conservation District, the height of the one-hundred-year flood shall be
established as a point on the boundaries of the General Floodplain
Conservation District which is nearest to the construction site in question.
HYDRODYNAMIC LOADS — These loads or pressures are primarily lateral
in nature. As the floodwaters flow around a structure at moderate to high
velocities they impose additional loads on the structure. These loads consist
of frontal impact by the mass of moving water against the projected width
of the obstruction represented by the structure, drag effect along the sides
of the structure and eddies or negative pressures on the downstream side.
HYDROSTATIC LOADS — These loads or pressures at any point of
floodwater contact with the structure are equal in all directions and always
act perpendicular to the surface on which they are applied. Pressures
increase lineally with depth of head water above the point under
consideration. The summation of pressures over the surface under
consideration represents the load acting on that surface. For structural
analysis purposes, hydrostatic loads are defined to act vertically downward
on structural elements such as roofs, decks and similar overhead members
having a depth of water above them, vertically upward or uplift when they
act at the underside of generally horizontal members such as slabs and
footings and the net effect is upward and laterally when they act in a
horizontal direction on walls, piers and similar vertical structural elements.
It is assumed that hydrostatic conditions prevail for still water and water
moving with a velocity of less than five feet per second.
IMPACT LOADS — These loads are induced on the structure by solid objects
and masses carried by or floating on the moving water surface. These loads
are the most difficult to predict and define with any degree of accuracy,
yet reasonable allowances must be made for these loads in the design and
potential debris problems at the site and to the degree of exposure of the
structure in relationship to its general setting.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this chapter.
§ 110-2 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 110-2
100:151
MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME — A transportable, single-family
dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly,
contained in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, which
arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations and constructed so that it
may be used with or without a permanent foundation. For Federal
Emergency Management (FEMA) floodplain management purposes, this
term includes recreational vehicles, travel trailers and other similar
vehicles located on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single
ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of two
or more mobile homes for nontransient use.
MUDSLIDE — A condition where there is a river, flow or inundation of liquid
mud down a hillside usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush
cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on or under the ground
preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain.
MUDSLIDE AREA HAVING SPECIAL MUDSLIDE HAZARDS — A mudslide
area with a high potential for mudslides.
MUDSLIDE-PRONE AREA OR MUDSLIDE AREA — An area with land
surfaces and slopes of unconsolidated material where the history, geology
and climate indicate a potential for mudslide.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Any structure for which construction commenced
on or after September 19, 1977, and includes any subsequent improvements
thereto.
OBSTRUCTION — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, culvert, building,
fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or
projecting into any channel, watercourse or designated floodplain districts,
which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water which
might carry the same downstream to the damage of life or property.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — The highest level of flooding that, on the
average, is likely to occur once every 100 years within the Township (i.e.,
that has a one-percent chance of occurring each year), although the flood
may occur in any year. It shall also mean "base flood" or "area of special
flood hazard" or "regulatory flood."
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year-flood elevation
based upon information contained in the Flood Insurance Study plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet. Unless other data exists, within the
General Floodplain Conservation District, the height of a one-hundred-year
flood shall be established as a point on the boundaries of the General
Floodplain Conservation District which is nearest to the construction site in
question.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it; if there is no floor above it,
then the space between any floor and the ceiling immediately above it.
§ 110-2 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 110-2
100:152
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land, including
but not limited to flagpoles, stadiums, platforms, towers, sheds, storage
bins, fences, signs, sign posts, lights and light standards for other than
residential use except for patios, driveways, walks and parking areas at
yard grade.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC) by
reference as the construction standards applicable to floodplain
construction within the commonwealth.
§ 110-3. Effect on other ordinances.
This chapter supersedes any ordinance to the extent that such ordinances
relate to the subject matter of this chapter. However, any underlying
ordinance shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that these
provisions are more restricting and to the extent that such ordinances
would otherwise apply.
§ 110-4. Municipal liability.
The grant of any permit with respect to any building or structure, or portion
thereof, in the flood-prone area(s) shall not constitute a representation,
guaranty or warranty of any kind by the Township or by any official or
employee thereof, of the practicability or safety of the proposed erection,
Includes any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure,
the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure, either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the
structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage
occurred.
A.
For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
B.
The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.
(2)
C.
§ 110-2 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 110-4
100:153
construction, reconstruction, repair, enlargement, addition to, alteration,
extension, use or occupancy of such building or structure and shall create
no liability upon the Township, its officials or employees.
§ 110-5. Issuance of permit.
The Code Official shall issue a building permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed construction, erection or substantial
improvement or alteration of any building or structure or portion thereof
in the flood-prone area will be in conformance with all applicable
requirements and regulations of this chapter as well as in conformance with
all applicable requirements and regulations of other ordinances.
§ 110-6. Additional permit application information.
In addition to the information required on a building permit application in
the Building Code and other applicable ordinances, additional application
information to ensure that all construction, erection or substantial
improvement or alteration to a building or structure or portion thereof
within the identified flood-prone area(s) will be conducted employing
adequate flood damage controls, the Code Official shall require the
following specific information to be included as part of an application for a
building permit:
A. A plan which accurately locates the construction proposal with respect
to the designated floodplain districts' boundaries, stream channel and
existing flood-prone developments.
(1) Included on such plan shall be information to assure that:
(a) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage.
(b) All public and private utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems are located, elevated and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
(2) Such plan shall also include existing and proposed contours and
elevations of the ground, lowest floor of proposed construction,
storage elevations, size of the structure, location and elevations of
streets, water supply, sanitary facilities, soil types and
floodproofing measures, including specific references to the level
of floodproofing in relation to the one-hundred-year flood.
B. A document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect,
which states that the proposed construction has been adequately
designed to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces and other hydrostatic and hydrodynamic and buoyancy
factors associated with the one-hundred-year flood. Such statement
§ 110-4 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 110-6
100:154
§ 110-7. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for construction, erection or substantial
improvement or alteration to a building or structure or portion thereof
in any designated floodplain district to be considered for approval shall
be submitted by the Code Official to the County Conservation District
for review and comment prior to the issuance of a building permit. The
recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered by the
Code Official for possible incorporation into the proposed plan.
§ 110-8. Township Engineer review.
A copy of all such plans and applications to be considered for approval shall
be submitted by the Code Official to the Township Engineer for review and
comment.
§ 110-9. Designation of flood-prone area(s).
The flood-prone area(s) shall be such area(s) which are identified as being
flood-prone through a study, designation or identification of special flood
hazard areas by the Federal Insurance Administration, United States Corps
of Engineers and the Township Engineer, as set forth in Chapter 220,
Zoning. Special flood hazard area(s) shall be delineated on the Zoning
Map kept by the Township Code Official and available for inspection at the
Township office or by the Township Engineer.
§ 110-10. Changes in designation of flood-prone areas.
§ 110-11. Regulations.
In order to prevent excessive damage to buildings and structures due
to flood conditions, the following provisions shall apply to all proposed
construction or development or substantial improvements occurring in any
of the floodplain districts designated in Chapter 220, Zoning.
shall include a description of the type and extent of floodproofing
measures which have been incorporated into the design of the
structure.
A. The boundaries of areas considered to be flood-prone may be revised
and modified by the Township with the approval of a majority of the
Township Commissioners, where there are changes through natural or
other causes or where further detailed engineering studies or
information indicate the need and provide the basis for such
modification or revision.
B. No modification or revision of any area identified as being flood-prone
in the flood Insurance Study prepared by the Federal Insurance
Administration shall be made without prior approval from the Federal
Insurance Administration.
§ 110-6 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 110-11
100:155
A. Nonresidential structures.
(1) Within any designated Floodway District (FW), Flood-Fringe
District (FF) or General Floodplain Conservation District (FA), the
lowest floor, including basement, of any new or substantially
improved nonresidential structure shall be at least 1 1/2 feet above
the one-hundred-year-flood elevation or be designed and
constructed so that the space enclosed by such structure shall
remain either completely or essentially dry during any flood up to
that height.
(2) Any structure or part thereof which will not be completely or
adequately elevated, shall be designed and constructed to be
completely or essentially dry in accordance with the standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations,"
United States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, or some other
equivalent standard for that type of construction.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the current edition of the IBC (Sections 1603, 1605,
1606, 1612 and 3403) and ASCE 24 (Section 2.4 and Chapter 7)
and 34 PA Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be
utilized.
B. Residential structures.
(1) Within any designated Floodway District (FW), Flood-Fringe
District (FF) or General Floodplain Conservation District (FA), the
lowest floor, including basement, of any new or substantially
improved residential structure shall be at least 1 1/2 feet above the
one-hundred-year-flood elevation.
(2) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the current edition of the IBC (Sections 1603, 1612
and 3403) and in the current edition of the IRC (Section R323) and
ASCE 24 (Section 2.4 and Chapter 7) and 34 PA Code (Chapters
401 through 405, as amended)shall be utilized.
C. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points.
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted.
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring or settling.
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal, unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and
approved by, the Code Official.
§ 110-11 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 110-11
100:156
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
(6) The provisions contained in the current version of the IBC
(Sections 1801 and 1803) shall be utilized.
D. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be constructed and placed on the lot so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water. In so doing, consideration shall be
given to their effect upon the flow and height of floodwaters.
E. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse
or other movement, thus reducing the threat to life and property
and decreasing the possibility of the blockage of bridge openings
and other restricted sections of the watercourse.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks located at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation.
(3) The design and construction provisions of the UCC pertaining to
this subsection as referred to in 34 PA Code (Chapters 401 through
405 as amended) and contained in the current version of the IBC
(Sections 1605, 1612 and Appendix G501) and the current version
of the IRC (Sections R301 and R323) and ASCE 24-98 (Section 5.6)
shall be utilized.
F. Floors, walls and ceilings. Where located at or below the regulatory
flood elevation:
(1) Wood flooring shall be installed to accommodate a lateral
expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain,
without incurring structural damage to the building.
(2) Plywood shall be of any exterior or marine grade and of a waterresistant
or waterproof variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings in nonresidential structures shall have sufficient
wet strength and be so installed as to survive inundation.
(4) Window frames, door frames, door jambs and other components
shall be made of metal or other water-resistant material.
(5) The design and construction provisions of the UCC pertaining to
this subsection as referred to in 34 PA Code (Chapters 401 through
405 as amended) and contained in the current version of the IBC
(Sections 801, 1403 and 1404) and the current version of the IRC
(Sections R323 and R501) and ASCE 24-98 (Chapter 6) shall be
utilized.
§ 110-11 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 110-11
100:157
G. Electrical systems.
(1) All electric water heaters, electric furnaces, electric air
conditioning and ventilating systems and other electrical
equipment or apparatus shall be permitted only at elevations above
the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) No electrical distribution panels shall be allowed at an elevation
less than three feet above the level of the one-hundred-year-flood
elevation.
(3) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
(4) The provisions pertaining to this subsection and referenced in the
UCC in 34 PA Code (Chapters 401 through 405 as amended) and
contained in the current version of the IBC (Section1612) and the
current version of the IRC (Section R323) and the current version
of IFGC (Sections R301 and R1601) and ASCE 24 (Chapter 8) shall
be utilized.
H. Plumbing and equipment.
(1) Water heaters, furnaces and other mechanical equipment or
apparatus shall be permitted only at elevations above the
regulatory flood level.
(2) No part of any on-site sewage disposal system shall be constructed
within any designated floodplain districts.
(3) Water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to preclude infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharges from the system into floodwaters.
(4) All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to preclude the
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for
the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
(5) The provisions pertaining to this subsection and referenced in the
UCC in 34 PA Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) and
contained in the current version of the IBC (Section1612) and the
current version of the IRC (Section R323) and the current version
of IFGC (Sections R301 and R1601) and ASCE 24 (Chapter 8) shall
be utilized.
I. Paints and adhesives. Where located at or below the regulatory flood
elevation:
(1) Adhesives shall have a bonding strength that is unaffected by
inundation, i.e., marine or water-resistant quality.
§ 110-11 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 110-11
100:158
(2) All wooden components, doors, trim, cabinets, etc., shall be sealed
with a marine or water-resistant quality or similar product.
(3) Paints or other finishes shall be capable of surviving inundation,
i.e., marine or water-resistant quality.
(4) The standards and specifications contained in 34 PA Code
(Chapters 401 through 405 as amended) and contained in the
current version of the IBC (Sections 801, 1403 and Appendix G)
and the current version of the IRC (Sections R323) shall be utilized.
J. Storage. No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or that in
time of flooding could be injurious to human, animal or plant life shall
be stored below the regulatory flood.
K. Drainage facilities.
(1) Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of
surface waters without damage to persons or property. The system
shall ensure drainage at all points along streets and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
(2) The provisions contained in the current version of the IBC
(Appendix G401) shall be utilized.
L. Water and sanitary sewer facilities.
(1) All new or replacement sanitary sewer facilities and private
package sewage treatment plants, including all pumping stations
and collector systems, shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into the floodwaters. In addition, they should be located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and
impairment.
(2) All new or replacement water facilities shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damages.
(3) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and 34 PA Code
(Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) and the current version of
the IBC (Appendix G Section 401) and the current version of the
IRC (Section R323) and ASCE 24-98(Section 8.3) and FEMA #348,
Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damages and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code (Chapter 3) shall be
utilized.
M. Streets. The finished elevation of proposed new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation. The Township shall
§ 110-11 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 110-11
100:159
require profiles and elevations of proposed new streets to determine
compliance with this requirement.
N. Utilities. All utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and telephone
systems, placed in designated floodplain districts shall be located,
elevated, where possible, and constructed to minimize the chance of
impairment during a flood.
O. Existing structures in designated floodplain districts. Structures
existing in any designated floodplain district prior to the enactment of
this chapter, but which are not in compliance with these provisions, may
continue to remain subject to the following:
(1) Existing structures located in a designated Floodway District (FW)
or area shall not be expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the
proposed expansion or enlargement on flood heights is fully offset
by accompanying improvements.
(2) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than
50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to
the greatest extent possible.
(3) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or
more of its market value, shall be undertaken only in full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
P. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) is
prohibited.
(2) Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (including
basement) which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle,
building access or incidental storage in an area other than a
basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "partially
enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be signed and sealed by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space;
and
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
§ 110-11 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 110-11
100:160
§ 110-12. Variances.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the current edition of the IBC (Sections 1202, 1203
and 1612) and IRC (Section R323) and 34 PA Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized.
Q. Special requirements for manufactured homes. Within any FW
(Floodway Area) or FA (General Floodplain Area) manufactured homes
shall be prohibited.
A. If compliance with the elevation or floodproofing requirements stated
above would result in an exceptional hardship for a prospective
applicant's builder, developer or landowner, the Board of
Commissioners may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirement.
B. Requests for variances to the strict application of the provisions of this
chapter may be granted by the Board of Commissioners in accordance
with the following procedures and criteria:
(1) No variances shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(2) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(3) In granting any variance, the Board of Commissioners may attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(4) Whenever a variance is granted, the Board of Commissioners shall
notify the applicant, in writing, that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(5) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Board of
Commissioners shall consider, but not be limited to the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
§ 110-11 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 110-12
100:161
Chapter 117
HEATERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and safety
standards — See Ch. 70.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
(c) That the granting of the variance will not result in any
unacceptable or prohibited increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense or
create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
or conflict with any other applicable local or state ordinances
and regulations.
(6) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Board of Commissioners. In addition a report
of all variances granted during the year shall be included in the
annual report to the Federal Insurance Administration.
C. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and pressures, and effects of
buoyancy of the one-hundred-year flood.
§ 110-12 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 110-12
100:162
ARTICLE I
Outdoor Hydronic Heaters
[Adopted 2-23-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
§ 117-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Lower Allen Township
Outdoor Hydronic Heater Ordinance of 2009."
§ 117-2. Statutory authority.
The Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen Township, under, and by virtue
of and pursuant to the authority granted by the Air Pollution Control Act,
35 P.S. § 4012 and the First Class Township Code Section 1502 (29) 53 P.S.
§ 56529, Smoke regulation, do hereby enact and ordain this article.
§ 117-3. Findings; purpose.
Whereas the Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen Township has
determined that air pollution from outdoor hydronic heaters may be
detrimental to the health, comfort, living conditions, welfare, and safety of
the citizens of Lower Allen Township, it is hereby declared to be the policy
of Lower Allen Township to safeguard the citizens of Lower Allen Township
from such air pollution.
§ 117-4. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them:
BOARD — Lower Allen Township Board of Commissioners.
CLEAN WOOD — Natural wood that has been seasoned to reduce its water
content and provide more efficient combustion, that has not been:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — Person designated by the municipality
to be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article.
OUTDOOR HYDRONIC HEATER —
Coated with paint, stain, oil, resin or any other preservative, fire
retardant or decorative materials;
A.
B. Impregnated with preservatives or fire retardants;
C. Exposed to salt water; and
Manufactured with the use of adhesives, polymers or resins, such as
strand, particle and veneer lumber and recycled lumber.
D.
A. A fuel-burning device designed:
§ 117-1 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 117-4
100:163
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation for profit or not
for profit, association, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department, board,
bureau or agency of the commonwealth or the federal government, political
subdivision, municipality, district, authority, or any other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
STARTUP PERIOD — The time period beginning with flame stability after
first charge of wood fuel and is no longer than a two-hour duration. This
definition only includes initial startup where no previous coal bed exists,
and does not include refueling.
§ 117-5. Regulations for installation and use.
After enactment, an outdoor hydronic heater may be installed or used
in Lower Allen Township only in accordance with all of the following
provisions:
To burn clean wood or other fuels specifically tested and listed for
use by the manufacturer;
(1)
By the manufacturer specifically for outdoor installation or
installation in structures not normally intended for habitation by
humans or domestic animals (e.g., garages); and
(2)
To heat building space and/or water via distribution, typically
through pipes, of a fluid heated in the device, typically water or a
water/antifreeze mixture.
(3)
Outdoor hydronic heaters are also known as "outdoor wood-fired
boilers," "outdoor wood-fired furnaces," and "outdoor wood-burning
appliances."
B.
A. The outdoor hydronic heater shall be installed, operated and
maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
B. The outdoor hydronic heater shall not be used to burn any material that
does not meet the definition of clean wood, with the following
exceptions:
(1) Wood pellets made from clean wood, if the device has been tested
and listed to utilize this fuel; and
(2) Home heating oil meeting applicable sulfur content limit, propane
or natural gas, when used as auxiliary starter fuels for devices
tested and listed as dual-fired outdoor hydronic heaters.
C. The outdoor hydronic heater shall have been tested, listed and tagged
as being compliant with the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) voluntary program to reduce outdoor hydronic heater
emissions as a Phase II qualified device (white tag). Phase II qualified
devices (white tag) shall not exceed the EPA limit of 0.32 pound of fine
particulate emissions per million BTU heat output. [Amended
6-29-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-10]
§ 117-4 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 117-5
100:164
§ 117-6. Enforcement orders.
§ 117-7. Responsibility of owners and operators.
D. The outdoor hydronic heater shall be located at least 100 feet from a
property line or 120 feet from the nearest occupied building, whichever
is more stringent. [Amended 6-29-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-10]
E. The owner or operator of the outdoor hydronic heater shall obtain a
permit from the Department of Community Development prior to
installation of the device. The permit applicant shall demonstrate
compliance with applicable building and zoning regulations contained
in the Code of the Township of Lower Allen, in addition to compliance
with this article.
F. No person shall cause or allow the emission of a smoke plume from any
outdoor hydronic heater to exceed an average opacity of 20% for six
consecutive minutes in any one-hour period, except during the startup
period, when visible emissions may not exceed opacity of 40% for 20
consecutive minutes.
A. The Lower Allen Township Code Enforcement Officer shall have the
power and duty to enforce the provisions of this article.
B. Lower Allen Township may issue such orders as are necessary to aid in
the enforcement of the provisions of this article. These orders shall
include, but shall not be limited to: orders requiring persons to cease
unlawful use of outdoor wood-fired boilers which are in violation of any
provision of this article; orders to take corrective action or to abate a
public nuisance; or orders requiring production of information. Such an
order may be issued if Lower Allen Township finds that any person is in
violation of any provision of this article.
C. The Lower Allen Township may, in its order, require compliance with
this article.
D. An order issued under this section shall take effect upon notice, unless
the order specifies otherwise. An appeal to the Lower Allen Township
Regional Code Appeals of the Lower Allen Township order shall not act
as a supersedeas; provided, however, that, upon application and for
cause shown, the Lower Allen Township Regional Code Appeals may
issue such a supersedeas under rules established by the Lower Allen
Township Regional Code Appeals.
E. The authority of Lower Allen Township to issue an order under this
section is in addition to any remedy or penalty that may be imposed
pursuant to this article. The failure to comply with any such order is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
A. Whenever the Code Enforcement Official finds that illegal operation of
an outdoor wood-fired boiler is occurring in Lower Allen Township, in
contravention of the requirements of § 117-6 above, the Code
§ 117-5 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 117-7
100:165
§ 117-8. Violations and penalties.
Enforcement Official may order the owner or operator to take
corrective action in a manner satisfactory to Lower Allen Township, or
the Code Enforcement Official may order the owner or operator to allow
access to the land by the Code Enforcement Official or a third party to
take such action.
B. For purposes of collecting or recovering the costs involved in taking
corrective action or pursuing a cost recovery action pursuant to an
order or recovering the cost of litigation, oversight, monitoring,
sampling, testing, and investigation related to a corrective action,
Lower Allen Township may collect the amount in the same manner as
civil penalties are assessed and collected following the process for
assessment and collection of a civil penalty contained in § 117-8B of this
article.
A. Criminal penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this article
or any order of the Township issued pursuant to this article commits a
summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $100 nor more than $2,500 for each separate offense
and, in default of the payment of such fine, may be sentenced to
imprisonment for 90 days for each separate offense. Employees of the
Township authorized to conduct inspections or investigations are
hereby declared to be law enforcement officers authorized to issue or
file citations for summary violations under this article, and the
Township Solicitor is hereby authorized to prosecute these offenses. For
purposes of this section, a summary offense may be prosecuted before
any district justice in this Township. There is no accelerated
rehabilitative disposition authorized for a summary offense.
B. Civil penalties.
(1) In addition to proceeding under any other remedy available at law
or in equity for a violation of a provision of this article or any order
issued pursuant to this article, the Township may assess a civil
penalty for the violation. The penalty may be assessed whether or
not the violation was willful. The civil penalty so assessed shall not
exceed $25,000 per day for each violation. In determining the
amount of the penalty, the Township shall consider the willfulness
of the violation; damage to air, soil, water, or other natural
resources of the Township or their uses; financial benefit to the
person in consequence of the violation; deterrence of future
violations; cost to the Township; the size of the source or facility;
the compliance history of the source; the severity and duration of
the violation; degree of cooperation in resolving the violation; the
speed with which compliance is ultimately achieved; whether the
violation was voluntarily reported; other factors unique to the
owners or operators of the source or facility; and other relevant
factors.
§ 117-7 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 117-8
100:166
(2) When the Township proposes to assess a civil penalty, it shall
inform the person of the proposed amount of the penalty. The
person charged with the penalty shall then have 30 days to pay the
proposed penalty in full; or if the person wishes to contest the
amount of the penalty or the fact of the violation to the extent not
already established, the person shall forward the proposed amount
of the penalty to the Township within the thirty-day period for
placement in an escrow account with the State Treasurer or any
commonwealth bank, or post an appeal bond to the Township
within 30 days in the amount of the proposed penalty, provided that
such bond is executed by a surety licensed to do business in the
commonwealth and is satisfactory to the Township. If, through
administrative or final judicial review of the proposed penalty, it is
determined that no violation occurred or that the amount of the
penalty shall be reduced, the Township shall, within 30 days, remit
the appropriate amount to the person with any interest
accumulated by the escrow deposit. Failure to forward the money
or the appeal bond at the time of the appeal shall result in a waiver
of all legal rights to contest the violation or the amount of the civil
penalty unless the appellant alleges financial inability to prepay the
penalty or to post the appeal bond. The Township shall conduct a
hearing to consider the appellant's alleged inability to pay within
30 days of the date of the appeal. The Township may waive the
requirement to prepay the civil penalty or to post an appeal bond if
the appellant demonstrates and the Township finds that the
appellant is financially unable to pay. The Township shall issue an
order within 30 days of the date of the hearing to consider the
appellant's alleged inability to pay. The amount assessed after
administrative hearing or after waiver of administrative hearing
shall be payable to the Township and shall be collectible in any
manner provided by law for the collection of debts, including the
collection of interest on the penalty amount computed in
accordance with section 6621(a)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986 (Public Law 99-514, 26 U.S.C. § 1 et seq.) from the date of
assessment of the penalty. If any person liable to pay any such
penalty neglects or refuses to pay the same after demand, the
amount, together with interest and any costs that may accrue, shall
constitute a debt of such person, as may be appropriate, to the
Township. The debt shall constitute a lien on all property owned by
said person when a notice of lien incorporating a description of the
property of the person subject to the action is duly filed with the
prothonotary of the court of common pleas where the property is
located. The prothonotary shall promptly enter upon the civil
judgment or order docket, at no cost to the Township, the name and
address of the person, as may be appropriate, and the amount of
the lien as set forth in the notice of lien. Upon entry by the
prothonotary, the lien shall attach to the revenues and all real and
personal property of the person, whether or not the person is
solvent. The notice of lien, filed pursuant to this section, which
§ 117-8 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 117-8
100:167
§ 117-9. Unlawful conduct.
It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with or to cause or assist in the violation
of any of the provisions of this article or to fail to comply with any order
or other requirement of the Township; or to cause a public nuisance; or to
hinder, obstruct, prevent, or interfere with the Township or its personnel
in their performance of any duty hereunder, including denying the Code
Enforcement Official access to the source or facility.
§ 117-10. Public nuisances.
A violation of this article or of any order issued by the Township under
this article shall constitute a public nuisance. The Township shall have the
authority to order any person causing a public nuisance to abate the public
nuisance. In addition, when abating a public nuisance, the Township may
recover the expenses of abatement following the process for assessment
and collection of a civil penalty contained in § 117-8B. Whenever the
nuisance is maintained or continued contrary to this article or any order
issued pursuant to this article, the nuisance may be abatable in the manner
provided by this article. Any person who causes the public nuisance shall be
liable for the cost of abatement.
§ 117-11. Effect on other provisions.
The provisions of this article, as far as they are the same as those of
ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this article, are
intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as new enactments.
The provisions of this article shall not affect any such suit or prosecution
pending or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any
offense under the authority of any ordinance repealed by this article.
affects the property of the person shall create a lien with priority
over all subsequent claims or liens which are filed against the
person, but it shall not affect any valid lien, right, or interest in
the property filed in accordance with established procedure prior
to the filing of a notice of lien under this section.
§ 117-8 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 117-11
100:168
Chapter 121
JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 76.
Nuisances — See Ch. 149.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 212.
§ 121-1. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK — Discarded materials, articles or things possessing value in
part, gross or aggregate, and including but not limited to scrapped
motor vehicles and parts thereof, including motors, bodies of motor
vehicles and vehicles which are inoperable and do not have a current
and valid inspection required by the motor vehicle laws of the
Commonwealth, except those being stored temporarily on municipal
or fire company property for the purpose of evidence, evidence
processing, and firefighting and/or rescue training, but not including
garbage or other organic waste or farm machinery, provided such
farm machinery is used in connection with a bona fide farming
operation.[Amended 10-22-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-14]
JUNK DEALER — Any person who engages in the business of collecting,
accumulating, buying, selling, storing, disassembling, treating or
processing junk in the Township.
JUNKYARD — Any place or establishment where junk is stored or
accumulated on the outside of any building, edifice or structure that
is enclosed on all sides; or where the business of selling, buying or
dealing in junk is carried on or where two or more motor vehicles are
stored which are unlicensed, inoperable and do not have current and
valid inspection stickers as required by the motor vehicle laws of the
Commonwealth, except those being stored temporarily on municipal
or fire company property for the purpose of evidence, evidence
processing, and firefighting and/or rescue training.[Amended
10-22-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-14]
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
B. The singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the
feminine and the neuter.
§ 117-11 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 121-2
100:169
§ 121-2. License required.
On and after the effective date of this chapter, no person shall engage or
continue to engage in business as a junk dealer or establish or operate a
junkyard in the Township except as authorized by this chapter and without
first having obtained a license therefor from the Board of Commissioners.
§ 121-3. License application.
Application for such license shall be made, in writing, under oath and
in the form prescribed by the Board of Commissioners and shall contain
the name of the applicant, his address, his length of residence at such
address, his previous criminal record, if any, the address of the premises
upon which such business is to be conducted or upon which such junkyard
is to be established or operated, the name of the owner or owners of the
property if other than the applicant, and upon any subsequent applications
a statement that the applicant, during the preceding term of his license,
did comply with and did maintain his premises in full compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. Each application shall describe the premises
upon which the junkyard is to be established or operated, specifying therein
setback lines, structures erected thereon, dwellings erected upon premises
adjacent to the premises proposed to be used, and a reference to the
place where the deed is recorded. If the applicant is a partnership or
association, the application shall furnish the above information for every
member thereof. If the applicant is a business corporation, the application
shall furnish the above information for each officer and director thereof. The
application shall be signed by the applicant, if an individual, by all members
if the applicant is a partnership or association, and by the President and
Secretary if the applicant is a business corporation. A separate application
shall be required for each junkyard conducted by a junk dealer.
§ 121-4. License fee; term; renewal. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-16]
Every junk dealer or person operating or maintaining or intending to
establish or maintain a junkyard shall pay an annual license fee as set forth
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners for every
license or renewal thereof issued hereunder. All licenses shall be issued for
a term of one year, beginning July 1 and ending June 30 of the following
year. No abatement of the annual license fee shall be made for any cause
whatsoever. All licenses must be renewed annually on or before July 1 of
each year. Such license shall be issued upon the condition that the same
may be summarily revoked in the event the licensee is found to have given
any false information or in any way misrepresented any material fact upon
which the issuing authority has relied in granting such license. No refunds
will be given in such case.
§ 121-2 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 121-5
100:170
§ 121-5. License issuance.
The Board of Commissioners, upon receipt of an application for license
under this chapter, shall determine whether or not a license shall be issued
or a renewal thereof shall be granted after an examination of the application
and upon the fullest consideration of the suitability of the premises
proposed to be used for the purposes of the license, the character of the
property adjacent thereto and the effect of the proposed use, taking into
consideration the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the Township
and any potential hazard which may result to adjacent properties and
structures thereon or to the residents of the Township. Upon approval of
the application for license, the Board of Commissioners shall issue to the
applicant a license upon which such license shall be designated the name of
the junkyard. Such license shall be at all times conspicuously posted upon
the premises licensed thereunder. No such license issued by the Board shall
be transferable or assignable by agreement, will, intestacy or otherwise.
§ 121-6. License denial.
No license or renewal of license shall be issued to any person who, within
five years immediately preceding the date of his application, shall have been
convicted for any felony or misdemeanor crimen falsi.
§ 121-7. Records. [Amended 1-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
Every license hereunder shall provide and shall at all times keep and
maintain records, in the English language, or at the time of his purchase,
acquisition or receipt of junk, a full and complete description, including
trade names, serial or manufacturer's numbers, if any, of every article
or item of junk purchased, acquired or received by him, the date and
approximate hour of such purchase, acquisition or receipt and the name
and address of the person from whom such article or item of junk was
purchased, acquired or received. Such written records shall at all times be
subject to the inspection of the Chief of Police or equivalent official for just
cause. Such records shall be retained for a period of five years.
§ 121-8. Holding period.
Every licensee hereunder shall keep and retain upon the licensed premises,
for a period of 24 hours after the purchase, acquisition or receipt thereof,
every item or article of junk so purchased, acquired or received by him and
placed on the licensed premises. The licensee shall not disturb or reduce or
alter the original form, shape or condition of the same until such period of
24 hours has elapsed.
§ 121-9. Maintenance of premises.
Every license hereunder shall constantly maintain the licensed premises in
the manner hereinafter prescribed.
§ 121-5 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 121-9
100:171
A. Such premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to constitute a
nuisance or a menace to the health and welfare of the community or to
residents nearby or a place for the breeding of rodents and vermin.
B. No garbage or other organic waste shall be stored on such premises.
C. The manner of storage and arrangement of junk and the drainage
facilities of the premises shall be such as to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water upon the licensed land and to facilitate access for
inspection purposes and fire fighting.
D. No junk shall be stored or accumulated nor shall any structure be
erected within 25 feet of any side yard line nor within 50 feet of the
front or rear yard line, nor shall any junk be stored within the buffer
yard required by Chapter 220, Zoning, provided that nothing contained
in this subsection shall apply to existing structures pertaining to and
being used in connection with junkyards presently established and
operating.
E. Every structure erected upon the licensed premises and used in
connection therewith shall be of fireproof construction.
F. The premises shall be enclosed by a metal chain link fence constructed
of good heavy-duty steel and supported upon steel posts, or in lieu
thereof, a solid masonry or metal wall of a uniform design, texture and
structure. The erection of such fence or wall shall be controlled by the
setback provisions of Subsection D hereof. Such fence or wall shall not
be less than six feet in height, nor shall two or more vehicles or major
parts thereof be stacked on top of one another or otherwise as to
protrude above it. The erection of said fence shall be completed within
12 months after the effective date of this chapter. If, in the sole and
exclusive opinion of a majority of the Board of Township
Commissioners, it should appear that the owner and/or operator of a
junkyard situate within the Township have clearly demonstrated that
they are making a continuing bona fide effort to comply with the fencing
provisions of this subsection, then and in such event the Board may, in
its sole discretion, grant an extension of time to such owner or operator
of a junkyard for the completion of the erection of said fence, upon
receipt of a written letter from said junkyard owner or operator
requesting such an extension of time. It is further provided that the
foregoing fencing provisions shall be applicable only to the portion of
the premises being immediately used for the storage of junk and shall
not be applicable to the balance of the property owned or used by said
junkyard operator so long as said remaining portion of land is not being
used for the storage of junk as defined in this chapter.
G. The land area between the above provided chain link fence or wall and
any public highway, street or avenue or adjacent property shall be
implanted with a screen planting consisting of trees, shrubbery and
other plant material arranged in a manner to serve as a barrier to
§ 121-9 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 121-9
100:172
§ 121-10. Inspection. [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
The Township Manager or his designee shall from time to time regularly
inspect the premises of every licensee hereunder for the purpose of
determining whether the licensee has established and maintained his
premises in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and such
rules and regulations which may hereafter be adopted by the Township
regulating and licensing junk dealers and the establishment and
maintenance of junkyards. The Township Manager or his designee shall
forthwith prosecute any discovered violation of this chapter. The Township
Manager or his designee shall, not less than twice yearly, furnish to the
Board of Commissioners a report of such inspection, the same to be in
writing and in the form prescribed by the Board.
§ 121-11. Maintenance. [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
Every junkyard in the Township shall at all times be subject to inspection
during reasonable hours of the day by the Township Manager or his
designee. To facilitate such inspection, all junk therein shall be arranged
and maintained in a neat and orderly fashion. All of such junk vehicles and
other junk are to be arranged in rows with a minimum of 20 feet of clear
space between each row and each of the rows shall be no greater in width
than 40 feet.
visibility, airborne particles, glare and noise. The screen planting shall
be in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Plant materials used in the screen planting shall be comprised of
not less than 50% evergreen material and shall be not less than six
feet in height.
(2) The screen planting shall be permanently maintained.
(3) The screen planting shall be so placed that at maturity it will not be
closer than five feet from any street or property line.
(4) A clear sight triangle shall be maintained at all street intersections
and at all points where private accessways intersect public streets.
(5) The screen planting may be broken at points of vehicular or
pedestrian access and at other points where a barrier is not
necessary, provided that no outdoor storage of junk shall be so
located to be visible from any adjacent property.
(6) Prior to the issuance of a license, complete plans showing the
arrangement of all buffer yards and the placement, species and size
of all plant materials to be placed in such buffer yard shall be
approved by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 121-9 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 121-12
100:173
§ 121-12. Burning junk.
No burning of junk rubbish or other material in connection with junkyards
shall be ignited or otherwise commenced except between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 12:00 noon, Tuesdays through Saturdays and at no other times.
§ 121-13. Storage near watercourse prohibited.
No junk scrap, automobile bodies, motors or any other item of junk as
defined in this chapter shall be stored, maintained, situated, placed or
otherwise located within 20 feet of any river, stream, run, creek, irrigation
ditch or any other natural watercourse within the boundary lines of the
Township.
§ 121-14. Off-street parking required.
No junkyard as defined in this chapter shall be granted a license under the
provisions hereof, unless off-street parking is provided within the property
owner's boundary lines.
§ 121-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-16]
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment thereof, imprisoned for not more than 30 days. Each day's violation
of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 126
KEY LOCK BOXES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency medical service — See Ch. 17.
Fire Companies — See Ch. 21.
Police Department — See Ch. 42.
Alarms — See Ch. 61.
Building construction — See Ch. 70.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 103.
Fire suppression equipment — See Ch. 106.
§ 126-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to require certain structures to have a key
lock box installed on the entrance of the structure to enable members of
Lower Allen Fire Company No. 1, Lisburn Community Fire Company, Lower
Allen Township Emergency Medical Service (EMS) personnel and police
officers to gain access to the structure when responding to an emergency
without forceful entry.
§ 121-12 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 126-2
126:174
§ 126-2. Title.
This chapter shall be know and may be cited as the "Key Lock Box
Ordinance."
§ 126-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following words, terms and phrases shall have
the meanings herein ascribed thereto unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
AUTOMATIC DETECTION SYSTEM — Any engineered system, device,
equipment, mechanical, electrical or battery-operated arrangement to
activate an alarm or signal of the occurrence of a police, fire, hazard or
medical emergency requiring urgent attention and to which police, fire
units or EMS personnel are expected to respond.
AUTOMATIC SUPPRESSING SYSTEM — An engineered system that
automatically detects a fire, activates an alarm and suppresses a fire by
applications of an extinguishing agent through fixed piping and nozzle.
FIRE COMPANIES — All members and equipment of the Lower Allen Fire
Company No. 1 and Lisburn Community Fire Company.
FIRE EMERGENCY — A fire.
MANAGER — The Manager of the township.
MEDICAL EMERGENCY — An emergency involving the health of a person
or persons.
PERSON — Any person, group, firm, partnership, association, company,
corporation or organization of any kind.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — All members of the Lower Allen Township Police
Department.
POLICE EMERGENCY — An incident requiring prompt response by the
Police Department.
STRUCTURAL — That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
TOWNSHIP — The Lower Allen Township, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 126-4. Key lock box required.
All structures within the township having an automatic detection system
and/or an automatic suppression system that are secured in a manner
that restricts access during an emergency, including but not limited to
multifamily residential structures that have restricted access through a
locked door or have a common corridor for access to the living units,
governmental structures, health care facilities, schools and churches, shall
be equipped with a key lock box at or near the main entrance in such other
location required and approved by the Township Manager or his designee.
§ 126-2 KEY LOCK BOXES § 126-4
126:175
Single-family residential dwellings having independent means of ingress
and egress shall be exempt from this requirement.
§ 126-5. Time of compliance.
The owner of each newly constructed structure subject to this chapter
shall have the key lock box installed and operational prior to the issuance
of an occupancy permit. The owner of each structure in existence on the
effective date of this chapter and subject to this chapter shall have one year
from the effective date of this chapter to have a key lock box installed and
operational.
§ 126-6. Key lock box type.
The key lock box shall be an Underwriter's Laboratory type and approved by
the Township Manager or his designee. The key lock box will be equipped
with a lock which can be opened only with a key that is issued only to the
Township Manager or his designee. Emergency vehicles will be equipped
with one key that is held in a special security device. The structure owner
shall not be able to obtain a key to open the lock box.
§ 126-7. Location.
The key lock box shall be mounted on the structure entrance at a height
of between four to six feet and within three feet of the direct access
port or such other location approved by the Township Manager or his
designee. Flush mounted or surface recessed key lock box installations will
be permitted, provided that the key lock box is clearly marked. Once the key
lock box is installed, the owner of the structure shall contact the Township
Manager or his designee during regular office hours to arrange for the
owner of the structure to be contacted and visited by a member of the Fire
Companies and a member of the Police Department to inspect the key lock
box and install the access keys.
§ 126-8. Contents of key lock box.
The key lock box shall contain keys to locked ports of entrance, whether
on the interior or exterior of the structure, keys to locked mechanical
equipment rooms, keys to locked electrical rooms, keys to elevator controls,
keys to any fenced or secured area, floor plan of the rooms within the
structure denoting any utility disconnects or controls, fire alarm panels or
controls and any hazardous materials stored in the structure. If contents of
the key lock box must be added or removed, arrangements shall be made
with the Township Manager or his designee to visit the structure to open
the box, inspect the change of contents and then lock the box.
§ 126-9. Contact person.
The owner of the structure required to have a key lock box shall provide a
list of contact persons, indicating name, home address and home telephone
number to the Township Manager or his designee. The owner of the
§ 126-4 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 126-9
126:176
structure shall immediately upon any change with respect thereto furnish
the Township Manager with such information with respect to such change.
§ 126-10. Violations and penalties.63
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, upon summary
conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, be imprisoned in the Cumberland County Prison for
a period of not more than 30 days. Each day's violation of any provision of
this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 133
LIGHTING SERVICE ASSESSMENTS
§ 133-1. Request for lighting services. [Amended 6-25-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-08]
Developers or residents of residential developments may request, by way
of a subdivision plan or formal petition, that the Township furnish
streetlighting service, pursuant to the First Class Township Code.64
§ 133-2. Annual assessment by street frontage. [Amended
6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-08]
The Board of Commissioners shall annually assess or cause to be assessed
the cost of such lighting service by an equal assessment on all properties
situated wholly or in part within 300 feet of any streetlight, such distance to
be measured along the center line of the street, in proportion to the number
of feet the same fronts on a street or highway, or the portion thereof, so
lighted by the lighting service requested.
§ 133-3. Assessment of vacant lots.
The assessment per foot front against vacant lots in any area so receiving
the lighting service rendered shall be assessed only 25% of the assessment
per foot front against property with improvements thereon.
§ 133-4. Assessment according to type of service. [Amended
6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-08]
The assessment in the several residential developments or areas within the
Township may vary and be of a different amount according to the kind of
service rendered in any particular area so assessed, so that the abutting
properties receiving such services may pay for the kind and type of service
rendered on a foot front basis.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
64.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
§ 126-9 LIGHTING SERVICE ASSESSMENTS § 133-5
133:177
§ 133-5. Billing procedure.
All assessments for streetlighting shall be filed with the Township
Treasurer, who shall give 30 days' written notice that the assessments are
due and payable, stating the due date to each party so assessed, either by
service on the owner of the property or by mailing such notice to the owner
at his last known post office address.
§ 133-6. Collection of unpaid assessments.
Any assessments which shall remain unpaid on the first Monday of May of
the succeeding year shall be collected in accordance with the provisions of
the First Class Township Code.65
Chapter 140
(RESERVED)
Chapter 146
MUNICIPAL CLAIMS, DELINQUENT
65.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
§ 133-5 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 133-6
133:178
ARTICLE I
Attorney Fees
[Adopted 6-10-1996 by Ord. No. 96-2]
§ 146-1. Schedule of fees. [Amended 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
Attorney fees incurred in the collection of any delinquent municipal claim
shall be at the rate determined from time to time by resolution by the
Board of Commissioners for all work in connection with the collection of
any delinquent municipal claim and shall be added to the amount of the
municipal claim.
§ 146-2. Notice.
At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney fees in connection
with the collection of a delinquent municipal claim, the township shall, by
United States certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, mail
to the owner the notice required by Act No. 1996-166 or if within 30 days
of mailing the aforesaid notice, the certified mail is refused or unclaimed or
the return receipt is not received, then at least 10 days prior to assessing
or imposing attorney fees in connection with the collection of a delinquent
municipal claim, the township shall, by United States first class mail, mail
to the owner the notice required by Act No. 1996-1. The notice shall include
the following:
§ 146-3. Challenge to imposition and assessment of attorney fees.
Where attorney fees are sought to be collected in connection with the
collection of a delinquent municipal claim, the owner shall have the rights
granted by Act No. 1996-1.
A. A statement of the intent of the township to impose or assess attorney
fees within 30 days of mailing the notice or within 10 days of mailing
the notice, as hereinbefore required.
B. The manner in which the imposition or assessment of attorney fees may
be avoided by payment of the delinquent municipal claim.
66.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7193.1.
§ 146-1 LIGHTING SERVICE ASSESSMENTS § 146-3
133:179
Chapter 147
NOISE CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management services — See Ch.
15.
Alarms — See Ch. 61.
Animals — See Ch. 65.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 87.
Filling and excavating — See Ch. 98.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 155.
Solid waste — See Ch. 180.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 209.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 147-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Lower Allen Township Noise Control
Ordinance."
§ 147-2. Definitions and standards.
A. All terminology used in this chapter not defined below shall be in
conformance with applicable publications of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSTRUCTION OPERATION — The erection, repair, renovation,
demolition or removal of any building or structure, and the excavation,
filling, grading and regulation of lots in connection therewith.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS — Any combustible or explosive composition
or any substance or combination of substances which is intended to
produce visible or audible effects by combustion, is suitable for use by
the public, complies with the construction, performance, composition
and labeling requirements promulgated by the Consumer Products
Safety Commission in 16 CFR (relating to commercial practices) or any
successor regulation and complies with the provisions for "consumer
fireworks" as defined in APA 87-1 or any successor standard, the sale,
possession and use of which shall be permitted throughout this
Commonwealth. The term does not include devices such as "ground
and hand-held sparkling devices," "novelties" or "toy caps" in APA
87-1 or any successor standard, the sale, possession and use of which
shall be permitted at all times throughout this Commonwealth.[Added
8-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
DEPARTMENT — Any department, agency or authority of Lower Allen
Township.
§ 146-3 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 147-2
133:180
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving
actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — A motor vehicle used in response to a public
calamity or to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure
to danger.
EMERGENCY WORK — Work made necessary to restore property to
a safe condition following a public calamity, work to restore public
utilities or work required to protect persons or property from an
imminent exposure to danger.
MOTOR VEHICLE — The same as defined in the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code.
MUFFLER or SOUND-DISSIPATIVE DEVICE — A device decreasing
or abating the level of sound escaping from an engine or machinery
system.
NOISE — Any sound which is unwanted or which causes an adverse
psychological or physiological effect on human beings.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Sound which:
PERSONS — Any individual, association, partnership or corporation,
user, owner or operator and includes any officer, employee, department,
agency or instrument of a state or any political subdivision of a state.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty,
"person" includes the individual members, partners, officers and
managers or any of them of partnerships and associations, and as for
corporations, the officers and managers thereof or any of them and, in
their absence, the shareholders.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE NOISE — Any noise for which the information
content of that noise is unambiguously communicated to the listener,
such as but not limited to understandable spoken speech and
comprehensible musical rhythms.
POWERED MODEL VEHICLES — Any powered vehicles, either
airborne, waterborne or landborne, which are designed not to carry
persons or property, such as but not limited to model airplanes, boats,
cars and rockets, and which can be propelled by mechanical means.
PROPERTY BOUNDARY — An imaginary line exterior to any enclosed
structure, at the ground surface, which separates the real property
owned, rented or leased by one person from that owned, rented or
leased by another person, and its vertical extension.
Disrupts or injures the comfort, repose, health, hearing, peace or
safety of persons;
(1)
Annoys, disturbs or perturbs a reasonable person with normal
sensitivities;
(2)
(3) Endangers or injures personal or real property.
§ 147-2 LIGHTING SERVICE ASSESSMENTS § 147-2
133:181
§ 147-3. Enforcement agencies.
The power and authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall
be vested in the Police Department and the Department of Community
Development.
§ 147-4. Noises prohibited.
The following acts are declared to be a noise disturbance and in violation of
this chapter if occurring during the period of time set forth in this section:
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk, alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon which are
owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY — All land, whether publicly or privately owned,
whether improved or not improved, with or without structures,
exclusive of any areas devoted to public rights-of-way.
SOUND — An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces
that cause compression and rarefaction of that medium or the
superposition of such propagated oscillation which evokes an auditory
sensation. The description of sound may include any characteristics of
such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency.
SPECIAL EVENTS — A ticketed or unticketed event held by an
establishment licensed by the Liquor Control Board, including any
event outside the normal scope of entertainment that does not require
an admission fee.
STATIONARY NOISE SOURCE — Any stationary device, fixed or
movable, which is located or used on any real property.
ZONING DISTRICTS — The land use districts designated in Chapter
220, Zoning, of 1995, as amended from time to time.
A. Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., operating or permitting
the use or operation of any radio set, musical instrument, television,
phonograph, sound amplifier, automobile radio, automobile stereo,
high-fidelity equipment, portable stereo or other device, including but
not limited to devices utilizing digital technology, for the production or
reproduction of sound:
(1) Such noise level shall not create a noise disturbance within a
dwelling unit which is not the source of the sound.
(2) Such noise level shall not be heard from the boundary line of the
real property affected by the noise, the curbline of a public street or
way or a point not less than 50 feet from the source of the noise in
§ 147-2 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 147-4
133:182
Residential and MUN Zoning Districts and not less than 250 feet in
Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts.
B. Animal noise: Refer to § 65-1, Disturbing or loud noise, from any dog or
domestic animal.
C. Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., loading, unloading or
handling boxes, containers, garbage cans or the general activity of
loading or unloading operations of vehicles in such a manner as to
cause a noise disturbance across the property line (boundary). This
section shall not apply to municipal or utility services in or about the
public right-of-way and the collection of refuse in compliance with
§ 180-12D(6), regarding times of collection. [Amended 4-10-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-04]
D. Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., repairing, rebuilding,
modifying or testing any machine with an internal combustion engine in
or near a residential use district if the noise of such repairing,
rebuilding, modifying or testing shall be heard from the boundary line
of the real property affected by the noise, the curbline of a public street
or way or a point not less than 50 feet from the source of the noise,
whichever is less.
E. Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., operating or permitting
the operation of powered model vehicles in such a manner as to create
a noise disturbance across any property boundary.
F. Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., operating or permitting
the operating of any mower, powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or
garden tool, snowblower or similar device used outdoors in residential
areas in a manner so as to cause a noise disturbance across a
residential property line (boundary).
G. Offering for sale or selling by shouting or outcry or by any other
amplified or unamplified sound within any residential area, except
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
H. The following acts or the causing thereof are prohibited:
(1) The removal or rendering inoperative by any person other than for
purposes of maintenance, repair or replacement of any muffler or
sound-dissipative device or element of design or noise label of any
product.
(2) The intentional moving or rendering inaccurate or inoperative of
any sound-monitoring instrument or device positioned by or for the
personnel authorized to enforce this chapter, provided that such
device is clearly labeled in accordance with noise control
regulations to ward off the potential illegality.
§ 147-4 LIGHTING SERVICE ASSESSMENTS § 147-4
133:183
§ 147-5. Motor vehicle noise levels.
§ 147-6. (Reserved)
§ 147-7. Enforcement order; exemption for time to comply.
(3) The use of a product which has had a muffler or sound-dissipative
device or element of design or noise label removed or rendered
inoperative, with knowledge that such action has occurred.
I. Discharging, detonating, igniting or otherwise using consumer
fireworks between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall be
prohibited. [Added 8-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-0767]
J. The noise from any of the aforesaid prohibited acts that disturbs two or
more residents in general agreement as to times and duration of the
noise and who reside in separate residences, including apartments and
condominiums located across a property line (boundary) from the
property on which the source of the noise is generated, shall be prima
facie evidence of a noise disturbance.
A. No person shall operate or permit the operation of any motor vehicle or
any auxiliary equipment attached to such a vehicle while the vehicle is
stationary, for reasons other than traffic congestion, anywhere within
150 feet of any residence in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance across residential property lines (boundary). Auxiliary
equipment shall include air brakes, horns and other devices associated
with the operation of motor vehicles. [Amended 4-10-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-04]
B. The noise from any of the prohibited acts that disturbs two or more
residents who are in general agreement as to times and duration of the
noise and who reside in separate residences, including apartments and
condominiums located across a property line (boundary) from the
property on which the source of the noise is generated, shall be prima
facie evidence of a noise disturbance.
A. Violation of this chapter shall be cause for a citation to be issued,
directly to the owner, occupant or person or persons in charge of or in
control of the device, building or premises.
B. Enforcement personnel may verbally communicate with the on-site staff
to request that sound levels be decreased. Enforcement personnel shall
have the power to shut down amplified music if two complaints are
received for the same event from unrelated parties.
C. Upon good cause shown by the owner of any noise source, who was
issued a notice under Subsection A or B, the Township Manager shall
have the power to grant an exemption from the operation of this
67.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection I as Subsection J.
§ 147-4 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 147-7
133:184
§ 147-8. Exemptions.
The following sounds are exempted from the provision of this chapter:
chapter in order to allow for sufficient time for installation of needed
control equipment; such exemption may be renewed for an additional
like period, but only if satisfactory progress toward compliance is
shown.
A. Railway locomotives and cars.
B. Amplified announcements. Electronically amplified announcements at
athletic events.
C. Blasting. Blasting under permit, which blasting may occur only between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, unless
specifically authorized by such permit.
D. Concerts, etc. Band concerts, block parties, church carnivals or other
performances or similar activities publicly or privately sponsored and
presented in any public or private space outdoors, provided that such
activities do not occur between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
E. Emergency operations. Sound caused by the performance of emergency
operations, or by the ordinary and accepted use of emergency
apparatus and equipment.
F. Municipal and utility services. Sounds resulting from the repair or
replacement of any municipal or utility installation in or about the
public right-of-way.
G. School and public activities. Sounds not electronically amplified,
created by organized school-related activities, athletic and
entertainment events or other public programs, activities or events,
other than fireworks or fireworks displays.
(1) Any person responsible for any activity or event involving fireworks
or fireworks displays shall apply for a special permit with the
Department of Community Development.
H. Other exemptions:
(1) Highway noise.
(2) Aircraft.
(3) Idling of construction equipment on highways.
(4) Farm animals located in an area zoned to allow farm animals.
(5) Noise caused in the performance of emergency work for the
immediate safety, health or welfare of the community or individuals
of the community, or to restore property to a safe condition
following a public calamity.
§ 147-7 LIGHTING SERVICE ASSESSMENTS § 147-9
133:185
§ 147-9. Licensed establishments.
§ 147-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the terms of this chapter shall, upon conviction
in a summary proceeding, be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 or be less
than $100 for each offense, as hereinafter set forth, costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment of such fines and costs, imprisonment for a period
not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 149
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 121. Property maintenance — See Ch. 162.
§ 149-1. Stagnant water prohibited.
No person shall permit any pool or body of water that has or may become
stagnant to remain on the premises owned or occupied by him.
§ 149-2. Ponds. [Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-11]
Any pond or body of water which is not classified as a swimming pool nor
is covered by DEP regulations shall be considered as a pond, the design
of which shall consider both child and pedestrian safety. Ponds with side
slopes steeper than 3 to 1 shall be fenced except that ponds with water
depths of 24 inches or less, as determined between the drain elevation and
the overflow elevation, shall not require fencing. The fencing shall be a
minimum of four feet high with no openings greater than six inches and
shall have a locked gate.68
A. It is the intent of the Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen Township
to enforce noise locally for licensed Liquor Control Board
establishments located in Commercial, Industrial or Mixed-Use
Neighborhood Zoning Districts.
B. Licensed establishments comply with the Liquor Code for local
enforcement per Act 2012-116 (July 5, 2012).
C. Licensed establishments that have special events shall give at least 30
days' written notice to Lower Allen Township and pay a permit fee as
determined by resolution of the Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen
Township.
68.Editor's Note: See § 220-168, Fences and walls, for other fencing regulations.
§ 147-9 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 149-3
149:186
§ 149-3. Offensive liquids or substances.
No person shall run, cast or deposit, either by means of a drain or
otherwise, on any street, alley, public or private ground, any kitchen food
debris, wash water, soap suds, grass clippings or any other nauseous or
offensive liquid or substance.
§ 149-4. Health nuisances.
No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any property within
the township any condition productive of a nuisance detrimental to the
public health. This may include such items as dust, dirt, manure, debris,
weeds or other noxious material.
§ 149-5. Notice to abate nuisance.
It shall be the duty of the Township Manager or his agent or agents, upon
complaint of citizens and property owners or otherwise, to investigate an
alleged nuisance and if a nuisance exists, to abate any nuisance detrimental
to the public health after giving a five-day notice, in writing, to the owner or
occupier of the premises.
§ 149-6. Action by township.
If 10 days after conviction of a violation of any provision of this chapter
any prohibited situations still exist, then the township or its representatives
shall enter upon the premises and correct the situation. The cost of this
abatement, together with a 10% penalty shall be collected by the filing of a
municipal lien.
§ 149-7. Violations and penalties.69
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$100 and not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, shall be imprisoned not more than 30 days.
Each ten-day continuance of a violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 151
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation and Parks Board — See Ch. 42.
Animals — See Ch. 65.
Burning, open — See Ch. 76.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 209.
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 149-3 NUISANCES § 151-1
149:187
§ 151-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
BOARD or BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners of
Lower Allen Township.
DOG PARK — Any facility designated as such by the Board of
Commissioners in which dogs are permitted off leash.[Added 3-22-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-02]
MEMORIAL — Any marker made of stone, concrete, wood, metal, plastic,
composite, or any other material installed by any member of the general
public containing written, engraved, or adhered lettered information
regarding any person to whom such memorial is being dedicated, including,
but not limited to, name, date of birth, date of death, quotations or
inspirational messages.[Added 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-04]
PARK or PARKS — Includes any land or water, whether owned or leased
by the Township, which is designated by the Board to be for recreational
use and under the control of the Board or which may properly come under
the control of the Board, including entrances and exits thereto, as well
as all improvements located thereon any area designated by the Board
of Commissioners as a public park and/or recreational facility.[Amended
3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-02]
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, trust,
corporation or any other group or entity.
PLAYGROUND — See "park" definition.[Amended 3-22-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-02]
RECREATION CENTER — The two-story building situate on the Lower Allen
Community Park.
SIGN — Any sign constructed by Township forces or contracted for by
Township officials that identifies the name of a park, field, building, or any
other facility of the Township, even if that name was dedicated in honor of
any living or deceased individual.[Added 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-04]
TOWNSHIP — Lower Allen Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
§ 151-2. Township residents have priority of use.
The facilities of the parks, playgrounds and recreation center are primarily
for use of the residents of Lower Allen Township in carrying out the
recreational and educational programs for all residents of the Township.
Residents of Lower Allen Township shall have priority in the use of any
of the facilities. When possible, the Board of Commissioners may permit
nonresidents of Lower Allen Township to make proper use of these facilities.
All persons who use the parks, playgrounds and recreation center shall be
subject to the rules and regulations as set forth in this chapter and any
supplements and amendments thereto.
§ 151-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 151-3
149:188
§ 151-3. Authority to prescribe rules, regulations and charge.
[Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-16]
The Board of Commissioners may prescribe rules and regulations for the
use of the parks, playgrounds and recreation center, including but not
limited to procedures for the filing and approval of applications and use
of the facilities or structures within the parks, playgrounds and recreation
centers. The Board may prescribe by resolution charges for the use of said
facilities. The Recreation and Parks Board shall make recommendations
with respect to such rules and regulations.
§ 151-4. General rules and regulations.
A. Hours of operation. Except as hereinafter set forth, parks and
playgrounds shall be open daily from dawn until dusk. The barn and
campground at Lower Allen Community Park shall be open for activity
and events as determined by the Township Manager or his designee.
Park areas that have coin-operated or timed lighting shall be opened
from dawn until 11:00 p.m. [Amended 7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 94-3;
5-9-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
B. Group activity. Whenever any group, association or organization desires
to use a park, playground or the recreation center a representative
thereof shall first obtain authorization from the Township Manager or
his designee. Authorization shall be granted to such a group if it
appears that its use will not interfere with the general use of said
facilities by individual members of the public. Fund-raising events shall
be permitted only when moneys derived from such events are solely
used to benefit the community.
C. Use of facilities. Facilities shall be used only for the purpose designated
or implicit in their character. Swimming or wading in streams or bodies
of water, if not posted, is at the user's own risk. No responsibility
whatsoever other than that imposed by law is assumed by the Township
with respect to any activity or use of facilities. Special activities, games
and picnics shall be permitted only at locations or trails specifically
designated by the Township Manager or his designee for such use and
at times established.
D. Use of vehicles. Licensed motor vehicles shall be permitted only on
designated roadways. The speed limit for such vehicles on such
roadways shall be 15 miles per hour. Motorscooters, motorcycles,
minibikes, go-carts, golf carts, and snowmobiles shall not be permitted
on roadways designated for licensed motor vehicles, unless licensed for
travel on the public roads of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. No
motor vehicles shall be driven off the roadways/driveways of the
Township parks or playgrounds without the Township Manager's
permission, except for maintenance vehicles. All vehicles shall be
parked in areas or places so provided and designated. Parking in areas
or places contrary to posted regulations and times is prohibited, and
such vehicles may be removed by the Township at the owner's expense.
§ 151-3 NUISANCES § 151-4
149:189
§ 151-5. Recreation center rules.
No person shall do any of the following acts within the recreation center:
§ 151-6. Prohibited acts.
No person shall do any of the following acts within any park, playground or
recreation center:
All parking is prohibited after regular closing time, except when
authorized, in writing, by the Township Manager or his designee. It
shall be unlawful to clean, wash, repair or do any work whatsoever on
private vehicles within recreation parks and conservation areas, except
for emergency repairs. [Amended 7-8-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-07]
E. Dog park rules. Users of the dog park must complete registration as
adopted by the Board of Commissioners prior to using the dog park. By
registering with the Board of Commissioners, users agree to follow all
rules in the dog park established by the Board of Commissioners.
[Added 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-02]
F. Parking. Parking lots and parking spaces within the park boundaries
are reserved for use by park patrons. Persons parking within park
property but not using park facilities will be subject to a fine of $10 as
described in §§ 209-8 and 209-9 of this Code. If a proceeding is
instituted before a District Justice as described in § 209-8B, the fine
shall not be less than $15 nor more than $25, and costs of prosecution.
[Added 7-9-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-09]
A. Use the recreation center without prior approval of the Township
Manager or his designee.
B. Use any room or corridor not assigned to his or her use.
C. Use decoration not approved in advance by the Township Manager or
his designee or not remove such decorations immediately after the
event.
D. Smoke within the building, except in areas where posting specifically
permits smoking.
A. Consume, carry or possess in any cup, can or any other open or
unsealed container any alcoholic beverages except as set forth in
§ 151-8. Alcoholic beverage shall include any beverage containing more
than 1% of alcohol by weight.
B. Commit any obscene or indecent act.
C. Take part in or abet the playing of games involving thrown or otherwise
propelled objects, except in areas set aside for such form of recreation.
D. Use threatening, abusive, insulting, profane or obscene language or
words.
§ 151-4 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 151-6
149:190
E. Solicit money, subscriptions or contributions for any purpose.
F. Endanger the safety of other persons by any conduct or act.
G. Injure, deface, disturb, befoul or in any manner destroy or cause to be
destroyed any part of any park, playground or recreation center site at
LACP, or any building, sign, structure, equipment, utility or other
property found therein.
H. Camp or sleep on the ground or elsewhere, except in such places and at
such times which may be designated and approved by the Board of
Commissioners, Township Manager or his designee.
I. Remove, injure or destroy any tree, flower, shrub, plant or growing
thing or any rock or other mineral.
J. Kill, trap, hunt, pursue or in any manner deliberately disturb any wild
bird or animal within any park, playground or recreation center sites at
LACP.
K. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters
of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into
such water, any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into
such water, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or
may result in the pollution of said waters.
L. Take into or dump, deposit or leave any broken glass, ashes, paper,
boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish or other trash in any park, playground or
recreation center. No such dirt, refuse or trash shall be placed in any
waters, in or contiguous to any park, playground or recreation center,
or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the
proper receptacles where these are provided; and where receptacles
are not so provided, all rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the
park, playground or recreation center by the person responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. The Township Manager
or his designee may authorize and control deposit of refuse at the
Lower Allen Community Park during cleanup week.
M. Build or attempt to build a fire within the area of any park or
playground except in an apparatus used for cooking such as stoves,
grills and barbecue pits. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise
scatter hot coals, lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco
paper or other inflammable material, within the area of any park or
playground or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous
thereto.
N. Set off fireworks.
O. Post, paste, fasten, paint, write, draw, carve, tack or affix any placard,
bill, notice, sign, advertisement or any inscription whatever upon any
structure, tree, stone, fence, thing or enclosure within a park or
playground or on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to the
§ 151-6 NUISANCES § 151-6
149:191
park or playground, except that the Township Manager or his designee
may place informational signs within such areas.
P. Permit a domesticated animal within a park or playground not in a
designated area or without being controlled by a leash not more than
six feet long, except in dog parks. Authorization may be obtained for the
training and/or exhibition of animals in designated areas. It shall be
unlawful to bring any dangerous animal into a park or playground.
[Amended 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-02]
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to have at any Township park or
playground any animal that creates a public nuisance. No owner
shall fail to exercise proper care and control of an animal to prevent
them from becoming a public nuisance. "Public nuisance" shall
mean any animal which:
(a) Molests passersby or passing vehicles.
(b) Attacks other animals.
(c) Is at large.
(d) Damages public property.
(e) Barks, whines or howls in an excessive, continuous or untimely
fashion.
(2) The Township Manager or his designee shall have full and complete
authority to pick up, catch or procure any animal roaming at large,
creating a nuisance or violating any of the animal laws of the
Township.
(3) The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of
any excrement on Township park or playground property.
Q. Gambling, except that games of chance for nonprofit organization fund
raisers may be played upon issuance of a permit as set forth in § 151-7.
R. Offer for sale any article or thing, nor station or place any stand, cart or
vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or
thing without first obtaining a permit from the Township Manager; or
announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any article
or service for sale or hire. Permit fees shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners. [Amended 7-9-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-04]
S. Fail to observe the rules established by the Board or Township Manager
with respect to the area in question.
T. Interfere with any Township official or employee in the performance of
his or her duties or refuse to obey the directions and commands of any
Township official or employee in the performance of his or her duties.
U. Make any threats of violence to or against any other person.
§ 151-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 151-6
149:192
§ 151-7. Acts requiring prior consent and written permit.
No person shall commit any of the following acts within any park,
playground or recreation center without having previously obtained the
consent and approval of the Board of Commissioners, the Township
Manager or his designee evidenced by a written permit:
V. Be noisy and disorderly; the following acts, among others, are declared
to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this
chapter, but said enumerations shall not be deemed to be exclusive,
namely:
(1) Blowing horns.
(2) Playing of radio, phonographs, musical instruments or use of
loudspeakers so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose
of any person in the vicinity.
(3) Exhaust discharge.
W. Do any noisy or riotous conduct to the disturbance of the public peace
and tranquillity.
X. Drive recklessly.
Y. Use roller skates and roller blades at Lower Allen Community Park.
[Added 7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 94-3]
Z. Use of motorized vehicles shall be prohibited on Township trails and
facilities other than designated roadways. This prohibition shall not
apply to disability access vehicles and authorized construction or
maintenance vehicles. [Added 12-22-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
AA. Swimming or wading in streams or bodies of water is prohibited at
posted areas in Township parks. [Added 5-9-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-02]
A. 70Carry any ax, saw, pick, shovel or spade.
B. Play baseball, tennis or any other sport, game or competition at a place
not designated for that purpose or engage in or play a game, sport or
contest of a nature different from the one for which the designated area
was created, except in such areas as are set aside for diversified games.
C. Moor or store any boat within or on Township property, including but
not limited to parks, except for designated rescue boats. [Amended
3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-02]
70.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, listing carrying, possessing or discharging of any type
of firearms, air rifles, air pistols, slingshot, firework, bow and arrow or explosive, was
repealed 12-22-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09. This ordinance also redesignated former
Subsections B through K as Subsections A through J, respectively.
§ 151-6 NUISANCES § 151-7
149:193
§ 151-8. Alcoholic beverages. [Amended 1-4-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-01]
The Board of Commissioners, Township Manager, or his designee may
permit consumption of alcoholic beverages within the park, playground or
recreation center by issuance of a written permit. Any person or group
of persons desiring to consume alcoholic beverages within any park,
playground or recreation center shall make written application to the Board
of Commissioners not less than 15 days before such use, upon such form
as the Board of Commissioners may prescribe. The Chief of Police or
equivalent official shall investigate the application and make
recommendations with respect thereto. Each application shall be
accompanied with a security deposit in an amount determined from time to
time by Resolution of the Board, to be applied on account of any damage
to property of the Township or returned if there is no such damage. Each
applicant shall also provide at no expense to the Township one security
guard, or any greater number of security guards as the Township Manager
or his designee may determine.
§ 151-9. Effect of violation.
D. Post or display any sign, banner or advertisement of a political or
commercial nature.
E. Conduct, operate, present or manage a parade, drill, maneuver, public
meeting, ceremony, speech, address, public contest, exhibit, dramatic
performance, play, motion picture, fair, circus or show of any kind or
nature or band, choir, glee club or orchestra.
F. Hold or participate in an organized picnic or outing consisting of more
than 25 persons.
G. Obstruct any way, roadway or path.
H. Hold games of chance for nonprofit organization fund raising.
I. Violate any term or condition of the written permit.
J. Enter a designated dog park and permit a dog to run unleashed without
completing a Township dog registration form and paying any
registration fee established by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners. [Added 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-02]
K. Operate a concession stand selling any food, drink, apparel, or any
other merchandise. [Added 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-04]
L. Install any memorial within a Township park or playground. Signs
approved by the Township shall be exempt. Fence posts, stone pavers,
or any other park facility appurtenance sold by the Township to raise
money for that or any other park facility and installed by Township
forces or contracted for by Township officials shall be exempt. [Added
7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-04]
§ 151-7 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 151-9
149:194
§ 151-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-16; 7-9-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-09]
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of the
payment thereof, be imprisoned for not more than 30 days unless otherwise
specified in this chapter.
Chapter 155
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 155-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter may be expelled from
the park, playground or recreation center by the Township Police or
other Township official in charge thereof.
B. Any person violating § 151-6G and I shall be responsible for the costs or
expenses of repair or replacement incurred by the Township.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases or words
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context in which the word is used clearly indicates otherwise:
PEDDLER — Any person who engages in peddling, as hereinafter
defined.
PEDDLING — Engaging in selling or offering for sale, canvassing,
soliciting or the taking of orders, either by sample or otherwise, for
any goods, wares, services or merchandise, including but not limited to
subscriptions for magazines or other printed matter, the obtaining of
contracts for home and building devices, repairs and improvements and
the securing of contributions to various causes and organizations, upon
any of the streets or sidewalks, from house to house, by visitation to
private residences within the Township. However, the word "peddling"
shall not apply to:
(1) Farmers selling their own produce.
The sale of goods, wares and merchandise, donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds whereof to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose.
(2)
Any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products or milk and milk products.
(3)
Boys and girls under the age of 18 years who take orders for and
deliver products being sold to raise funds for organizations that
they belong to, represent or participate in activities with, such as
schools, churches, Boy or Girl Scouts, athletic teams, or similar
organizations.
(4)
§ 151-9 NUISANCES § 155-1
149:195
§ 155-2. Permit required.
No person shall engage in peddling in the Township without first having
obtained a permit as herein provided.
§ 155-3. Application information.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm,
organization or corporation.
The seeking or taking of orders by insurance agents or brokers
permitted under the insurance laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(5)
Any person who has complied with the provisions of the Act of
Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania known as the
"Solicitation of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act of 1990."71
(6)
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. Every person desiring to engage in peddling in the Township shall
submit a written application and current/valid photo identification to
the Township Manager or designee for a permit. If such person shall
also be required to obtain a permit from any county officer, such person
shall, on making such application, exhibit a valid county permit.
(1) The Township Manager or designee shall forward the application to
the Police Department for review of the submitted background
check(s). Each applicant shall sign a waiver allowing the Township
to conduct a background check.
(2) All applicants shall provide a Pennsylvania State Police background
check at the time of application. The background check shall not be
older than 10 days prior to the date the application is filed.
(3) Applicants who have not lived within the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania within 12 months preceding the date of the
application shall provide a background check from all states in
which they have lived for the past 10 years.
B. The application shall be upon a form provided by the Township
Manager or designee and shall contain at least the following
information verified by oath or affirmation:
(1) The full name, age, sex, local address, if any, and business address,
if any, of the applicant.
(2) The permanent address of the applicant.
71.Editor's Note: See 10 P.S. § 162.1 et seq.
§ 155-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 155-3
149:196
§ 155-4. Permit issuance, fees and exhibition.
§ 155-5. Sales of nonauthorized product or services.
No peddler shall engage in the selling or dealing with any products or
services not mentioned upon such permit.
(3) The name and address of the current employer or a statement that
such person is self-employed.
(4) The nature of the goods, wares, services or merchandise offered for
sale.
(5) The make and type of vehicle, if any, the applicant will use,
including its registration number and proof of vehicle insurance.
(6) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or a crime of any kind involving
moral turpitude.
C. Upon request of the Lower Allen Police Department, the applicant shall
also submit to fingerprinting.
D. Each person who will be engaging in soliciting or peddling shall
complete a separate application and be subject to the same application
fee.
E. No permit under this chapter shall be transferable from one person to
another.
F. The permit shall be good for 30 days from date of issuance in each
calendar year. The permit may be renewed for one additional
consecutive thirty-day period in that calendar year for an additional fee.
[Amended 11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-09]
A. The Township Manager or designee shall issue to the applicant, within
15 business days from the date of filing of the application, a permit
supplied by the Township with a current picture of the applicant affixed
and, if requested, to which the applicant's fingerprints shall be affixed,
provided that the proper fee as set forth from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Commissioners has been paid to the Township Manager
or designee for the use of the Township.
B. No permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a
felony or a misdemeanor or any crime of any kind involving moral
turpitude, and such person shall not be permitted to engage in peddling
within the Township.
C. Such permit, when issued, shall state, inter alia, the products to be sold
and services to be rendered by the permitee. Every peddler shall at all
times, when engaged in peddling in the Township, carry such permit
upon his person and exhibit it upon request to all police officers,
Township officials and citizens.
§ 155-3 NUISANCES § 155-6
149:197
§ 155-6. Prohibited practices.
No person permitted as a peddler under this chapter shall:
A. Engage in peddling on any day of the week except between 10:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m., prevailing time. There shall be no peddling on legal
holidays.
B. Hawk or cry his goods, wares, services or merchandise from any of the
streets or sidewalks of the Township, nor shall be use any sound
amplification system, loudspeakers or horn or any other device for
announcing his presence, by which the public may be annoyed.
C. Park any vehicle upon any of the streets, highways or alleys of the
Township in order to sort, rearrange or clean any of his goods, wares,
services or merchandise;
D. Deposit any refuse upon any of the streets, highways or alleys of the
Township.
E. Maintain or keep a street or curbstone market by parking any vehicle
upon any street or alley in the Township for longer than necessary in
order to sell therefrom to persons residing in the immediate vicinity.
F. Occupy any fixed location upon any of the sidewalks of the streets,
highways, alleys or sidewalks of the Township for the purpose of
peddling, with or without any stand or counter.
G. Engage in peddling or soliciting upon any premises or residence located
thereon if such premises or residence is posted against solicitation by
means of a notice prominently displayed, upon which is printed the
legend "NO SOLICITORS."
H. Engage in peddling or soliciting after being asked to leave the premises
or residence by the owner or occupant.
I. No person who engages in peddling or soliciting shall use a plan,
scheme or ruse or make any statement which indicates or implies that
the purpose of such person's visit is other than to obtain orders for or to
make sales of goods and services.
J. No person who engages in peddling or soliciting shall misrepresent the
right of a buyer to rescind or cancel a sale under the provisions of
applicable law, and such person shall provide the buyer with all
information required by state and federal regulations.
K. Fail to show a Lower Allen Township peddler's/solicitor's permit upon
request of a property owner, resident or official of the Township the
peddler or solicitor is calling upon.
L. Peddle or solicit home improvement services without being compliant
with the Pennsylvania Home Improvement Consumer Protection Act.
§ 155-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 155-7
149:198
§ 155-7. Permit record; supervision of activities. [Amended
1-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
The Township Manager or designee shall keep a record of all permits issued
under this chapter. The Chief of Police or equivalent official shall supervise
the activities of all holders of such permits.
§ 155-8. Permit suspension or revocation.
Any permit issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked at any
time by the Township Manager or designee upon proof being furnished
to him that the application for the permit contained false information or
that the applicant or permittee was convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or
a crime of any kind involving moral turpitude after the issuance of such
permit or that the permittee was convicted of disorderly conduct under
any laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any ordinance of the
Township or for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 155-9. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 156
PENSION COMMITTEE
§ 156-1. Establishment; name.
The new title of the oversight committee shall be the "Lower Allen Township
Pension Committee."
§ 156-2. Membership.
A. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
less than $600 and not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution for
such offense and, in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned for
not more than 30 days.
B. Prior to receiving a permit, all peddlers shall sign an acknowledgment
stating that they are familiar with the prohibited practices listed in
§ 155-6.
A. The Pension Committee shall be appointed by the Board of
Commissioners and made up of the following persons:
(1) Police Commissioner.
(2) Assistant Manager.
(3) Public Safety Director/Chief of Police.
(4) Finance Director.
(5) President of the Lower Allen Township Police Officers Association.
§ 155-7 NUISANCES § 156-2
149:199
§ 156-3. Terms.
§ 156-4. Meetings.
Meetings of the Pension Committee shall be held at a minimum of once per
year, but may be called by the Assistant Manager as necessary.
§ 156-5. Effect on other provisions.
The provisions of this chapter, as far as they are the same as those of
ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this chapter, are
intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as new enactments.
The provisions of this chapter shall not affect any act done or liability
incurred, nor shall it affect any such suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense under the
authority of any ordinance repealed by this chapter.
§ 156-6. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any of its provisions shall
be held to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such decision shall not
affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this article. It is
hereby declared as a legislative intent that this article would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid provision not been
included herein.
§ 156-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
(6) Nonunion employee at large.
(7) Lower Allen Township resident.
B. The resident to be appointed to the Committee must have actuarial
experience.
C. Changes in Committee membership shall be made by ordinance or
resolution of the Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen Township.
A. All members of the Pension Committee, with the exception of the
nonunion employee and the resident, shall serve on the Committee as
long as they hold the position described in § 156-2A.
B. The nonunion employee and Township resident shall serve two-year
terms, with the initial term ending on December 31 in the year
following the year in which they were appointed.
§ 156-2 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 156-7
149:200
Chapter 159
PLUMBING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 70. Sewers — See Ch. 175.
Chapter 162
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and safety
standards — See Ch. 70.
Noise control — See Ch. 147.
Collection and disposal of solid waste — See
Ch. 180, Art. II.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 187.
Trees — See Ch. 202.
Vector control — See Ch. 206.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 212.
Weeds — See Ch. 216.
§ 162-1. Adoption of standards. [Amended 12-11-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-07]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office of
the Secretary of Lower Allen Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania,
being marked and designated as the "2006 International Property
Maintenance Code," as published by the International Code Council, Inc.,
is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of Lower Allen
Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, to provide minimum
standards for maintenance of existing residential and nonresidential
structures, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said International Property Maintenance Code are
hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof, as if fully set forth at
length herein, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
described in § 162-2 herein.
§ 162-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections of the 2006 International Property Maintenance
Code72 are hereby revised as follows:
A. Section 101.1, Title, shall be amended by inserting "Lower Allen
Township" in the relevant space.
72.Editor's Note: The 2003 International Property Maintenance Code was changed to the
2006 edition pursuant to Ord. No. 2006-07, adopted 12-11-2006.
§ 156-7 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 162-2
159:201
B. Section 103 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
103.1 Enforcement agency. The Department of Community
Development shall be charged with the task of administering and
enforcing this Code. The executive official in charge thereof shall
be known as the "Code Official." The Board of Commissioners shall
appoint the Code Official and his deputies.
C. Section 103.5., Fees, shall be deleted and replaced by "The fees for
activities and services performed by the Department in carrying out its
responsibilities under this Code shall be indicated on a fee schedule,
adopted by resolution of the Board of Commissioners."
D. Section 106.3, Prosecution of violation, shall be deleted and replaced as
follows:
Section 106.3 Recovery of costs. To the extent permitted by law,
any costs incurred by Lower Allen Township to restrain, correct or
remove a violation of a provision of this Code; to correct the erection,
installation, maintenance, repair or alteration of a structure in
violation of a provision of this Code: to require removal of work in
violation of a provision of this Code; and to abate any public nuisance
shall be charged against the person who is responsible for such
violation or charged against the real estate upon which the building or
structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
E. Section 106.4, Violation penalties, shall be deleted and replaced as
follows: "Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code shall,
upon summary conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000, together with costs of suit in each case, and, in
default of payment, to imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall
be punishable accordingly."
F. Section 107.3 shall be amended to read as follows:
§ 162-2 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 162-2
162:202
107.3 Method of service: Such service shall be deemed to be
properly served by handing a copy thereof to the owner; by handing
a copy thereof at the residence of the owner, to an adult member of
the family with whom he or she resides; but if no adult member of the
family is found, then to an adult person in charge of such property;
at the residence of the defendant, to the clerk or manager of the
hotel, inn, apartment house, boardinghouse or other place of lodging
at which he resides; at any office or usual place of business of the
person or owner, to his agent or to the person for the time being in
charge; or in lieu of service under this rule, the owner or his authorized
agent may accept service by a separate document which conforms with
Pa.R.C.P. 402(b); or sent by certified registered mail addressed to the
owner at the last known address, with return receipt requested. If the
certified registered letter is returned showing that the letter was not
delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in
or about the structure affected by such notice. Service of such notice
in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or upon the person
responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice upon the
owner.
G. Sections 111.1, 111.2, 111.2.1, 111.2.2, 111.2.3, 111.2.4, 111.2.5,
111.3, 111.4, 111.4.1, 111.5, 111.6, 111.6.1, 111.6.2, and 111.7 are
hereby deleted in their entirety.
H. Section 111.0 shall be amended to read as follows:
111.1 Application for appeal: Any person affected by a decision of
the Code Official or a notice or order issued under this Code shall have
the right to appeal to the Board of Appeals, provided that a written
application for appeal is filed within 20 days after the day of decision,
notice or order was served. The appeal shall be upon such form as the
Board of Commissioners shall prescribe, shall be filed in duplicate and
shall be filed with the Township Manager or Township Secretary. One
copy of the appeal shall be filed with the Township Manager, and one
copy of the appeal shall be given by the Township Manager to the Code
Official. The parties to the appeal shall be the person filing the appeal,
the owner and the Codes Office.
111.2 Membership of the Board: The Board of Appeals shall consist
of the Commissioners of Lower Allen Township. The Board of Appeals
may engage the services of such professionals and disciplines as it
shall deem necessary.
111.3 Notice of hearing: The Township Manager shall give not less
than 10 days' written notice of the hearing to the parties.
§ 162-2 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 162-2
162:203
Chapter 167
RENTAL PROPERTY
111.4 Hearing: The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing
within 30 days after the appeal is filed. Unless a party requests a
stenographically recorded hearing not less than five days before the
hearing, the testimony will be tape-recorded. If a stenographically
recorded hearing is requested, the party making the request shall pay
the cost thereof.
111.5 Evidence: The Board of Appeals shall not be bound by technical
rules of evidence, and all relevant evidence of reasonable probative
value may be permitted. Reasonable examination and crossexamination
shall be permitted.
111.6 Adjudication: The Board of Appeals shall, in every case, reach
a decision within 30 days after the hearing is continued, within 30
days after the continued hearing. Failure to render a decision within
30 days after the continued hearing shall not be deemed approval in
favor of appellant. Every decision shall be in writing and shall contain
findings and the reason for the adjudication. Every decision shall be
filed in the office of the Building Official and shall be open to public
inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be served upon all
parties or their counsel personally or by mail not later than 10 days
following the decision.
111.7 Court review: Any person aggrieved by an adjudication who
has a direct interest in such adjudication shall have the right to appeal
therefrom to the court vested with jurisdiction of such appeals by or
pursuant to Title 42 (relating to judiciary and judicial procedures).
I. Amend Section 302.4 to read: "All premises and exterior property
within any districts shall be maintained free from weeds or weed
growth in excess of 10 inches on lands located 200 feet or less from any
building or structure available for use for human occupancy." [Added
12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-0773]
J. Amend Section 304.14 by inserting "April 1" and "October 31" in the
spaces for insertion of dates.
K. Amend Section 602.3 by inserting "October 15" and "April 15" in the
spaces for insertion of dates.
L. Amend Section 602.4 by inserting "October 15" and "April 15" in the
spaces for insertion of dates.
73.Editor's Note: This local law also relettered former Subsections I, J and K as Subsections
J, K. and L.
§ 162-2 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 167-1
162:204
§ 167-1. Definitions.
The following words when used in this chapter shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning:
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
LESSEE — That person or persons who has the use of real estate of a lessor
and is responsible for the giving of any type of consideration therefor, but
excluding those who are lessees for a period of less than 30 days.
LESSOR — Any person who grants a lease or otherwise permits the use of
his real estate or portion thereof for a consideration, monetary or otherwise.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Lower Allen, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 167-2. Reports required; initial information.
All lessors within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter or in case of
real estate thereafter acquired or thereafter rented or becoming available
for rental, within 30 days after the acquisition, rental or availability for
rental thereof, as the case may be, shall report to the township the number
of the parcels or units or real estate presently or hereafter rented and
available for rental; a description, by address, number and/or some other
meaningful method of the parcels or units; and the names of its lessees at
the time of such report, together with a designation as to which unit or
parcel is occupied by each.74
§ 167-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No.
97-16]
Any lessor violating the provisions of this chapter or furnishing false
information to the township or using any false name or address in any
report required by this chapter shall be fined not less than $100 and not
more than $600 and the cost of prosecution and, in default of payment
thereof, shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
74.Editor’s Note: Former § 167-3, Report of occupancy change, and § 167-4, Use of report
form; duty to provide information, both of which immediately followed this section, were
repealed 5-12-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04. This ordinance also provided for the
redesignation of former § 167-5 as § 167-3.
§ 167-1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 167-3
162:205
Chapter 169
(RESERVED)
Chapter 175
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and safety
standards — See Ch. 70.
Solid waste — See Ch. 180.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 187.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
192.
§ 167-3 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 167-3
169:206
ARTICLE I
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 6-10-1985 as Art. 923 of the 1985 Code of Ordinances;
amended in its entirety 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-13]
§ 175-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — Lower Allen Township Authority, a Pennsylvania municipal
authority.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the sewage drainage system of
any structure to the sewer system.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located within the township upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings and from which structure
sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any room, group of rooms, building
or other enclosure used or intended for use, in whole, or in part, in the
operation of one business enterprise for manufacturing, fabricating,
processing, cleaning, laundering or assembling any product, commodity or
article or from which process waste, as distinct from sanitary sewage, shall
be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or
waterborne wastes or form of energy rejected or escaping in the course of
any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or in the course
of the development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct
from sanitary sewage.
LATERAL — That portion of or place in a sewer which is provided for
connection of any building sewer.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation or other group or entity.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
from any improved property.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system used
or usable for sewage collection purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
pumping, transporting, treating or disposing of sanitary sewage and
industrial wastes to be owned by the Authority.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Lower Allen, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania, a municipality, acting by and through its Board of
§ 175-1 (RESERVED) § 175-1
169:207
Commissioners or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its
authorized representatives.
§ 175-2. Notice to connect; time limit. [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-10]
Every improved property in the township within 200 feet from the footer
wall to the center line of the sewer main shall be connected with such sewer
in such manner as the Authority or township may order within 60 days after
notice to the owner from the Authority or township to make the connection
for the purpose of the discharge of all sanitary sewage or industrial waste
from such premises. All such sewage, after such connection, shall be
conducted into such sewer, subject to such limitations and restrictions
as shall be established herein or otherwise by the Authority or township
from time to time. Every such property shall be connected separately and
independently with the sewer through the lateral connection directly
opposite the structure or nearest to it in a downstream direction. Grouping
of buildings or townhouses upon one building sewer shall not be permitted,
except under special circumstances and for good sanitary reasons with
special permission granted by the Authority or township.
§ 175-3. Township may make connection and collect fee.
If the owner of any property, after 60 days' notice from the township or
Authority to make connection of such property with a sewer, fails to make
such connection, the township or Authority may make the connection and
may collect the cost thereof, together with the sewer connection fee as
herein set forth if the same has not been paid, from such owner by a
municipal claim or in an action of assumpsit, as provided by law.
§ 175-4. Required acts prior to making connection.
No person shall make or cause to be made any connection of his property
with any sewer until he has fulfilled all of the following conditions:
§ 175-5. Connection method and location; responsibility. [Amended
11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-10]
All sewer connections shall be made at the place where the lateral or
service connection in the sewer is provided. All joints shall be sealed and
A. He shall notify the Authority Manager of his desire and intention to
make such connection.
B. He shall pay a sewer connection fee as hereinafter set forth, which shall
be payable to the Authority.
C. He shall apply for and obtain a permit to make such connection.
D. He shall give the Authority Manager at least 24 hours' notice of the time
when such connection shall be made, in order that the Authority, by its
authorized agent, can supervise the work of connection.
§ 175-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-5
169:208
made airtight and shall be made smooth and clean inside so as to provide
free flow of sewage matter without any obstructions. All work pertaining
to the connection with the sewer shall be financially and otherwise the
responsibility of the owner of the property with which connection is made,
subject to the right of supervision hereby reserved by the Authority or
township. The owner of every property connected to the sanitary sewer
system shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of the building
sewer and lateral serving his property from the footer wall to the junction
with the sewer main.
§ 175-6. Prohibited connections. [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
98-10]
No person shall connect or cause to be connected with any of the sewers,
directly or indirectly, any roof, ground water or surface water, steam
exhaust, floor drains, boiler blowoff, sediment drip or any pipe carrying or
constructed to carry hot water or acid, germicide, grease, brewery mash,
gasoline, naphtha, benzene, oil or any other substance detrimental to the
sewers or to the operation of the sewer system.
§ 175-7. Privy connection prohibited.
No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle for
human excrement shall at any time be connected with any of the sewers.
§ 175-8. Cleaning and filling abandoned privies.
No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle for
human excrement shall hereafter be used or maintained upon any premises
from which connection with any of the sewer has been made. Every such
privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank, or other receptacle shall be
abandoned, cleansed, and filled under the direction and supervision of the
Authority or township. Any such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank
or other receptacle not abandoned, cleansed and filled as required by this
section shall constitute a nuisance, and such nuisance may be abated as
provided by law, at the expense of the owner of such property.
§ 175-9. Fees. [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-10]
§ 175-10. Discontinuance or pretreatment.
To prevent discharges to the sewer system deemed harmful in any respect,
the Authority or township may refuse any request for permission to connect
A. All owners of improved property who may hereafter connect with a
sewer and have the use of the sewer system shall pay such fees as shall
be established by resolution of the Authority from time to time.
B. Fees and regulations for connecting, repairing or disconnecting a sewer
not itemized herein shall be decided upon and fixed by the Authority at
the time of application.
§ 175-5 (RESERVED) § 175-10
169:209
to the sewer system. The Authority or township likewise may compel
discontinuance of the use of any sewer or may compel the pretreatment
of industrial wastes by any industry where required to prevent discharge
to the sewer system deemed that is harmful in any respect. Such
discontinuance or pretreatment shall at all times be subject to such
ordinances enacted to the Authority relating thereto or to such rules and
regulations relating thereto as shall be adopted by resolution or order of the
Authority, and failure to observe and comply with such rules and regulations
shall be a violation of this article.
§ 175-11. Use of sewer system.
Notwithstanding any of the terms of this article, connection to and use of
the sewer system shall at all times be subject to such ordinances enacted
by the Authority relating thereto or to such rules and regulations relating
thereto as shall be adopted by resolution or order of the Authority, and
failure to observe such rules and regulations shall be a violation of this
article.
§ 175-12. Enforcement procedure.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article or any rule, regulation,
order or permit issued hereinafter or included herein shall be fined not less
than $100 nor more than $600 for each offense, and costs of prosecution,
and in default of the payment thereof shall be imprisoned for not more than
30 days. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be
deemed a separate and distinct offense.
§ 175-13. False statements.
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, statement, sample, plan
or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to rules
and regulations adopted by resolution or order of Lower Allen Township
Authority or a wastewater contribution permit or who falsifies, tampers with
or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required
by rules and regulations adopted by resolution or order of Lower Allen
Township Authority will be prosecuted to the extent permitted by law under
the Crimes Code, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 175-10 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-13
169:210
ARTICLE II
Sewage Facilities
[Adopted 6-10-1985 as Art. 927 of the 1985 Code of Ordinances;
amended in its entirety 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-12]
§ 175-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMUNITY SEWERAGE SYSTEM — Any system, whether publicly or
privately owned, for the collection and disposal of sewage or industrial
wastes of a liquid nature or both, including various devices for the
treatment of such sewage or industrial wastes serving three or more
individual lots.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM — A single system of piping, tanks or other
facilities serving one or two lots and collecting and disposing of sewage
in whole or in part into the soil of the property or into any waters of this
commonwealth.
LOT — A part of a subdivision or a parcel of land used as a building site
or intended to be used for building purposes, whether immediate or future,
which will not be further subdivided.
PERSON — Any individual copartnership, association or private
corporation.
REALTY IMPROVEMENT — Any proposed new residence or other building,
the useful occupancy of which will require the installation or erection
of a sewage disposal system other than one which is to be served by a
community water supply and a community sewage system.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings and any
noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or inimical to the public
health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic water
supply or for recreation.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a single tract or other parcel of land or a
part thereof into three or more lots, and shall also include changes in street
lines or lot lines.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Lower Allen.
§ 175-15. Permit required.
No person, including those persons proposing to install such a system on
a lot 10 acres or larger and who are otherwise qualified for a permit
exemption in accordance with the provisions of Section 7(a)(1) of the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act [35 P.S. § 750.7(a)(1)], shall install an
§ 175-14 (RESERVED) § 175-15
169:211
individual or community sewage disposal system or construct any building
in which an individual or community sewage disposal system is to be
installed without first obtaining a permit indicating that the site and the
plans and specifications of such system are in compliance with the
provisions of this article and the standards adopted pursuant to this article.
No permit shall be required in those cases where a permit from the
Department of Environmental Protection has been obtained or where the
Department determines that such permit is not necessary for the protection
of the public health.
§ 175-16. Application for permit.
Application for a permit to install an individual or community sewage
disposal system shall be in writing, to the township, and shall be made on
a formal application blank, and each application shall include such data as
shall be prescribed by said technical standards for construction.
§ 175-17. Time limit for permit issuance; denial.
A permit to install an individual or community sewage disposal system
shall be issued or denied within seven days after receiving an application
for a permit, except that in case the township finds the data submitted
by an applicant incomplete, the time for acting thereon shall be extended
seven days beyond the date of submission of adequate supplementary or
amendatory data. Denial or permit shall be supported by a statement, in
writing, of the reasons for such actions.
§ 175-18. Approval to cover required.
No system or structure designed to provide individual or community sewage
disposal to any realty improvement shall be covered from view until
approval to cover the same has been given by the township or its authorized
representative. If 48 hours have elapsed, excepting Sundays and holidays,
since the township received notification of completion of construction, the
applicant may cover the system or structure, unless permission has been
refused by the township.
§ 175-19. Hearings.
In case any permit to install an individual or community sewage disposal
system is denied or revoked, a hearing will be held thereon before the
township within 15 days after request therefor is made by the applicant.
Within seven days following the date of such hearing, the applicant shall be
notified, in writing, of the determination of the hearing.
§ 175-20. Changed conditions require new permits.
If the township determines that any change has occurred in the physical
conditions of any lands of a realty improvement which will materially affect
the operation of the community or individual sewage disposal system
§ 175-15 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-20
169:212
covered by any permit issued under this article, the permit shall be revoked
and a new permit shall be obtained before construction proceeds.
§ 175-21. Tests and inspections.
The township shall have the power to make or cause to be made such
inspections and tests as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this
article, and its authorized representatives shall have the right to enter upon
lands for such purposes.
§ 175-22. Permit fee.
Every applicant for a permit to install an individual or community sewage
disposal system shall pay to the township, at the time of the filing of the
application, such fee as the township may from time to time prescribe, by
resolution, which fee shall be applied toward the cost of administration of
this article.
§ 175-23. Installation standards.
The township hereby adopts the standards of the Department of
Environmental Protection relative to the installation of individual and
community sewage disposal systems as the standards to be applied to
any application for permit under this article, whether such standards have
been adopted by the Department or shall in the future be adopted by the
Department.
§ 175-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article or the rules,
regulations or standards promulgated thereunder or who resists or
interferes with any officer, agent or employee of the township, in
accordance with the provisions of this article, in the performance of his
duties, shall be fined not less than $100, plus costs, nor more than $600,
plus costs, or in default thereof shall be imprisoned not more than 30 days.
§ 175-20 (RESERVED) § 175-24
169:213

ARTICLE III
Sanitary Sewer Specifications
[Adopted 6-10-1985 as Art. 939 of the 1985 Code of Ordinances;
amended in its entirety 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-15]
§ 175-25. Compliance required.
Any sanitary sewer extension shall be constructed or reconstructed in
accordance with the provisions of this article. It shall be the duty of each
applicant, as defined in Chapter 220, Zoning, § 220-6B, contractor or
subcontractor to comply with this article in the construction or
reconstruction of any sanitary sewer extension within the township.
§ 175-26. General instructions.
A. Submission of plans, profiles and specifications.
(1) Before any work is commenced on any sanitary sewer extension,
three copies of the plans, profiles and specifications of the
proposed sanitary sewer extension shall be presented to the
Authority Manager not less than 30 days prior to the meeting of the
Lower Allen Township Authority. The Authority Manager shall
distribute a copy thereof to the Sanitary Sewer Engineer for review.
After review by the Authority Sewer Department and Authority
Sanitary Sewer Engineer, such documents shall be presented to the
Authority for its review and recommendations prior to submission
to the Board of Commissioners. All corrections and necessary
changes to the documents shall be made before presentation to the
Township Authority.
(2) All drawings shall be prepared in conformance with the
requirements set forth in these specifications and shall be
identified with the name of the project and developer and shall be
numbered in consecutive order. The approval of drawings will be
general and shall not relieve the applicant, contractor or
subcontractor from the responsibility for proper fitting and
construction of the work nor from furnishing material and work
required which may not be indicated on the drawings when
approved.
(3) All costs or expenses incurred and costs of labor involved by the
Authority or charges by its Sanitary Sewer Engineer in review of
any sanitary sewer extension plans, profiles and specifications and
in inspection of the construction thereof shall be paid by the
applicant, contractor or subcontractor. The charges therefore shall
be established by resolution of the Authority Board.
(4) All plans and profiles shall include the following additional
information and shall be in compliance with the following
requirements:
§ 175-25 (RESERVED) § 175-26
169:215
(a) The location and depth of all utilities crossing or within 10 feet
of the sewer line, manhole and other appurtenances.
(b) Manhole top elevations.
(c) Manholes shall be numbered in accordance with the present
system of the Authority or as directed by the Authority
Manager.
(d) A statement therein stating "All sanitary sewers and
appurtenances to be built in accordance with specifications of
Authority."
(e) When two or more utilities of any type are to be installed in or
are already in the same right-of-way or in close proximity, the
sewer line shall be laid not less than 10 feet from any such
utility or utilities, measured from center line to center line.
Should local conditions prevent such a separation of 10 feet, a
sewer line may be laid closer than 10 feet if:
[1] It is laid in a separate trench; or
[2] It is laid in the same trench, with a water main located at
one side on a bench of undisturbed earth; and
[3] In either case, the elevation of the top (crown) of the sewer
line is at least 18 inches below the bottom (invert) of the
water service line; and
[4] It is laid in accordance with generally accepted
engineering practices.
(f) Finished grade of streets and sanitary sewer right-of-way.
(g) Finished grade of streets or sanitary sewer rights-of-way shall
be designed and constructed in such manner as to permit
maintenance and internal inspection by Authority equipment
or without any danger of injury to Authority personnel or any
danger of damage to Authority equipment.
B. Examination and inspection. The work shall at all times be subject to
examination and inspection by the Authority and the township. It shall
be the responsibility of the inspector to assure compliance with plans
and specifications and to alert the Authority to any modifications or
plans required to meet unexpected conditions found during
construction and to make suggestions to minimize future collection
system maintenance. The Authority reserves the right to stop any phase
of work which does not comply with the provisions of these
specifications.
C. Observation of laws. The contractor or subcontractor at all times shall
observe and comply with all federal and state laws and regulations and
any local bylaws, ordinances and regulations in any manner affecting
§ 175-26 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-26
169:216
the conduct of the work or applying to employees on the project, as well
as safety precautions which apply.
D. Permit and licenses. The applicant, contractor or subcontractor shall,
unless otherwise specified, procure all necessary permits and licenses,
pay all charges and fees and file all notices necessary to the proper and
lawful prosecution of the work.
E. Safety requirements. The contractor or subcontractor shall furnish,
erect and maintain at closures, intersections and throughout the
project all necessary approved barricades, signals, warning signs and
closure signs and shall take all necessary precautions for the protection
of the work and safety of the public. All barricades shall be illuminated
at night and all lights shall be kept burning from sunset to sunrise.
F. Work conditions.
(1) The work shall at all times be subject to the examination and
inspection of the Authority or its representative. No night or
weekend work requiring the presence of the Authority
representative will be permitted, except in case of emergency, and
then only with written consent of the Authority. All inspections and
tests shall be performed without unnecessarily delaying the work.
All materials and workmanship not otherwise designated by the
specifications shall be subject to inspection and test by the
Authority at the cost of the contractor or subcontractor. The
Authority shall have the right to reject defective material or
workmanship or require its correction.
(2) When any material not conforming to the requirements of the
specifications and drawings has been delivered to the site of the
project or incorporated in the work or when work performed is of
inferior quality, such material or work shall be considered as
defective and shall be immediately removed and renewed or made
satisfactory as directed by the Authority.
G. Cleaning site. The contractor or subcontractor shall at all times keep
the site free from accumulations of waste material or rubbish caused by
the work. Before work will be considered as complete, the contractor or
subcontractor shall clean and remove from the project and adjacent
property all surplus and discarded materials, equipment and temporary
structures.
H. Notification of inspection. A minimum of 24 hours notice prior to the
beginning of any sewer work shall be given the Authority Sewer
Department to alert it to the commencement of the project. If work is
stopped for any reason after it has been started, an additional twentyfour-
hour notice shall be given before restarting work. No sewer pipe
shall be covered or backfilled before it has been inspected by the
Authority.
§ 175-26 (RESERVED) § 175-27
169:217
§ 175-27. Special provisions.
A. Scope of work. The contractor or subcontractor shall furnish all labor,
materials, equipment, machinery, apparatus and tools and perform all
operations necessary to install, equip, adjust and to put into satisfactory
operation the work of the project, and shall so connect the various items
or sections of the work so as to form a complete and operating whole.
B. Intent of specifications and drawings. The Authority and township will
not accept any sanitary sewer extension provided by a developer unless
and until all requirements of these specifications have been met.
C. Special requirements.
(1) If the sewer line is to cross telegraph, electric cable, gas, oil or
water lines, no excavation or pipe-laying shall be done at those
crossings without the presence of an authorized representative of
the Authority having jurisdiction, and no such excavation shall be
done without the prior written approval of the owner or lessee of
such line.
(2) Sewer lines and other work shall be protected at all times against
damage from uplift due to high groundwater table.
(3) The contractor or subcontractor will be required to maintain, at all
times during construction of the work, the flow of sewage in the
existing sewerage systems to which the connections are being
made.
(4) Connections to an existing sanitary sewer shall be made in such a
manner as to provide a watertight installation. Where manholes are
core-drilled into for installation of connections, they shall be
restored to their original condition using materials similar to those
in the existing structure.
(5) Where a sewer will be constructed within state highway rights-ofway,
the applicant shall make necessary applications for permits to
construct such sewers. It shall be, however, the responsibility of the
contractor or subcontractor to construct the sewer in strict
compliance with the requirements of Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(6) Streets shall not be unnecessarily obstructed, and the contractor or
subcontractor shall take such measures as may be necessary to
keep the street or road open and safe for traffic.
(7) Where sewers are to be installed within the limits of streets, all
removal and protection of street paving, backfilling of trenches,
temporary and permanent replacement of street paving,
restoration of shoulders and the maintenance and protection of
traffic shall be performed in strict conformance with the
requirements of the township. All sewer trenches within the limits
§ 175-27 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-27
169:218
§ 175-28. Materials.
of streets in the township shall be restored in accordance with
Chapter 187, Streets and Sidewalks, Article I.
(8) All curbs, gutters and sidewalks damaged or disturbed shall be
replaced with the same type of material as the original, and shall be
of the same thickness and surface finish as the original, or as
required by Chapter 187, Streets and Sidewalks, Article IV.
A. Cement. All cement for use in items of concrete construction shall
conform to American Association of State Highway Officials (ASTM)
Designation C 150, Type II, or shall be portland blast furnace slag
cement conforming to Type IS, ASTM Designation C595, with the
additional requirement that the tricalcium aluminate content of the
portland cement clinker constituent not exceed 8%.
B. Concrete. All concrete shall be air-entrained and the cement-concrete
mixtures shall be proportioned by weight. In proportioning concrete,
the unit weight of the aggregate shall be based on the specific gravity
thereof, and the unit weight of water and cement shall be taken as 62.4
pounds per cubic foot and 94.0 pounds per cubic foot, respectively. Bulk
specific gravity is defined as the ratio of the weight in air of given
volume of a permeable material, including both permeable and
impermeable voids normal in the material, at a stated temperature to
the weight in air of an equal volume of distilled water at the same
temperature. When slag is specified or permitted, it shall be subject to
tests to determine the actual weight per cubic foot, and if these weights
are obtained on the basis of bulk specific gravity, the actual weights
shall be used as a basis for proportioning. The maximum amount of
water specified for the various mixes shall include the free water in the
aggregate and in calcium chloride solution, if any. Determinations of
the moisture content of the aggregate shall be made on samples taken
from stock and in the manner and at the times required by the
Authority.
C. Manhole frame and cover. All manhole frames and covers shall consist
of gray iron castings conforming to ASTM A 48, Class No. 30, designed
for American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
(AASHTO) Highway Loading Class HS-20. All manhole frames and
covers shall provide castings of uniform quality, free from blowholes,
porosity, hard spots, shrinkage distortion or other defects. Frames and
cover design and dimensions are as indicated on drawings. Design
standards shall be as follows:
(1) Finish. Bearing surfaces shall be machined to prevent rocking and
rattling under traffic. Casting surfaces shall be shotblast cleaned
and coated with asphalt paint, non-tacky-drying.
(2) Identification. Cast the word "SEWER" integrally on the cover in
two-inch-size raised letters.
§ 175-27 (RESERVED) § 175-28
169:219
(3) Frame hold-down bolts. Frame hold-down bolts shall conform to
ASTM A 307.
(4) Cover gasket. A one-piece O-ring gasket shall be factory-installed
in a machined rectangular or dovetail groove in the bearing surface
of the cover.
(a) Gasket material shall be of neoprene composition having good
abrasion resistance, low compression set, Type D 40
durometer hardness determined in accordance with ASTM D
2240 and suited for use in sanitary sewer manholes.
(b) Gluing of the gasket is not permitted.
(5) Tensile test bar. All tensile test bars shall be Size B, cast separately,
but poured from the same iron as the castings they represent.
D. Watertight manhole frame and cover. All watertight manhole frames
and covers shall consist of gray iron castings conforming to specified
requirements for manhole frames and covers, with the addition of cover
hold-down bolts.
(1) Cover hold-down bolts shall be Type 316 stainless steel, ASTM A
276, bolts and washers; or manufacturer's standard bronze bolts
and washers.
E. Preformed plastic sealing compound. Preformed plastic sealing
compound shall conform to Federal Spec, SS-S021OA, Type 1, Rope
Form, of either bitumastic base compound or butyl rubber base
compound, and shall be shipped protected in a removable two-piece
wrapper. The size cross-section of the rope form is to provide squeezeout
of material around the entire interior and exterior circumference
when the joint is completed. The following products are acceptable:
(1) K.T. Snyder Company, Inc.: RAM-NEK;
(2) K.T. Snyder Company, Inc.: RUBOR-NEK;
(3) Hamilton Kent Manufacturing Company: KENT-SEAL No. 2; or
(4) An equal.
F. PVC waterstop. PVC waterstop shall consist of a gasket-type waterstop
composed of virgin polyvinyl chloride (PVC), such as a CMA Concrete
Manhole Adapter manufactured by Fernco Joint Sealer Co. (CMA
Waterstop distributed by The General Engineering Company, Frederick,
Maryland). It shall be used with cast-in-place concrete base or
connection to existing manhole.
G. Reinforced concrete pipe. Reinforced concrete pipe shall conform to
the requirements of ASTM Specifications Designation C 76 and shall be
manufactured with Type II portland cement conforming to ASTM
Specifications Designation C 150. Pipe shall be Class III, unless the
§ 175-28 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-28
169:220
§ 175-29. Sanitary sewer line construction.
earth or other loads on the pipe or other conditions require a stronger
class of pipe. Sizes up to and including 24 inches in diameter shall be
of the bell-and-spigot or tongue-and-groove joint type. The pipe shall be
absolutely free from honeycomb and shall present a hard, dense surface
inside and outside. The roughness coefficient shall not exceed 0.013.
Joints for reinforced concrete pipe shall be formed of special shaped
steel joint rings and sealed by a round rubber gasket, contained in an
external groove in the spigot or tongue ring. Joint and rubber gaskets
shall conform to the requirements specified in American Water Works
Association (AWWA) Standard C 302. The rubber gasket shall be the
sole element depended upon to make the joint watertight and shall have
a smooth surface free from any imperfection.
H. Polyvinyl chloride plastic sewer pipe.
(1) This specification designates the general requirements for
unplasticized polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic gravity sewer pipe
with integral wall bell and spigot joints for the conveyance of
sanitary sewage. Pipe and fittings shall meet an extra-strength
minimum of SDR-35 of the requirements of ASTM D 3034. The pipe
shall be colored either white or green for in-ground identification
as sewer pipe. All pipe shall be suitable for use as a gravity sewer
conduit, having provisions for contraction and expansion at each
joint by use of a rubber ring. The bell of the pipe shall consist of an
integral wall section with a solid cross-section rubber ring, factory
assembled and securely locked in place to prevent displacement.
Sizes of sewer pipe allowed for use in the township shall be eight
inches or larger.
(2) Joints shall be of push-on rubber gasket type conforming to ASTM
D 3212. Rubber gaskets shall conform to ASTM F 477 and shall be
suitable for use in pipelines conveying sanitary sewage.
(3) All fittings and accessories shall be as manufactured and furnished
by the pipe supplier or approved equal and shall have bell and
spigot configurations identical to that of the pipe.
(4) Minimum pipe stiffness at 5% deflection shall be 46 for all pipe
sizes when tested in accordance with ASTM D 2412, external
loading properties of plastic pipe by parallel-plate loading.
(5) Tightness of joints shall be capable of withstanding an external
hydrostatic pressure of 10 pounds per square inch or 25 feet of
water as specified by ASTM D 3213 for a period of one hour. Any
leakage at the pipe joint during this test period would be
considered a failure of the test requirement.
A. General. The contractor or subcontractor shall excavate, protect and
backfill all trenches necessary for the completion of the work of the
§ 175-28 (RESERVED) § 175-29
169:221
project. All excavation shall be in open ditches, except where and
to such extent as the Authority may authorize or require that the
same be done in tunnel. In general, trenches may be excavated and
backfilled either by machinery or by hand as the contractor may elect,
provided that the contractor shall use hand excavation where necessary
to protect existing structures, utilities or private or public property.
B. Removal and protection of paving. The contractor or subcontractor
shall clear the surface and remove all surface material of whatever
nature over the line of the trench, and he shall properly separate and
classify the materials removed. The contractor or subcontractor shall
be responsible for any loss of or damage to paving materials through his
own or his employees' careless removal or neglect or wasteful storage,
disposal or use of the same. Pavement shall be cut in neat lines
equidistant from the center line of the trench, using equipment suitable
for such work, and the edges of the pavement shall be protected and
maintained by the contractor or subcontractor until the repaving is
completed. If the pavement edges are not maintained to the satisfaction
of the township, the pavement shall be recut when the repaving is done.
All concrete paving shall be cut with a mechanical saw.
C. Order of work. Service connections and manholes shall be constructed
either at the same time as the main sewer or immediately after its
completion. All street paving shall be repaved by the contractor or
subcontractor after which the street surface shall be cleaned.
D. Sewer line and grade. Sewer lines and grade shall be laid out and
maintained during construction in the following manner. Before the
excavation is begun for any run of main sewer, the contractor's or
subcontractor's personnel shall set control points for line and grade. In
unpaved areas, these points shall be placed on the top of stakes
securely driven into the ground. In paved areas there may be spikes
driven into the paving or crosses cut into the paving and, in either case,
enclosed in a painted circle. Stakes or points shall be sufficiently offset
from the center line of the trench so as to be undisturbed during the
excavation and pipelaying operations.
E. Width and depth of trench.
(1) From the subgrade elevation to an elevation at least 12 inches
above the top of the outside barrel of the pipe, the banks of
trenches shall be excavated to vertical lines, and the trenches shall
not be less than 12 inches nor more than 16 inches wider than the
outside diameter at the barrel of the pipe to be laid.
(2) From a point 12 inches above the top of the pipe to the surface, the
banks of trenches in all streets, either paved or unpaved, shall be
kept as nearly vertical as possible, and in no case shall the width of
the trench at the top exceed the outside diameter of the pipe plus
40 inches.
§ 175-29 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-29
169:222
(3) In easements and rights-of-way, the maximum width of the trench
at the top may be exceeded only if the construction is kept entirely
within the easement or right-of-way and can be carried on without
damage to adjoining property. The angle of slope shall be the angle
at which the trench bank will stand without sliding, and in no case
shall the angle be steeper than 1/2 horizontal to one vertical.
F. Pipe foundation.
(1) In all trenches, for all types of pipe, first-class bedding shall be
provided as a foundation unless concrete cradle or concrete
encasement is to be provided.
(2) First-class bedding shall be constructed in accordance with the
detail shown on detail drawings. Bedding material shall consist of
crushed stone, 2 B or smaller.
(3) If concrete encasement of pipe is required for stream crossings, the
concrete encasement shall be terminated five feet back from the
top edge of the stream bank.
G. Length of open trench. The Authority shall have the right to limit the
amount of trench opened in advance of pipelaying and the amount of
pipe laid in advance of backfilling, but in no case shall these amounts
exceed 301 feet, respectively.
H. Pipe haunching. The pipe-haunching material shall be properly
compacted to limit deflection of the pipe.
I. Initial backfill. The initial backfill shall be from the springline of the
pipe to a point at least 12 inches above the crown of the pipe. Bedding
and haunching materials shall be Class I bedding materials, onequarter-
inch to three-quarter-inch crushed stone. The trench bottom
shall be smooth and free from large stones, dirt clods and frozen
material. Excavation for bell holes shall be provided to allow uniform
support for the pipe. The foundation and bedding shall be shaped by
hand to provide a satisfactory bedding. A minimum of six inches of
bedding material shall be provided for pipe support. Backfill materials
shall be placed in such a manner so as to not damage or disturb the
pipe.
J. Backfilling of trenches.
(1) After proper placement of initial backfill materials, the remainder
of the trench shall be refilled evenly to the required height in
layers, each layer not to exceed six inches thickness after
compaction.
(2) In rock trenches, crushed stone, 1/4 inch to 3/4 inch, shall be
provided and used as backfill of the trench to a height of 12 inches
above the top of the pipe, and the balance of the backfill of the
trench shall be good earth, sand or gravel, which shall contain no
§ 175-29 (RESERVED) § 175-29
169:223
§ 175-30. Manholes.
stones more than six inches in the largest diameter, but not in
proportion exceeding 20% of the total volume of the backfill.
(3) All trenches in highways shall be backfilled from the top of the
initial backfill for the remainder of the trench with 2 RC stone.
Within highways, all trenches shall be backfilled in four-inch layers
and tamped by mechanical means. [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-10]
(4) Tamping of haunching and initial backfill materials shall be
accomplished by either hand tamping bars or by mechanical
tampers. Care shall be taken to avoid contact between the pipe and
compaction equipment. Compaction of the bedding shall be done in
such a way that the compaction equipment is not used directly
above the pipe until sufficient backfill has been placed to assure the
equipment will not damage the pipe or cause deflection. Hydrohammers
shall not be used within three feet of the top of the pipe.
K. Responsibility for condition of excavation. The contractor or
subcontractor shall solely be responsible for the condition and results
of all excavation made by him. All slides and cave-ins shall be removed
by the contractor or subcontractor at whatever time and under
whatever circumstances they may occur.
A. General. Manholes shall consist of precast, reinforced concrete, round
riser sections and eccentric cone or flat slab top sections on concrete
bases, with aluminum manhole steps. The contractor or subcontractor
shall have the option of providing either poured-in-place manhole bases
or precast concrete bases. Manholes shall conform to the design and
dimensions shown on the sewer detail drawings.75
B. Precast manhole bases.
(1) Precast manhole bases shall be of the design and dimensions
shown on the sewer detail drawings. When precast manhole bases
are used, they shall be installed on a layer of crushed stone which
shall have a minimum depth of six inches in rock and eight inches in
dirt. Openings in precast concrete bases to accommodate the
connection of the sewer pipe shall be custom preformed for each
manhole base at the time of manufacture of the base at the
manufacturer's plant. Openings for connection of sewer pipe shall
be of the size and shape required for the particular type of pipe seal
provided.
(2) Connections of rigid types of sewer pipe shall be made to precast
manhole bases by means of a rubber gasket-type seal similar and
approved equal to A-LOK manhole pipe seal, as manufactured by A-
75.Editor's Note: Said drawings are on file in the township offices.
§ 175-29 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-30
169:224
LOK Products Corporation, Trenton, New Jersey; RES-SEAL, as
manufactured by Scales Manufacturing Corporation, Newburgh,
New York; PRESS-WEDGE 11, as manufactured by Press Seal
Gasket Corporation, Fort Wayne, Indiana; or Lock Joint Flexible
Manhole Sleeve, as manufactured by Interpace Corporation, New
Brunswick, New Jersey.
(3) Connections of polyvinyl chloride plastic sewer pipe to precast
manhole bases shall be made with a rubber ring water stop,
stretched around the pipe, and cast into the structure wall or base.
C. Poured-in-place manhole bases.
(1) Poured-in-place manhole bases shall be constructed in accordance
with the design and dimensions shown on the sewer detail
drawings.76 Concrete for poured-in-place manhole bases shall be
vibrated with a mechanical vibrator.
(2) If poured-in-place manhole bases are used, the base shall be
constructed of unreinforced concrete poured into a basin formed in
the bottom of a manhole excavation. Before the concrete is poured
into the excavation, a minimum of six inches of crushed stone shall
be evenly placed to form a firm foundation for the manhole base.
(3) The top of poured-in-place manhole bases shall be accurately
formed to receive the tongue of the bottom precast concrete
manhole section and shall be poured monolithically with the base
slab as shown on the sewer detail drawings.
(4) Poured-in-place manhole bases for connection to polyvinyl chloride
plastic sewer pipe shall have, cast into the base, a rubber ring
water stop for connection of the pipe to the base.
(5) Prior to installing rigid-type sewer pipe, in poured-in-place
manhole bases, in order to assure a watertight installation, the
piping shall be completely coated with a concrete bonding agent so
that when the concrete is poured, a tight bond between the pipe
and the concrete is obtained. The concrete bonding agent to be
used shall be similar and approved equal to Opalite 600 bonding
agent, as manufactured by Upco Chemical Division of USM
Corporation, Cleveland, Ohio.
D. Manhole riser sections.
(1) Walls of manholes shall be constructed of precast, reinforced
concrete manhole sections. The riser and top section shall be
manufactured in compliance with the requirements of ASTM
Specifications Designation C 478 for precast reinforced concrete
manhole sections.
76.Editor's Note: Said drawings are on file in the township offices.
§ 175-30 (RESERVED) § 175-30
169:225
(2) Riser sections shall have tongue-and-groove ends and a minimum
wall thickness as shown on the sewer detail drawings.77 Top
sections shall be of eccentric cone or flat slab top design, as
required by the sewer detail drawings. Eccentric cone top sections
shall have the same minimum wall thickness as the round riser
sections. Flat slab tops shall have a minimum thickness as shown
on the sewer detail drawings and shall be reinforced with steel in
accordance with the design requirements specified in ASTM
Specification C 478. Top sections shall have a top width of such
design and dimensions as to properly support the required manhole
frame and cover and the lower joint shall be of tongue and groove
design.
E. Precast concrete manhole grade rings. Precast concrete manhole grade
rings for leveling units shall be manufactured in compliance with the
requirements of the specifications for precast reinforced concrete
manhole sections, ASTM Designation C 478, and shall be three inches
or four inches thick, as necessary to provide grade adjustment.
F. Manhole steps.
(1) Aluminum steps shall be Aluminum Alloy AA Designation 6061-T6.
Coat that portion of the aluminum step being embedded in concrete
with heavy-bodied bituminous paint.
(2) Cast iron steps shall be gray iron casting meeting requirements of
ASTM A 48, Class No. 30.
(3) Reinforced plastic steps shall be composed of a three-eighths-inch,
Grade 60, ASTM A 615, deformed steel reinforcing bar completely
encapsulated in Grade 49108, ASTM D 4104 polypropylene
copolymer compound, Type II; M.A. Industries, Inc., Type PS4, or
equal.
(4) Manhole steps shall be installed in the walls of the riser and conical
sections at the manufacturer's plant. The installation of manhole
steps in the walls of the riser and conical top sections in the field
shall not be allowed. Manhole steps shall be aligned vertically and
spaced so as to be on equal centers in the assembled manhole at a
maximum distance apart of 12 inches.
(5) When precast manhole riser or conical sections are set on precast
or poured-in-place manhole bases in the field, the steps in the riser
and conical sections shall be aligned in such a way as not to be
located over any invert of any sewer line either entering or leaving
the manhole.
G. Manhole frames and covers. Manhole frames and covers shall be of the
type and design shown on the sewer detail drawings. All manhole
frames must be bolted to the top section of the manhole.78
77.Editor's Note: Said drawings are on file in the township offices.
§ 175-30 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-30
169:226
§ 175-31. Sewer pipe installation.
H. Concrete channel fill. The concrete channel fill shall be poured in the
field for all manhole bases. Inverts shall be formed directly in the
concrete channel fill of the manhole bases and shall be of smooth steel
troweled finish and accurately shaped to a semicircular bottom and
conforming to the inside of the adjacent sewer sections. Changes in size
and grade shall be made gradually. Changes in direction shall have a
true curve of as large a radius as the size of the manhole will permit.
Steep slopes outside the invert shall be avoided.
I. Length of pipe connections to manholes. Where pipe connections to
manholes are made to rubber gasket pipe seals or steel ball joint rings,
the sewer pipe at the point of connection shall not be more than five
feet in length.
J. Adjustment of manhole frames and covers. Where required, adjustment
of the frame to the final elevation shall be made by precast concrete
manhole grade rings. Joints between grade rings shall be made with
preformed plastic sealing compound. After the grade rings have been
installed, all outside joints shall be neatly plastered with a minimum
one-half-inch cement mortar. Manhole frames shall be attached through
the grade rings as specified in Subsection G. [Amended 11-9-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-10]
A. Handling of pipe. Care shall be taken in unloading and storage of the
pipe at the construction site to avoid damage to the pipe or joints.
B. Pipelaying.
(1) Sewer pipe installation shall be done by use of grade line strings,
batter boards or laser beam or a combination of one or more of
these methods. Small-diameter pipe, up to and including 10 inches,
can be placed directly on the bedding material with the bell end
facing upstream. Larger-diameter pipe shall be supported in place
with a lifting hook or sling until the joining operation is completed.
(2) Following the trench preparation and installation of the required
first-class bedding, pipelaying shall proceed upgrade with the pipe
laid carefully and true to lines and grades given. When laying bell
and spigot pipe, the bell end shall be laid upgrade. The grade and
alignment of each length of pipe shall be carefully checked before
installing another section. Each pipe shall be inspected before
laying, and any pipe with cracks or defects shall not be used. Each
section of pipe shall rest upon the pipe bed for the full length of its
barrel, with recesses excavated so that the invert forms a
continuous grade with the invert of the pipe previously laid. The
inside of all pipe and the inside of the bell and outside of the spigot
shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign matter before lowered
78.Editor's Note: Said drawings are on file in the township offices.
§ 175-30 (RESERVED) § 175-31
169:227
into the trench and shall be kept clean during the laying operation
by means of plugs or other devices. [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-10]
(3) When laying PVC pipe, the spigot shall be cleaned and lubricated,
with care being taken not to allow the spigot end of the pipe to
touch the bedding material after lubrication. Insert the spigot end
of the pipe into the bell, making contact with the rubber ring. While
keeping the pipe in proper alignment, brace the bell as the spigot of
the pipe is pushed into the bell. Assembly may either be made by
hand or with a wooden block. Stabbing of the pipe shall not be
allowed. Care must be taken to ensure that the pipe is not
overassembled, beyond the reference mark, because this will cause
the spigot to squeeze down in the neck of the bell, creating a
reduced internal diameter of the spigot end.
(4) Walking or working on the complete pipeline, except as necessary
in tamping or backfilling, shall not be permitted until the trench
has been backfilled to a height of at least one foot over the top of
the pipe.
C. Protection of the pipe. Once the sewer pipe has been laid to a true
grade and alignment, it should be protected from displacement or
breakage until the trench is backfilled. Protection may be provided by
placement of initial backfill material. The upper end of the pipe shall be
plugged at the end of the work day or if pipelaying is to be stopped for
several hours.
D. Drop connections to manholes. Where change in grade of the sewer line
requires the use of a drop manhole, the pipe and fittings used to make
those drop connections shall be of the same type pipe and fittings as
used to construct the sewer line. All drop connections to manholes shall
be of the outside drop type as shown in the sewer detail drawings.79
E. Branches.
(1) Wye branches shall be of the same pipe material as the pipe used to
construct the main sewer to which it is connected. In general,
connections to sewer mains shall be made with commercially
manufactured branches and 1/8 bend.
(2) When additional sewer lateral connections are required after the
sewer main has been constructed, cast iron saddles held in place by
stainless steel bands will be used for connection to vitrified clay
and reinforced concrete pipe.
(3) All sewer saddles used for PVC pipe shall be of the gasketed, strapon
type and shall be held in place with two stainless steel hose
clamps.
79.Editor's Note: Said drawings are on file in the township offices.
§ 175-31 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-31
169:228
§ 175-32. Sewer line design criteria.
F. Service connections.
(1) The contractor or subcontractor shall build complete, to such
points as shown on the sewer detail drawings, all service
connections. All service connections laid in street rights-of-way
shall be completed to a point at least behind the curbline of the
street or out of the state row. Should the contractor or
subcontractor damage or disturb any curb or sidewalk, he will be
required to restore the same to a condition equal to or better than
existed prior to being disturbed. The ends of all service connections
shall be closed with watertight plugs and marked with a two-byfour,
three feet above ground level.
(2) The depth of cut to the inverts of service connections shall be
determined in advance of the excavation. Pipe for service
connections shall be laid true to the required lines and grades and,
unless otherwise required, shall be at a ninety-degree angle to the
curbline. Service connection trenches at the upper end of the
service connection shall not be backfilled by the contractor or
subcontractor until the elevation and location of the service
connection has been inspected and approved by the Authority.
Location markers shall be installed by the contractor or
subcontractor at the upper free end of the service connection and
shall consist of any upright piece of two inches by four inches
lumber set plumb at the end of the service connection, and shall be
three feet above the existing ground.
G. Joint of bell and spigot pipe. The method of joining pipe with resilient
joints is as follows:
(1) Clean bell and spigot;
(2) Lubricate the gasket and seat as prescribed by the manufacturer;
(3) Guide the spigot end of the pipe into place;
(4) Push or pull the pipe into place;
(5) Inspect the joint for proper seating of the gasket; and
(6) Check the alignment and grade of the pipe.
A. Sewer pipe. All polyvinyl chloride plastic sewer pipe meeting the extrastrength
minimum of SDR-35 of the requirements of ASTM D3034.
Sewer pipe larger than 16 inches in diameter shall be of reinforced
concrete. Sanitary sewer pipe shall be of cast iron or ductile iron in
locations where required by the Authority because of prevailing
conditions or where required by utility companies or governmental
bodies.
§ 175-31 (RESERVED) § 175-32
169:229
§ 175-33. Inspections; testing.
B. Minimum depth of cover. Minimum depth of cover for all sewer pipe
shall be at least five feet.
C. Construction plans. Construction plans for sewer main extensions shall
be prepared on sheets having overall dimensions of 30 inches in height
by 36 inches in width. Plans shall be drawn with a horizontal scale of 50
feet to one inch and a vertical scale of 10 feet to one inch. All elevations
shown on the construction plans shall be based on the datum of the
existing sewers of the township.
A. General. All newly constructed sewer mains eight inches or larger in
diameter shall be inspected and tested prior to being placed in
operation or accepted by the Authority. The method of inspection and
air testing shall be at the discretion of the Authority.
B. Air testing by the contractor.
(1) At its own discretion, the Authority may allow the contractor or
subcontractor to air test newly installed sewer main extensions
using his personnel and equipment under the supervision and
inspection of the Authority.
(2) If this type of air testing is permitted, the contractor or
subcontractor shall furnish all equipment and labor necessary for
conducting the air test of sewer main extensions. The air testing of
the sewer lines shall be done by the contractor's or subcontractor's
personnel in the presence of an Authority Sewer Inspector. All costs
incurred for air testing of the sewer, including the wages of the
Inspector, shall be the responsibility of the contractor or
subcontractor. A minimum 24 hours' notice in advance of the air
testing will be given to the Authority Sewer Department.
C. Television inspection and air testing.
(1) At the discretion of the Authority and wherever possible, television
inspection and air testing of the completed sewer line extensions
shall be required. The sewer inspection and joint-by-joint air
testing shall be conducted by Sewer Authority personnel in the
presence of a representative of the contractor or subcontractor.
(2) Prior to television inspection and air testing by the Authority, all
roadways and rights-of-way in the construction area shall be
graded and leveled and made passable for the sewer inspection
van.
(3) All costs and expenses incurred by the Authority in television
inspection and air testing of the sewer line extension shall be the
responsibility of the contractor or subcontractor and shall be paid
in full before the sewer can be put into operation or accepted by the
Authority.
§ 175-32 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-33
169:230
D. Repairing defective pipe. [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-10]
(1) If, in the course of the television inspection or air testing of the
sewer main, it is found that any pipe or pipe connection will not
maintain the proper air pressure, it will be the responsibility of the
contractor or subcontractor to correct the defect prior to placing
the system in operation or acceptance by the Authority.
(2) All charges due the Authority or Sanitary Sewer Engineer shall be
paid in full before the system is placed in operation or accepted by
the Authority.
E. Manhole testing procedures. Generally, test each manhole constructed
in the project by methods specified herein. If the manhole is
constructed on an existing sewer where sewage flow must be
maintained, the test will be waived.
(1) Conduct tests in presence of and to complete satisfaction of the
Authority Personnel.
(2) Should a manhole not satisfactorily pass testing, discontinue
manhole construction in the project until that manhole does test
satisfactorily.
(3) Provide tools, materials (including water), equipment and
instruments necessary to conduct the manhole testing specified
herein.
(a) Vacuum testing equipment.
[1] Use vacuum apparatus equipped with necessary piping,
control valves and gauges to control the air removal rate
from the manhole and to monitor vacuum.
[2] Provide an extra vacuum gauge of known accuracy to
frequently check test equipment and apparatus.
[3] Provide the seal plate with vacuum piping connections for
inserting in manhole frame.
[4] Prior to testing, clean manholes thoroughly and seal
openings, both to the complete satisfaction of the
Authority. Seal openings using properly sized plugs.
[5] Perform testing with frames installed. Include the joint
between the manhole and manhole frame in the test.
[6] The contractor may elect to make a test for his own
purposes prior to backfilling. However, conduct tests of
the manholes for acceptance, only after the backfilling has
been completed.
(b) Vacuum test procedure.
§ 175-33 (RESERVED) § 175-33
169:231
[1] Perform vacuum testing in accordance with the testing
equipment manufacturer's written instructions.
[2] Draw a vacuum of 10 inches of mercury and close the
valves.
[3] Consider the manhole acceptable when the vacuum does
not drop below nine inches of mercury for the following
manhole sizes and times:
[a] Four-foot diameter: 60 seconds.
[b] Five-foot diameter: 75 seconds.
[c] Six-foot diameter: 90 seconds.
[d] Seven-foot diameter: 105 seconds.
(c) Repair and retest to determine source or sources of leaks in
manholes failing acceptable limits.
[1] Repair or replace defective materials and workmanship, as
is the case, and conduct such additional manhole
acceptance tests and such subsequent repairs and
retesting as required until manholes meet test
requirements.
[2] Materials and methods used to make manhole repairs shall
meet with the Engineer's approval prior to use.
[3] Make repairs, replacements and retests at no increase in
contract price.
(d) Final inspection and approval.
[1] No newly constructed sanitary sewer extension or any of
its appurtenances shall be placed in operation or
considered for acceptance by the Authority until all of the
requirements of the specifications are met, including final
inspection and approval of the entire system.
[2] Before final inspection may be requested by the contractor
or subcontractor, the following criteria must be met:
[Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-10]
[a] Submission of plans, profiles and specifications for
review and approval;
[b] Installation and inspection of the sewer line as
required by these specifications;
[c] Air testing of all sewer lines and joints;
[d] Raising of manhole frames and covers to the final
elevation;
§ 175-33 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-33
169:232
§ 175-34. Charges.
§ 175-35. Violations and penalties.
Any person, whether as principal, agent or employee, who violates or assists
in the violation of any provision of this article shall be fined not less than
$100 and not more than $600, and costs of suit, and in default thereof shall
be imprisoned not more than 30 days.
§ 175-36. Variances.
In the event that strict compliance with the terms and provisions of this
article will result in an undue hardship by reason of unique physical
[e] Vacuum testing of all manholes;
[f] Submission of as-built plans as necessary;
[g] Submission of service connection locations;
[h] Cleaning of all pipes and appurtenances of the sewer
main extension; and
[i] Payment in full of all moneys due the Authority, with
respect to fees, charges, permits, licenses, inspection
and testing, and any other related costs or expenses
incurred by the Authority.
[3] No certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued by the
Code Official for any building or structure connected or to
be connected to the sanitary sewer extension before final
inspection and approval of the entire system.
A. The Authority and the Board of Commissioners shall be empowered to
establish and reestablish from time to time, by resolution, charges for
the review of plans, profiles and specifications, inspections, materials
furnished, work done, testing or other related costs or expenses
incurred or paid by the Authority. Such charges shall be reasonable and
sufficient to reimburse the Authority for the costs of time of employees
involved, materials furnished and overhead. The charges of the
Authority Engineer and Sanitary Sewer Engineer shall be paid to the
Authority by the applicant, contractor or subcontractor upon the
submission of bills therefor to the applicant, contractor or
subcontractor, from time to time, as such charges are billed to the
Authority. Payment shall be made to the Authority by cash or personal
check, except that the Authority Manager may require a certified check
when he deems such necessary.
B. No certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued by the Code Official
for any building or structure connected to or to be connected to the
sanitary sewer extension before payment to the Authority or township
of all charges, costs or expenses of the Authority or township.
§ 175-33 (RESERVED) § 175-36
169:233
circumstances or conditions or limited rights-of-way, the Board of
Commissioners may grant a variance therefrom, provided that such
variance is necessary to enable installation of the sewer line, manhole
or other appurtenances, will not be detrimental to the public interest or
substantially impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property or utilities, will represent the minimum variance that will afford
provisions in issue and is in accordance with generally accepted
engineering practices.
§ 175-36 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-36
169:234
ARTICLE IV
Industrial Pretreatment Program
[Adopted 10-11-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-0780]
§ 175-37. Title; effective date.
This article shall be known as the "Industrial Pretreatment Program (IPP)
Ordinance," and the provisions hereof shall become effective upon the date
of adoption hereof, as entered below, and shall remain in effect hereafter
unless the same be repealed.
§ 175-38. Objectives, applicability and reservation of rights.
A. This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly
owned treatment works for the Lower Allen Township Authority
("Authority") and enables the Township and Authority to comply with all
applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40
CFR 403).
B. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will interfere with its operation;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will pass-through the publicly owned
treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or
otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment
works;
(3) To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who
may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their
employment and the general public;
(4) To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and
sludge from the publicly owned treatment works;
(5) To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the publicly owned
treatment works; and
(6) To enable the Authority to comply with its National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and
disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws to which
the publicly owned treatment works is subject.
C. This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment
works. The article authorizes the issuance of individual wastewater
80.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. IV, Industrial Pretreatment
Program, adopted 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9, as amended.
§ 175-37 (RESERVED) § 175-38
169:235
§ 175-39. Administration.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Township and Authority shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the Township and Authority may be
delegated by the Township and Authority to a duly authorized employee.
§ 175-40. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the
designated meanings:
BOD – Biochemical oxygen demand
BMP – Best management practice
BMR – Baseline monitoring report
CFR – Code of Federal Regulations
CIU – Categorical industrial user
COD – Chemical oxygen demand
EPA – U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
gpd – Gallons per day
IU – Industrial user
mg/l – Milligrams per liter
NPDES – National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW – Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA – Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIU – Significant industrial user
SNC – Significant noncompliance
discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance and
enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures;
requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the
equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established
by separate resolution.
D. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, nothing in this
article shall be deemed to be a legally binding commitment under the
Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., the Clean Streams Law, 35
P.S. § 691.1 et seq., and applicable regulations (e.g., 40 CFR 403, Title
25 Pa. Code) for the Township to undertake implementation or
enforcement activities beyond the minimum otherwise required by
these laws and regulations. Nevertheless, the Township maintains
discretionary authority to undertake activities beyond the minimum
required. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Board of
Commissioners of the Township, Township Manager, Superintendent of
the POTW or Authority Manager shall administer, implement and
enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 175-38 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-40
169:236
TSS – Total suspended solids
U.S.C. – United States Code
§ 175-41. Definitions.
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Regional Administrator of Region III of the
EPA.
AUTHORITY — The Lower Allen Township Authority, a Pennsylvania
Municipal Authority, its officers, board members, employees and agents,
owner and operator of the sewer collection systems in Lower Allen
Township and the Borough of Shiremanstown and Lower Allen wastewater
treatment plant system.
AUTHORITY MANAGER — An employee of the Authority so designated by
that title who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities for the
operation of the POTW and this article.
AUTHORIZED OR DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER
—
If the user is a corporation:
The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other
person who performs similar policy or decisionmaking functions for
the corporation; or
(1)
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make
management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated
facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty of making
major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct
other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental
compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure
that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to
gather complete and accurate information for individual
wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where authority to
sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
(2)
A.
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship; a general partner or
proprietor, respectively.
B.
§ 175-40 (RESERVED) § 175-41
169:237
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPS — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in § 175-42A and B [40 CFR
403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating
procedures and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five days at 20° C., usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g., mg/l).
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that appear
in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD — A measure of the oxygen
required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
CONTRIBUTING MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Shiremanstown; the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Corrections; The Townships
of Lower Allen, Upper Allen, and Hampden; Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania; the Township of Fairview, York County, Pennsylvania; their
officers, members, employees, agents and assigns.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The Lower Allen Township Authority.
DAILY MAXIMUM — The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a
pollutant collected during a calendar day.
DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT — The maximum allowable discharge limit of a
pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed
in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the
course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement
of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that
day.
If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility: a director
or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the government facility.
C.
The individuals described in Subsections A through C above may
designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in
writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, or the government facility, and the written
authorization is submitted to the Authority.
D.
§ 175-41 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-41
169:238
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional
Water Management Division Director, the Regional Administrator, or other
duly authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge that is not a new source.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample that is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The introduction of pollutants
into the POTW from any nondomestic source.
INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT — The maximum concentration of a pollutant
allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any
discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow
rate and the duration of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW,
its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or
disposal and therefore is a cause of a violation of the Authority's NPDES
permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued
thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405
of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act,81 including Title II, commonly
referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any
state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act;82
the Toxic Substances Control Act;83 and the Marine Protection, Research,
and Sanctuaries Act.84
LOCAL LIMIT — Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the
Authority upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general
and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.
MONTHLY AVERAGE — The sum of all daily discharges measured during a
calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during
that month.
MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT — The highest allowable average of daily
discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily
81.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
82.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq.
83.Editor's Note: See 15 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.
84.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1401 et seq.
§ 175-41 (RESERVED) § 175-41
169:239
discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number of
daily discharges measured during that month.
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is
(or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under Section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source
if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located; or
(1)
The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
(2)
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing
plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the existing source, should be
considered.
(3)
A.
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the
criteria of Subsection A(2) or (3) above but otherwise alters, replaces
or adds to existing process or production equipment.
B.
Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite
construction program:
Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
(a)
Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or
installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
(b)
(1)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial
(2)
C.
§ 175-41 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-41
169:240
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling that does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product or finished product.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the Authority's NPDES permit, including an increase
in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental
entities.
pH — A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural
and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor).
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means,
except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS — Prohibited discharge
standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local limits.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES —
Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these
prohibitions appear in § 175-42 of this article.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW — A treatment works,
as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned
by the Authority. This definition includes any devices or systems used in
the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey
wastewater to a treatment plant.
loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies,
do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.
§ 175-41 (RESERVED) § 175-41
169:241
SEPTIC TANK WASTE — Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
SEWAGE — Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations, etc.).
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU) — Except as provided in
Subsection C of this definition:
SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE — Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in § 175-42 of this article. A slug discharge is any discharge of a
nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill
or a non customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to
cause interference or pass-through, or in any other way violate the POTW's
regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS or SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total
suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water,
wastewater or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering.
USER or INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge.
WASTEWATER — Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage
from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and
manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated,
which are contributed to the POTW.
A. An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
An industrial user that:
Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling
and boiler blowdown wastewater);
(1)
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant; or
(2)
Is designated as such by the Authority on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation
or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
(3)
B.
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection B of
this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Authority may at any time, on its own initiative or
in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in
accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such
user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
C.
§ 175-41 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-41
169:242
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT — That
portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal
sewage and industrial waste.
§ 175-42. Prohibited discharge standards.
A. General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the
POTW, whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment
standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards
or requirements.
B. Specific prohibitions.
(1) No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW
the following pollutants, substances or wastewater:
(a) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140° F. (60° C.) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
(b) Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 9.0, or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or
equipment;
(c) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference
but in no case solids greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension or
above industrial discharger permit listed limits;
(d) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW or above
industrial discharger permit listed limits;
(e) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 140° F. (60°
C.), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment
plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater
which causes the temperature at the introduction into the
treatment plant to exceed 104° F. (40° C.);
(f) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or
pass-through;
(g) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems;
§ 175-41 (RESERVED) § 175-42
169:243
(h) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Authority in accordance with § 175-51 of this
article;
(i) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to
life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or
repair;
(j) Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by
the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts
color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the
Authority's NPDES permit;
(k) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes
except in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations;
(l) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage,
condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water and
unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the
Authority;
(m) Sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
(n) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
Authority in an individual wastewater discharge permit;
(o) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test;
(p) Detergents, surface-active agents or other substances that
might cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
(q) Fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than a maximum daily 200 mg/l and a
monthly average 100 mg/l;
(r) Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard
meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point
in the POTW, of more than 5% or any single reading over 10%
of the lower explosive limit of the meter.
(2) Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section
shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could
be discharged to the POTW.
§ 175-42 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-43
169:244
§ 175-43. National categorical pretreatment standards.
Users must comply with the categorical pretreatment standards found at
40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. Environmental Protection
Agency regulations at 40 CFR 403.13 authorize a CIU to obtain a variance
from a categorical pretreatment standard if the CIU can prove, pursuant to
the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors
relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors
considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard.
The Township and Authority may recognize revised standards if the user
has obtained an FDF variance from EPA on the basis of 40 CFR 403.13 and
consider using revised EPA FDF variance standards.
A. Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
Authority may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with § 175-43E and [40 CFR 403.6(c)].
B. When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed
only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the Authority
may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as
mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for
purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual
industrial users [40 CFR 403.6(c)(2)].
C. When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
Authority shall impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR
403.6(e).
D. A CIU may obtain a net/gross adjustment to a categorical pretreatment
standard in accordance with the following subsections of this section
(40 CFR 403.15).
(1) Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the
presence of pollutants in the industrial user's intake water in
accordance with this section. Any industrial user wishing to obtain
credit for intake pollutants must make application to the Authority.
Upon request of the industrial user, the applicable standard will be
calculated on a net basis (i.e., adjusted to reflect credit for
pollutants in the intake water) if the requirements of Subsection
D(2) of this section are met.
(2) Criteria.
(a) Either the applicable categorical pretreatment standards
contained in 40 CFR, Subchapter N, specifically provide that
they shall be applied on a net basis or the industrial user
demonstrates that the control system it proposes or uses to
meet applicable categorical pretreatment standards would, if
properly installed and operated, meet the standards in the
absence of pollutants in the intake waters.
§ 175-43 (RESERVED) § 175-43
169:245
(b) Credit for generic pollutants such as biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), and oil and
grease shall not be granted unless the industrial user
demonstrates that the constituents of the generic measure in
the user's effluent are substantially similar to the constituents
of the generic measure in the intake water or unless
appropriate additional limits are placed on process water
pollutants either at the outfall or elsewhere.
(c) Credit shall be granted only to the extent necessary to meet
the applicable categorical pretreatment standard(s), up to a
maximum value equal to the influent value. Additional
monitoring may be necessary to determine eligibility for
credits and compliance with standard(s) adjusted under this
section.
(d) Credit shall be granted only if the user demonstrates that the
intake water is drawn from the same body of water as that into
which the POTW discharges. The Authority may waive this
requirement if it finds that no environmental degradation will
result.
E. When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of
pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may request that the
Authority convert the limits to equivalent mass limits. Mass-based limit
requests will not be approved by the Authority in place of categorical
concentration-based limits for pollutants such as pH, temperature,
radiation or any other pollutants for which mass limits are not
appropriate. The determination to convert concentration limits to mass
limits is within the discretion of the Authority. The Authority may
establish equivalent mass limits only if the industrial user meets all the
conditions set forth in § 175-43E(1)(a) through (e) below.
(1) To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the industrial user must:
(a) Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water conservation
methods and technologies that substantially reduce water use
during the term of its individual wastewater discharge permit;
(b) Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to
achieve compliance with the applicable categorical
pretreatment standard and not have used dilution as a
substitute for treatment;
(c) Provide sufficient information to establish the facility's actual
average daily flow rate for all waste streams, based on data
from a continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as
the facility's long-term average production rate. Both the
actual average daily flow rate and the long-term average
production rate must be representative of current operating
conditions;
§ 175-43 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-43
169:246
(d) Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels
that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not
appropriate to control the discharge; and
(e) Have consistently complied with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards during the period prior to the
industrial user's request for equivalent mass limits.
(2) An industrial user subject to equivalent mass limits must:
(a) Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment
technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the
equivalent mass limits;
(b) Continue to record the facility's flow rates through the use of a
continuous effluent flow monitoring device;
(c) Continue to record the facility's production rates and notify the
Authority whenever production rates are expected to vary by
more than 20% from its baseline production rates determined
in § 175-43E(1)(c) of this section. Upon notification of a revised
production rate, the Authority will reassess the equivalent
mass limit and revise the limit as necessary to reflect changed
conditions at the facility; and
(d) Continue to employ the same or comparable water
conservation methods and technologies as those implemented
pursuant to § 175-43E(1)(a) of this section so long as it
discharges under an equivalent mass limit.
(3) When developing equivalent mass limits, the Authority:
(a) Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the
actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of
the industrial user by the concentration-based daily maximum
and monthly average standard for the applicable categorical
pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit conversion
factor;
(b) Upon notification of a revised production rate, will reassess the
equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to
reflect changed conditions at the facility; and
(c) May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent
individual wastewater discharger permit terms if the industrial
user's actual average daily flow rate was reduced solely as a
result of the implementation of water conservation methods
and technologies, and the actual average daily flow rates used
in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not
based on the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment
pursuant to § 175-47. The industrial user must also be in
§ 175-43 (RESERVED) § 175-43
169:247
§ 175-44. State pretreatment standards.
Users must comply with all applicable Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes,
as amended.
§ 175-45. Local limits.
compliance with § 175-103, regarding the prohibition of
bypass.
F. The Authority may convert the mass limits of the categorical
pretreatment standards of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419 and 455 to
concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to
individual industrial users. When converting such limits to
concentration limits, the Authority will use the concentrations listed in
the applicable subparts of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419 and 455 and
document that dilution is not being substituted for treatment as
prohibited by § 175-47 of this article. In addition, the Authority will
document how the equivalent limits were derived for any changes from
concentrations to mass limits, or vice versa, and make this information
publicly available [40 CFR 403.6(c)(7)].
G. Once included in its permit, the industrial user must comply with the
equivalent limitations developed in this § 175-43 in lieu of the
promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent
limitations were derived [40 CFR 403.6(c)(7)].
H. Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for
calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for
calculating maximum monthly average, or four-day average,
limitations. Where such standards are being applied, the same
production or flow figure shall be used in calculating both the average
and the maximum equivalent limitation [40 CFR 403.6(c)(8)].
I. Any industrial user operating under a permit incorporating equivalent
mass or concentration limits calculated from a production-based
standard shall notify the Authority within two business days after the
user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will
significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not
notifying the Authority of such anticipated change will be required to
meet the mass or concentration limits in its permit that were based on
the original estimate of the long-term average production rate [40 CFR
403.6(c)(9)].
A. The Authority is required and authorized to establish local limits
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c).
B. Pollutant limits.
(1) The following pollutant limits are established to protect against
pass-through and interference. No person shall discharge
§ 175-43 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-45
169:248
§ 175-46. Authority's right of revision.
The Authority reserves the right to establish, by resolution or in individual
wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements
on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this article.
§ 175-47. Dilution.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or
wastewater containing in excess of the following monthly average
and daily maximum limits.
Pollutant
Monthly
Average
(mg/l)
Daily Maximum
(mg/l)(1)
Maximum
Allowable
Headworks
(lb/day)(2)
Arsenic 0.1420 0.2840 0.6234
Cadmium 0.0908 0.1815 0.3983
Chromium 4.2220 8.4439 18.5320
Copper 2.6575 5.3150 15.4752
Cyanide 1.4077 2.8153 6.2836
Lead 0.9672 1.9344 4.2456
Mercury 0.0442 0.0883 0.1939
Molybdenum 0.5485 1.0970 2.5920
Nickel 1.5588 3.1175 6.8420
Selenium 0.3118 0.6235 1.3684
Silver 3.2657 6.5313 14.3344
PCBs 0.0001 0.0002 0.0547
Zinc 1.2145 2.4290 18.8507
NOTES:
Based on EPA Version Pa 3.1, 1-26-2010:
(1) Table 18
(2) Table 20
(2) The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is
discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances
are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. The Authority may
impose mass limitations in addition to the concentration-based
limitations above.
§ 175-45 (RESERVED) § 175-47
169:249
requirement. The Authority may impose mass limitations on users who are
using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements
or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
§ 175-48. Pretreatment facilities.
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with
this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in § 175-42 of this article
within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state or the Authority,
whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall
be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans
describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to
the Authority for review before such facilities are constructed. The review
of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user
from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce
a discharge acceptable to the Authority under the provisions of this article.
§ 175-49. Additional pretreatment measures.
A. Whenever deemed necessary, the Township or Authority may require
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate
that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers,
relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste
streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as
may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's
compliance with the requirements of this article.
B. The Township or Authority may require any person discharging into the
POTW to install and maintain, on his or her property and at his or her
expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure
equalization of flow. An individual wastewater discharge permit may be
issued solely for flow equalization.
C. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Township and Authority, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil
or sand except that such interceptors shall not be required for
residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and capacity to
accommodate the peak flow and loading expected to occur, have a
minimum size of 250 gallons, be located outside as to be readily
accessible for inspection and cleaning and be approved by the
Authority.
D. Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.
§ 175-47 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-50
169:250
§ 175-50. Accidental discharge/slug discharge control plans.
The Township or Authority shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an
accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan or other action to control
slug discharges. The Township or Authority may require any user to
develop, submit for approval and implement such a plan or take such other
action that may be necessary to control slug discharges. Alternatively, the
Township or Authority may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental
discharge/slug discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the
following:
§ 175-51. Hauled wastewater.
The Authority will not receive hauled septic tank waste or hauled industrial
waste.
§ 175-52. Wastewater analysis.
When requested by the Township or Authority, a user must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 90
days of the request. The Authority is authorized to prepare a form for this
purpose and may periodically require users to update this information.
§ 175-53. Permit required.
A. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
B. Description of stored chemicals;
C. Procedures for immediately notifying the Authority of any accidental or
slug discharge, as required by § 175-72 of this article; and
D. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection
and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials,
loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker
training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or
measures and equipment for emergency response.
A. No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first obtaining an individual wastewater discharge
permit from the Authority, except that a significant industrial user that
has filed a timely application pursuant to § 175-54 of this article may
continue to discharge for the time period specified therein.
B. The Authority may require other users to obtain individual wastewater
discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article.
C. Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual wastewater
discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects
§ 175-50 (RESERVED) § 175-53
169:251
§ 175-54. Permits for existing connections.
Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who
was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of
this article and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future shall,
within 120 days after said date, apply to the Authority for an individual
wastewater discharge permit in accordance with § 175-56 of this article and
shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 180 days
of the effective date of this article except in accordance with an individual
wastewater discharge permit issued by the Authority.
§ 175-55. Permits for new connections.
Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who
proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain
such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An
application for this individual wastewater discharge permit, in accordance
with § 175-56 of this article, must be filed at least 120 days prior to the date
upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
§ 175-56. Permit application contents.
the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in
§§ 175-85 through 175-100 of this article. Obtaining an individual
wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its
obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards
or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state and
local law.
A. All users required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
must submit a permit application. The Township or Authority may
require users to submit all or some of the following information as part
of a permit application:
(1) Identifying information.
(a) The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner.
(b) Contact information, description of activities, facilities and
plant production processes on the premises.
(2) Environmental permits: a list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
(3) Description of operations.
(a) A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
(including each product produced by type, amount, processes
and rate of production) and standard industrial classifications
of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description
§ 175-53 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-56
169:252
should include a schematic process diagram, which indicates
points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
(b) Types of wastes generated and a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could
accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
(c) Number and type of employees, hours of operation and
proposed or actual hours of operation.
(d) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
(e) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers, floor drains and appurtenances by
size, location and elevation, and all points of discharge.
(4) Time and duration of discharges.
(5) The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit.
(6) Flow measurement: information showing the measured average
daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to
allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in § 175-43
[40 CFR 403.6(e)].
(7) Measurement of pollutants.
(a) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process and any new categorically regulated
processes for existing sources.
(b) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or
by the Authority, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from
each regulated process.
(c) Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.
(d) The sample shall be representative of daily operations and
shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
§ 175-76 of this article. Where the standard requires
compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the
user shall submit documentation as required by the Authority
or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the
standard.
(e) Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures
set out in § 175-77 of this article.
(8) Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved
monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to
§ 175-56 (RESERVED) § 175-56
169:253
§ 175-57. Application signatories and certifications.
§ 175-58. Permit decisions.
The Township or Authority will evaluate the data furnished by the user
and may require additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a
complete permit application, the Authority will determine whether to issue
an individual wastewater discharge permit. The Authority may deny any
application for an individual wastewater discharge permit.
§ 175-59. Permit duration.
An individual wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified
time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit.
An individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period of
less than five years, at the discretion of the Authority. Each individual
wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will
expire.
§ 175-60. Permit contents.
An individual wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as
are deemed reasonably necessary by the Township or Authority to prevent
pass-through or interference, protect the quality of the water body
receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety,
facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to
the POTW.
be present in the discharge based on § 175-70B [40 CFR
403.12(e)(2)].
(9) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
Authority to evaluate the permit application.
B. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision.
A. All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and
certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative
of the user and contain the certification statement in § 175-80A. (For
the definition of "authorized representative," see § 175-41c.)
B. If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate
because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new written authorization
satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the
Authority prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an
authorized representative.
A. Individual wastewater discharge permits must contain:
§ 175-56 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-60
169:254
(1) A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit
issuance date, expiration date and effective date. (See § 175-59.)
(2) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the Authority in
accordance with § 175-63 of this article, and provisions for
furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
(3) Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards.
(4) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and
recordkeeping requirements: These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants or best management practices to be
monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type
based on federal, state and local law.
(5) The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant
neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in
accordance with § 175-70B.
(6) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or
local law.
(7) Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the
Authority to be necessary.
(8) Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Authority in accordance
with § 175-70B must be included as a condition in the user's permit.
B. Individual wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be
limited to, the following conditions:
(1) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization.
(2) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction
of pollutants into the treatment works.
(3) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions, including management
practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated or nonroutine discharges.
(4) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW.
§ 175-60 (RESERVED) § 175-60
169:255
§ 175-61. Permit issuance process.
(5) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW.
(6) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement
devices.
(7) A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility
for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment
standards, including those which become effective during the term
of the individual wastewater discharge permit.
(8) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Authority to ensure
compliance with this article and state and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
A. Public notification. The Township or Authority may publish in a
newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public
notice with the jurisdiction served by the POTW, a notice to issue a
pretreatment permit at least 30 days prior to issuance. The notice will
indicate a location where the draft permit may be reviewed and an
address where written comments may be submitted.
B. Permit appeals. The Township or Authority shall provide public notice of
the issuance of an individual wastewater discharge permit. Any person,
including the user, may petition the Authority to reconsider the terms of
an individual wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of
its issuance.
(1) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be
a waiver of the administrative appeal.
(2) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the individual
wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons
for this objection and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to
place in the individual wastewater discharge permit.
(3) The effectiveness of the individual wastewater discharge permit
shall not be stayed pending the appeal.
(4) If the Township or Authority fails to act within 90 days, a request
for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider an individual wastewater discharge permit, not to issue
an individual wastewater discharge permit or not to modify an
individual wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final
administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
§ 175-60 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-62
169:256
§ 175-62. Permit modification.
The Township or Authority may modify an individual wastewater discharge
permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
§ 175-63. Permit transfer.
A. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements;
B. To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation,
processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of the
individual wastewater discharge permit issuance;
C. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
D. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the Authority's POTW, Authority personnel, sludge quality or the
receiving waters;
E. Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater
discharge permit;
F. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
G. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
H. To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater
discharge permit; or
I. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator where requested in accordance with § 175-63.
A. Individual wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new
owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 days' advance
notice to the Township and Authority and the Authority approves the
individual wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the
Township and Authority must include a written certification by the new
owner or operator which:
(1) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent
to change the facility's operations and processes;
(2) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
(3) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
individual wastewater discharge permit.
B. Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the individual
wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
§ 175-62 (RESERVED) § 175-64
169:257
§ 175-64. Permit revocation.
§ 175-65. Permit reissuance.
A user with an expiring individual wastewater discharge permit shall apply
for individual wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a
complete permit application, in accordance with § 175-56 of this article, a
minimum of 120 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing individual
wastewater discharge permit.
§ 175-66. Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions.
A. The Authority may revoke an individual wastewater discharge permit
for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
(1) Failure to notify the Authority of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
(2) Failure to provide prior notification to the Authority of changed
conditions pursuant to § 175-71 of this article;
(3) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
(4) Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;
(5) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
(6) Refusing to allow the Authority timely access to the facility
premises and records;
(7) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(8) Failure to pay fines;
(9) Failure to pay sewer charges;
(10) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
(11) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
(12) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
(13) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article.
B. Individual wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon
cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All individual
wastewater discharge permits issued to a user are void upon the
issuance of a new individual wastewater discharge permit to that user.
§ 175-64 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-66
169:258
§ 175-67. Baseline monitoring reports.
A. If another municipality, state or federal operating property unit or user
located within another municipality contributes wastewater to the
POTW, the Authority shall receive and treat the wastewater in
accordance with the current contributing intergovernmental
agreements with the Township and Authority and the conditions of this
article.
B. In accordance with intergovernmental agreements, the Authority shall
request the following information from the contributing municipality or
government unit as mandated by EPA:
(1) A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged
to the POTW by the contributing municipality;
(2) An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
(3) Such other information as the Authority may deem necessary for
compliance with state and federal regulations.
C. The contributing municipality or state or federal operating property
unit as provided for in the intergovernmental agreement shall, at a
minimum, comply with the following EPA-required conditions:
(1) The contributing municipality or governmental unit shall adopt a
sewer use ordinance or state-federal operating standard which is at
least as stringent as this article and local limits, including required
baseline monitoring reports (BMRs) which are at least as stringent
as those set out in § 175-45 of this article. The limits must be
revised as necessary to reflect changes made by the Authority to
the pretreatment program and local limits as mandated by EPA;
(2) The contributing municipality or governmental unit shall submit a
revised user inventory on at least an annual basis to the Authority;
(3) Pretreatment implementation activities, including individual
wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling,
and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing
municipality or governmental unit within the sewer system it owns
and discharges to the Authority's sewer system;
(4) The contributing municipality or governmental unit shall provide
the Authority with access to all information that the contributing
municipality or governmental unit obtains as part of any
pretreatment activities undertaken by the municipality or
government unit.
A. Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
§ 175-66 (RESERVED) § 175-67
169:259
existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the Township and
Authority a report which contains the information listed in Subsection
B below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge,
new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard,
shall submit to the Township and Authority a report which contains the
information listed in Subsection B below. A new source shall report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
Standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow
and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
B. Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
(1) All information required in § 175-56A(1)(a), (2), (3)(a) and (6) [40
CFR 403.12(b)(1)-(7)].
(2) Measurement of pollutants.
(a) The user shall provide the information required in Section
175-56A(7)(a) through (d).
(b) The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements
of this subsection.
(c) Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately
downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment
exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the
flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the
combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate
compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an
alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit, along
with supporting data, shall be submitted to the Control
Authority.
(d) Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
§ 175-76.
(e) The Township and Authority may allow the submission of a
baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the
data provides information sufficient to determine the need for
industrial pretreatment measures.
(f) The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of
sampling and methods of analysis and shall certify that such
sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles
and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.
§ 175-67 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-67
169:260
§ 175-68. Compliance schedule progress reports.
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
§ 175-67B(4) of this article:
§ 175-69. Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standard deadline.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
(3) Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's
authorized representative as defined in § 175-41 and certified by a
qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards
are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional
operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment
is required to meet the pretreatment standards and Requirements.
(4) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will
be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The completion date
in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance
schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set
out in § 175-68 of this article.
(5) Signature and report certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be certified in accordance with § 175-80A of this article and
signed by an authorized representative as defined in § 175-41.
A. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for
the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (Such events
include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components,
commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation).
B. No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
C. The user shall submit a progress report to the Authority no later than
14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with
the increment of progress, the reason for any delay and, if appropriate,
the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule;
and
D. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the Authority.
§ 175-67 (RESERVED) § 175-69
169:261
subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the Township and Authority a report containing the information described
in § 175-56A(6) and (7) and 175-67(B)(2) of this article. For users subject
to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with
the procedures in § 175-43 [40 CFR 403.6(c)], this report shall contain a
reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other
users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of
allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production or other measure of
operation, this report shall include the user's actual production during the
appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with § 175-80A of this article. All sampling will be
done in conformance with § 175-77.
§ 175-70. Periodic compliance reports.
All SIUs are required to submit periodic compliance reports.
A. Except as specified in § 175-70C, all significant industrial users must, at
a frequency determined by the Township or Authority, submit no less
than twice per year and no later than 45 days from the last day of June
and December reports indicating the nature, concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment
standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily
flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment
standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP)
or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit
documentation required by the Authority or the pretreatment standard
necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.
B. The Authority may authorize an industrial user subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a
categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has
demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the
pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the
Discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water
and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the
industrial user [40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)].
(1) This authorization is subject to the following conditions:
(a) The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined
to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged
from the facility, provided that the sanitary wastewater is not
regulated by an applicable categorical standard and otherwise
includes no process wastewater.
(b) The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the
effective period of the individual wastewater discharge permit,
but in no case longer than five years. The user must submit a
new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted
§ 175-69 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-70
169:262
for each subsequent individual wastewater discharge permit.
See § 175-56A(8).
(c) In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the
industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of
the facility's process wastewater prior to any treatment
present at the facility that is representative of all wastewater
from all processes.
(d) The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in
accordance with § 175-41E and include the certification
statement in § 175-80A [40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii)].
(e) Nondetectable sample results may be used only as a
demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPAapproved
method from 40 CFR 136 with the lowest minimum
detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis.
(f) Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Authority must be
included as a condition in the user's permit. The reasons
supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the
user in its request for the waiver must be maintained by the
Authority for three years after expiration of the waiver.
(g) Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the
user's permit by the Authority, the industrial user must certify
on each report with the statement in § 175-80C below that
there has been no increase in the pollutant in its waste stream
due to activities of the industrial user.
(h) In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is
expected to be present because of changes that occur in the
user's operations, the user must immediately comply with the
monitoring requirements of § 175-70A, or other more frequent
monitoring requirements imposed by the Authority, and notify
the Authority.
(i) This provision does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in categorical pretreatment
standards, except as otherwise specified in the categorical
pretreatment standard.
(2) Any Categorical user that is authorized to reduce its monitoring to
once per year is required to immediately notify the Authority if it no
longer meets the criteria for reduced monitoring [40 CFR
403.12(e)(3)(iv)].
C. Reduced reporting.
(1) The Authority may reduce the requirement for periodic compliance
reports for Categorical users subject to categorical standards as
may be permitted by § 175-70A [40 CFR 403.12(e)(1)] to a
§ 175-70 (RESERVED) § 175-70
169:263
§ 175-71. Reports of changed conditions.
Each user must notify the Township and Authority of any significant
changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change.
requirement to report no less frequently than once a year, unless
required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the
EPA, where the industrial user's total categorical wastewater flow
does not exceed any of the following:
(a) A value equal to 62,500 gallons per day, 0.01% of the POTW's
design dry-weather hydraulic capacity of the POTW, or 5,000
gallons per day, whichever is smaller, as measured by a
continuous effluent flow monitoring device unless the
industrial user discharges in batches; and
(b) A value equal to 108.46 pounds per day, 0.01% of the design
dry-weather organic treatment capacity of the POTW; and
(c) A value equal to 0.01% of the maximum allowable headworks
loading for any pollutant regulated by the applicable
categorical pretreatment standard for which approved local
limits were developed in accordance with § 175-45 of this
article.
(2) Reduced reporting is not available to industrial users that have in
the last two years been in significant noncompliance, as defined in
§ 175-84 of this article. In addition, reduced reporting is not
available to an industrial user with daily flow rates, production
levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that, in the
opinion of the Authority decreasing the reporting requirement for
this industrial user, would result in data that are not representative
of conditions occurring during the reporting period.
D. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with § 175-80A of this article.
E. All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at
all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample
results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
F. If a user subject to the reporting requirements in this section monitors
any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more
frequently than required by the Authority, using the procedures
prescribed in § 175-77 of this article, the results of this monitoring shall
be included in the report.
§ 175-70 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-71
169:264
§ 175-72. Notification of problems.
§ 175-73. Reports from not requiring permits.
All users not required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
shall provide appropriate reports to the Authority as the Authority may
require.
§ 175-74. Notification of violation; repeat sampling and reporting.
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify
the Authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The
A. The Township or Authority may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed
condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit
application under § 175-56 of this article.
B. The Authority may issue an individual wastewater discharge permit
under § 175-65 of this article or modify an existing wastewater
discharge permit under § 175-62 of this article in response to changed
conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
A. In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, a slug discharge or slug load, that
might cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall
immediately telephone and notify the Authority of the incident. This
notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the
user.
B. Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived
by the Authority, submit a detailed written report describing the
cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to
prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve
the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which might be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources or any
other damage to person or property nor shall such notification relieve
the user of any fines, penalties or other liability which may be imposed
pursuant to this article.
C. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a
discharge described in Subsection A above. Employers shall ensure that
all employees who could cause such a discharge to occur are advised of
the emergency notification procedure.
D. Significant industrial users are required to notify the Authority
immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a
slug discharge.
§ 175-71 (RESERVED) § 175-74
169:265
user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of
the repeat analysis to the Authority within 30 days after becoming aware
of the violation. Resampling by the industrial user is not required if the
Authority performs sampling at the user's facility at least once a month, or
if the Authority performs sampling at the user's facility between the time
when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or
the Authority receives the results of this sampling, or if the Authority has
performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user.
§ 175-75. Discharge of hazardous waste prohibited.
§ 175-76. Analytical requirements.
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136,
and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling
or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA
determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are
inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be
performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable
sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the
Township or Authority or other parties approved by EPA.
§ 175-77. Sample collection.
Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be obtained
through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period
covered by the report, which is representative of conditions occurring
during the reporting period.
A. The discharge into the POTW of any substance which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261 is
prohibited.
B. In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
Township and Authority, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste
Division Director and state hazardous waste authorities, and stop the
discharge of such substance on the effective date of such regulations.
C. In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall
certify that it has a program in place stop the hazardous wastes
generated from being discharged.
D. This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued
thereunder or any applicable federal or state law.
§ 175-74 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-77
169:266
§ 175-78. Date of receipt of reports.
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
§ 175-79. Recordkeeping.
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article, any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements and
documentation associated with best management practices. Records shall
A. Except as indicated in Subsections B and C below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flow-proportional
composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite
sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the Authority. Where timeproportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the
Authority, the samples must be representative of the discharge and the
reasons documented for using the alternative sampling monitoring.
Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40
CFR 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples
collected during a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to
the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the
samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile
organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the
laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the
compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA
methodologies may be authorized by the Township or Authority, as
appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show
compliance with instantaneous limits.
B. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols,
sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.
C. For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety-day
compliance reports required in §§ 175-67 and 175-69 [40 CFR 403.12(b)
and (d)], a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide,
total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for
facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for
which historical sampling data are available, the Township or Authority
may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by § 175-70
[40 CFR 403.12(e) and (h)], the industrial user is required to collect the
number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by
industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards and
Requirements.
§ 175-77 (RESERVED) § 175-79
169:267
include the date, exact place, method and time of sampling and the name of
the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who
performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the
results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period
of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the
duration of any litigation concerning the user, the Township or the Authority
or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period
by the Township or Authority.
§ 175-80. Certification statements.
A. Certification of permit applications, user reports and initial monitoring
waiver. The following certification statement is required to be signed
and submitted by users submitting permit applications in accordance
with § 175-57; users submitting baseline monitoring reports under
§ 175-67B(5) [40 CFR 403.12(1)]; users submitting reports on
compliance with the categorical pretreatment standard deadlines
under § 175-69 [40 CFR 403.12(d)]; users submitting periodic
compliance reports required by § 175-70A through D [40 CFR 403.12(e)
and (h)]; and users submitting an initial request to forego sampling of a
pollutant on the basis of § 175-70B(1)(d) [40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)(iii)]. The
following certification statement must be signed by an authorized
representative as defined in § 175-41:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather
and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted
is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete.
I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations.
B. Certification of pollutants not present. Users that have an approved
monitoring waiver based on § 175-70B must certify on each report with
the following statement that there has been no increase in the pollutant
in its waste stream due to activities of the user [40 CFR
403.12(e)(2)(v)].
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with the pretreatment standard for 40 CFR
_____ [specify applicable National pretreatment standard part(s)]. I
certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no
increase in the level of _____ [list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due
to the activities at the facility since filing of the last periodic report
under § 175-70A.
§ 175-79 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-81
169:268
§ 175-81. Right of entry: inspection and sampling.
The Township and Authority shall have the right to enter the premises of any
user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of
this article and any individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder. Users shall allow the Township and Authority ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying and the performance of any additional duties.
§ 175-82. Search warrants.
If the Township or Authority has been refused access to a building, structure
or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause
to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a
need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of the Authority designed to verify compliance with this article
or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety and welfare of the community, the Township or Authority
may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Court of Common Pleas of
Cumberland or York County or other appropriate forum and may request
EPA enforcement assistance.
A. Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, the Township and Authority
shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing
specific responsibilities.
B. The Township or Authority shall have the right to set up on the user's
property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
C. The Township or Authority may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to
measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at a minimum
frequency specified by the Township or Authority based on site
conditions to ensure their accuracy.
D. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the user at the written or verbal request of the Township or Authority
and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
borne by the user.
E. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Township or Authority access to
the user's premises shall be a violation of this article.
§ 175-81 (RESERVED) § 175-83
169:269
§ 175-83. Confidential information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge permits and
monitoring programs, and from the Township's or Authority's inspection
and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction,
unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Township or Authority, that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such
request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or
data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report
that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report
which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available
immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the
NPDES program or pretreatment program and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other effluent data, as defined at 40 CFR 2.302, shall
not be recognized as confidential information and shall be available to the
public without restriction.
§ 175-84. Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
The Township or Authority shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions
served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at any time during the
previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant
noncompliance" shall be applicable to all significant industrial users (or any
other industrial user that violates Subsections C, D or H of this section) and
shall mean:
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits as defined in § 175-41;
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by § 175-41 multiplied by the
applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for
all other pollutants except pH);
C. Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by § 175-41 (daily maximum, long-term average, Instantaneous
Limit or narrative standard) that the Authority determines has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-
§ 175-83 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-84
169:270
§ 175-85. Notice of violation.
When the Township or Authority finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, the Township or Authority may serve upon that user a
written notice of violation. Within 30 days of the receipt of such notice, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted
by the user to the Township or Authority. Submission of such a plan in
no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or
after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit
the authority of the Township or Authority to take any action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a
notice of violation.
§ 175-86. Consent orders.
The Township or Authority may enter into consent orders, assurances of
compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any
user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific
action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time
period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same
force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to §§ 175-88
and 175-89 of this article and shall be judicially enforceable.
through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the
general public;
D. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Authority's
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge
permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic selfmonitoring
reports and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
H. Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the Authority determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
§ 175-84 (RESERVED) § 175-87
169:271
§ 175-87. Show cause hearing.
The Township or Authority may order a user which has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, to appear before the Township or Authority and
show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the
meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action and
a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally
or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 30
days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the user as defined in § 175-41 and required by § 175-58.
A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the user.
§ 175-88. Compliance orders.
When the Township or Authority finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Township or Authority may issue an order to the user
responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance
within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within
the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are installed
and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other
requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional selfmonitoring
and management practices designed to minimize the amount
of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend
the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or
requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any
violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order
shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user.
§ 175-89. Cease and desist orders.
When the Township or Authority finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the
Authority may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all
such violations and directing the user to:
A. Immediately comply with all requirements; and
B. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a
§ 175-87 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-89
169:272
§ 175-90. Administrative fines.
§ 175-91. Emergency discharge suspensions.
cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user.
A. When the Township or Authority finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Township or Authority may
fine such user in an amount not to exceed the maximum fine allowed
under state law. Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day
basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge
limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of
violation.
B. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the
Township or Authority to reconsider the fine, along with full payment of
the fine amount, within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a
request has merit, the Township or Authority may convene a hearing on
the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment
shall be returned to the user. The Township or Authority may add the
costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices
and orders, to the fine.
C. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
A. The Township or Authority may immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension
is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably
appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment
to the health or welfare of persons. The Township or Authority may also
immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to
respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW or
which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
(1) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Township or Authority may take such steps as deemed necessary,
including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent
or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream or
endangerment to any individuals. The Township or Authority may
allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Township or Authority that
the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination
proceedings in § 175-92 of this article are initiated against the user.
§ 175-89 (RESERVED) § 175-91
169:273
§ 175-92. Termination of discharge.
§ 175-93. Injunctive relief.
When the Township or Authority finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Township or Authority may petition the Court of Common
Pleas of Cumberland or York County or any other appropriate forum
through the Authority's Solicitor for the issuance of a temporary or
permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the
specific performance of the individual wastewater discharge permit, order
or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The
Township or Authority may also seek such other action as is appropriate for
legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct
environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
(2) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and
the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the
Authority prior to the date of any show cause or termination
hearing under § 175-87 or § 175-92 of this article.
B. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior
to any emergency suspension under this section.
A. In addition to the provisions in § 175-64 of this article, any user who
violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
(1) Violation of individual wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards in §§ 175-42 through
175-47 of this article.
B. Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge
and be offered an opportunity to show cause under § 175-87 of this
article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this
option by the Authority shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the user.
§ 175-91 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-94
169:274
§ 175-94. Civil penalties.
The Township or Authority may assess monetary penalties for
noncompliance as provided by 35 P.S. § 752.1 et seq., the publicly owned
treatment works Penalty Law, Act of the General Assembly of March 26,
1992, P.L. 23, No. 9, subject to the appeal procedures as specified in 2
Pa.C.S.A. for any industrial user in noncompliance.
§ 175-95. Criminal prosecution.
Any person who knowingly, willfully or intentionally makes any false
statements, representation or certification in any application, record,
report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant
to this article, or wastewater contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers
with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this article, will be prosecuted to the extent permitted by
law under the Crimes Code, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 175-96. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The Township
or Authority may take any, all or any combination of these actions against
a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally
be in accordance with the Authority's enforcement response plan. However,
the Township or Authority may take other action against any user when the
circumstances warrant. Further, the Township or Authority is empowered to
take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user.
§ 175-97. Performance bonds.
The Authority may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater
discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision
of this article, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the Authority, in
a sum not to exceed a value determined by the Authority to be necessary to
achieve consistent compliance.
§ 175-98. Liability insurance.
The Authority may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater
discharge to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this
article, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the
user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient
to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.
§ 175-99. Payment of outstanding fees and penalties.
The Authority may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater
discharge permit to any user who has failed to pay any outstanding fees,
§ 175-94 (RESERVED) § 175-99
169:275
fines or penalties incurred as a result of any provision of this article, a
previous individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder.
§ 175-100. Eligibility for receipt of contractual award.
Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and Requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award
for the sale of goods or services to the Township and Authority. Existing
contracts for the sale of goods or services to the Township and Authority
held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment
standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the
Township and Authority.
§ 175-101. Upset.
A. For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance or careless or improper operation.
B. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of Subsection C; below are met.
C. A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs or other relevant evidence that:
(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and
(3) The user has submitted the following information to the Authority
within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. (If this information
is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five days.):
(a) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
(b) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue; and
(c) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
§ 175-99 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-101
169:276
§ 175-102. Affirmative defense of prohibited discharge
enforcement.
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in § 175-42A of
this article or the specific prohibitions in § 175-42B(1)(c) through (g) and (i)
through (r) of this article if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason
to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from
other sources, would cause pass-through or interference and that either:
§ 175-103. Bypass.
D. In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
E. Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards.
F. Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary
to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or
fails.
A. A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the passthrough
or interference; or
B. No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in
nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the
Authority was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit and, in
the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use
or disposal requirements.
A. For the purposes of this section:
(1) "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from
any portion of a user's treatment facility.
(2) "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the
absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean
economic loss caused by delays in production.
B. A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
§ 175-101 (RESERVED) § 175-103
169:277
§ 175-104. Wastewater treatment rates.
Rates for wastewater treatment are adopted by the Authority under a
separate resolution and amended as required.
bypasses are not subject to the provisions of Subsections C and D of
this section.
C. Bypass notifications.
(1) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the Authority at least 10 days before the date of the
bypass, if possible.
(2) A user shall submit oral notice to the Authority of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written
submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the
user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall
contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of
the bypass, including exact dates and times and, if the bypass has
not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue;
and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The Authority may waive the written
report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received
within 24 hours.
D. Bypass prohibited; exceptions.
(1) Bypass is prohibited, and the Township or Authority may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
(a) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury
or severe property damage;
(b) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup
equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and
(c) The user submitted notices as required under Subsection C of
this section.
(2) The Township or Authority may approve an anticipated bypass,
after considering its adverse effects, if the Authority determines
that it will meet the three conditions listed in Subsection D(1) of
this section.
§ 175-103 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-105
169:278
§ 175-105. Pretreatment charges and fees.
The Township or Authority may adopt by separate resolution reasonable
fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the Authority's
Pretreatment Program, which may include:
§ 175-106. Severability.
If any provision of this article is invalidated by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall
continue in full force and effect.
A. Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications, including the cost
of processing such applications;
B. Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures, including
the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge and reviewing
monitoring reports and certification statements submitted by users;
C. Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
D. Fees for filing appeals;
E. Fees to recover administrative and legal costs (not included in
§ 175-105B) associated with the enforcement activity taken by the
Authority to address IU noncompliance; and
F. Other fees as the Authority may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters
covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines and
penalties chargeable by the Authority.
§ 175-105 (RESERVED) § 175-106
169:279
Chapter 180
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 162. Vector control — See Ch. 206.
§ 175-106 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 175-106
180:280
ARTICLE I
Recycling
§ 180-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases or words shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context in which the word is used clearly indicates otherwise.
ALUMINUM — The lightweight ductile and malleable metallic substance or
element commonly known as "aluminum," and shall include all aluminum
food and beverage cans. It shall exclude aluminum foil.
BIMETAL CONTAINERS — Food or beverage containers consisting of
ferrous sides and bottom and an aluminum top.
COLLECTOR — That individual, partnership, firm, corporation or business
entity designated by the Township, by means of an independent contract, as
the person having the exclusive right and privilege to collect, haul, carry,
remove or disperse of all garbage, trash, ashes, rubbish and refuse from
dwelling units within the Township under Article II, Collection and Disposal
of Solid Waste.
COMMERCIAL — Those properties used primarily for commercial or
industrial purposes and those multiple-dwelling residential buildings
containing more than three dwelling units.
CURBSIDE RECYCLING COLLECTION — The scheduled collection and
transportation of recyclable material placed at the curbline by residents
subject to this Article I.
DWELLING — A building used for residential purposes, except hotels,
apartments with more than six dwelling units, tourist cabins, motels and
trailers in trailer parks.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.[Amended 5-29-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-07]
GLASS — All empty bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown glass,
except noncontainer glass, plate glass, blue glass, porcelain and ceramic
products.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people, such as hospitals, schools and nursing homes.
MAGAZINE AND PERIODICAL — Printed matter containing miscellaneous
written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals, excluding all other
paper products of any nature whatsoever.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTY — Any property having more than six
dwelling units per structure.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Any public facility operated by
Township or other governmental or quasi-governmental authority.
§ 180-1 SOLID WASTE § 180-1
180:281
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and other
matters of public interest, but not including glossy advertising inserts
included with newspapers.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, institution, cooperative
enterprise, municipality, municipal authority, federal government or agency,
state institution or agency or any other legal entity whatsoever which
is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. It shall also
mean owner, lessee or occupant of a residential dwelling, commercial
establishment or institutional establishment. In any provision of this article
prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty or any combination thereof,
person shall include the officers and directors of any corporation or other
legal entity having officers and directors.
PLASTIC — A class of synthetic organic compounds capable of being
molded, extruded, cast or otherwise fabricated into various shapes. It shall
include high-density polyethylene (HDPE) and polyethlyene terephthalate
(PET). It shall exclude low-density polyethylene (LDPE), polypropylene (PP)
and polyvinyl chloride (PVC).
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials specified by the Township to
be recycled.
RECYCLE — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, plastics and other materials which would otherwise be
disposed of or processed as municipal waste, or the mechanized separation
and treatment of municipal wastes (other than through combustion) and
creation and recovery of reusable materials other than fuel for the operation
of energy.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING — Any occupied single-family or multifamily
housing property having up to three dwelling units per structure for which
the Township provides municipal waste collection service.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, trash, ashes, refuse and other discarded solid
materials.
TOWNSHIP — Lower Allen Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP LICENSEE — A person or firm, not the Township collector,
licensed by the Township to collect, haul and/or dispose of refuse and/or
recyclables from persons not exclusively within the area of responsibility of
the Township collector.
§ 180-2. Establishment of program.
There is hereby established in the Township a mandatory source-separation
and collection program for recyclable materials from solid waste by persons
residing in residential dwellings from which solid waste is collected by or
on behalf of the Township.
§ 180-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 180-3
180:282
§ 180-3. Separation and disposal of recyclable materials from
residential dwellings.
Recyclable materials for residential dwellings are aluminum, bimetal
containers, glass, plastic and newspaper. Recyclable materials from
residential dwellings shall be placed at the curb separate from solid waste
for collections or taken to dropoff sites at such times, dates and places
as may be established by the Township Manager. Recyclable materials
for residential dwellings shall be collected a minimum of two days per
month. Recyclable materials for residential dwellings shall be prepared for
collection as follows:
§ 180-4. Separation and disposal of recyclable materials by
multifamily housing properties.
The owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of multifamily housing
properties whose solid waste is not collected by or on behalf of the Township
shall establish a collection system for recyclable materials at each
structure. Recyclable materials for multifamily housing properties are
aluminum cans, bimetal containers, glass containers and newspaper. The
collection systems must include suitable containers for collecting and
sorting materials, easily accessible locations for the containers and written
instructions to occupants concerning the use and availability of the
collection systems. Owners, landlords and agents who comply with this
section shall not be liable for noncompliance of occupants of their buildings.
§ 180-5. Separation and disposal of recyclable materials by
commercial, institutional and municipal establishments.
Commercial, institutional and municipal establishments shall separate and
store recyclable materials until collection. Recyclable materials for
commercial, institutional and municipal establishments are high-grade
office paper, aluminum cans, glass food and beverage containers (clear
and colored) and corrugated paper. These establishments shall arrange
for the transfer of recyclable materials to a recycling system, and, if the
system is separate from that used by or on behalf of the Township for
residential dwellings, the Township licensee shall provide annual reports
A. All newspaper shall be placed in paper bags or tied in bundles not
exceeding 40 pounds in weight nor exceeding one foot in thickness.
B. Glass shall have caps and lids removed and rinsed free of contaminates.
C. Aluminum and bimetal cans shall be rinsed free of contaminates.
D. Glass, aluminum and bimetal cans and plastic shall be placed in the
receptacle provided by the Township or in a plastic bag. The plastic bag
shall be durable and secured or tied. No other solid waste shall be
placed in the plastic bag.
E. Placement shall be a minimum of six feet from nonrecyclable trash and
garbage.
§ 180-3 SOLID WASTE § 180-5
180:283
as hereinafter set forth to the Township as evidence of such arrangement
and documentation of the total number of tons recycled. The application
for a license to be a Township licensee shall constitute a written agreement
evidenced by the signature of the applicant and the issuance of the license
by the Township whereby the Township licensees specifically agrees to
provide an annual report on or before the 10th day of January of each
calendar year which shall state the quantities and types of waste material
processed during the preceding calendar year, particularly the recyclables
collected in the Township, the nature and extent of the processing, the type
and quantity (weight) of source-separated recyclable materials, the place,
nature and terms of marketing recyclable materials supported by actual
records documenting the quantity of such marketing, i.e., the weight slips,
receipts from each market verifying quantities, etc., which agreement shall
provide that the Township may recognize appropriate recyclables processed
by the Township licensee originating in the Township in any application for
performance grants from superior governmental agencies and specifically
waiving any claim against or for any grants. If such information is regarded
as confidential and the Township licensee demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the Township Manager that such information is entitled to protection,
such information shall not be available for inspection by the public but shall
be made available upon request to governmental agencies for uses related
to this § 180-5.
§ 180-6. Collection by unauthorized person.
No person shall collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up
any recyclable material within the Township or dispose of the same in any
manner or place without obtaining annually a license from the Township
in accordance with the provisions of § 180-13. Each such collection or
pickup in violation hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 180-7. Franchise or license.
The Township may enter into an agreement or agreements with a private
person or persons or public agency or agencies for collection of all or part
of recyclable materials from the curbside.
§ 180-8. Enforcement and administration.
The Township Manager or his designee is authorized and directed to
enforce this article. The Township Manager shall have authority to make
rules and regulations relating to the administration of the provisions of
this article, in addition to any other powers herein conferred upon him,
provided that such rules and regulations are not contrary to the provisions
of this article. An aggrieved person shall have the right of appeal against
any rule or regulation made by the Township Manager to the Board of
Commissioners that may confirm, modify or revoke any such rule or
regulations.
§ 180-5 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 180-9
180:284
§ 180-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of §§ 180-3, 180-4 and 180-5 hereof
shall be punishable by a fine of $50 upon a first conviction, $75 upon a
second conviction and $200 upon a third or each subsequent conviction.
Any person who violates the provisions of § 180-6 hereof shall be punishable
by a fine of $100. Any person who takes a container designated for recycling
usage or the contents thereof without a license from the Township shall be
punishable by a fine of $300. In default of payment of fines and costs, the
person shall be imprisoned not more than 30 days.
§ 180-9 SOLID WASTE § 180-9
180:285

ARTICLE II
Collection and Disposal of Solid Waste
§ 180-10. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases or words shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context in which the word is used clearly indicates otherwise:
APARTMENT BUILDING — A building used for residential purposes with
more than six dwelling units, except hotels, motels, tourist cabins and
dormitories.
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, charcoal and
other combustible materials for the purpose of heating and cooking.
BULKY WASTE — Refuse which will not fit inside a container but which is
not oversized refuse, including large auto parts and the like, but excluding
tires and white goods.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.[Amended 5-29-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-07]
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or
article which is designated by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency or other appropriate agency of the commonwealth to be
"hazardous," as that term is defined by or pursuant to federal or state law.
HDPE — High-density polyethylene (i.e., plastic containers, such as plastic
milk and water bottles).
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people for a common purpose, such as hospitals, schools and
nursing homes.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Public facilities operated by the
Township of Lower Allen and other governmental and quasi-governmental
authorities.
OVERSIZED REFUSE — Large items of waste, including but not limited to
furniture, but excluding tires and white goods.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, institution, cooperative
enterprise, municipality, municipal authority, federal government or agency,
state institution or agency or any other legal entity whatsoever which
is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. It shall also
mean owner, lessee or occupant of a residential dwelling, commercial
establishment or institutional establishment. In any provision of this article
prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty or any combination thereof,
person shall include the officers and directors of any corporation or other
legal entity having officers and directors.
§ 180-10 SOLID WASTE § 180-10
180:287
PET, PETE — Polyethylene terephthalate used to make plastic soda bottles.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any premises which is capable of being conducive
to a fire, health or safety hazard due to, but not limited to, accumulations
of any flammable materials, refuse, recyclables, hazardous waste, or any
premises which contains unauthorized accumulations of refuse and/or
recyclables.
REFUSE — All regulated municipal waste, except the following categories
of refuse:
REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICES — Those services to be performed by a
contractor as follows: collection of refuse from locations; transportation of
refuse in trucks; and disposal of refuse at an approved Cumberland County
Solid Waste Management Authority Facility, if applicable, licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — A building used for residential purposes,
except hotels, apartments with more than six dwelling units, tourist cabins,
motels, fraternities and dormitories.
SMALL BUSINESS — A business establishment that produces five or fewer
forty-gallon containers of garbage, ashes and refuse, including recyclables,
per week.
TOWNSHIP — Lower Allen Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP COLLECTION SERVICE — A service for the collection of refuse,
recyclables, bulky waste and oversized refuse, which is provided by the
Township or the Township collector.
TOWNSHIP COLLECTOR — A person or firm designated by the Township by
means of an independent contract to have the exclusive right and privilege,
subject to certain limitations, to collect, haul and/or dispose of refuse and
recyclables within the Township of Lower Allen, but shall not be construed
A. Construction/demolition waste.
B. Bulky waste.
C. Putrescible waste.
D. Noncompactable waste.
E. Special handling waste.
F. Household hazardous waste.
G. Recyclable materials.
H. Unacceptable waste.
I. Oversized refuse items.
J. Yard waste.
K. Dirt and sod.
§ 180-10 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 180-10
180:288
as meaning that such person is an employee, official or representative of the
Township.
TOWNSHIP LICENSEE — A person or firm, not the Township collector,
licensed by the Township to collect, haul and/or dispose of refuse and/or
recyclables from persons not exclusively within the area of responsibility of
the Township collector.
TRUCKS — Vehicle(s) used for the collection of solid waste and recyclables
which has mounted thereon an approved watertight sanitary body or which
has a standard truck body made watertight and equipped with means of
covering to prevent loss of material by wind.
WHITE GOODS — Large appliances weighing more than 50 pounds,
including clothes washers, clothes dryers, dishwashers, freezers,
refrigerators, stoves, ovens, water heaters, air conditioners, furnaces and
electrical heaters.
YARD WASTE — Garden residue, trimmings, prunings and branches of four
inches or less from plants, shrubs, and trees. Excludes grass clippings, dirt,
and sod.
§ 180-11. Precollection practice.
A. Preparation of refuse, ashes and oversized items.
(1) Preparation for collection by the Township or Township collector.
(a) All garbage and refuse shall be drained of liquids and wrapped
in paper or plastic before being deposited for collection.
(b) Recyclables shall be drained of liquids and rendered free of
garbage and rubbish before being deposited for collection.
(c) Ashes shall be stored in a noncombustible container until cool.
(d) All materials shall be otherwise prepared for collection in
accordance with any regulations established by the Township
Manager.
(2) Preparation for collection by Township licensee. The manner of
preparation of refuse, recyclables, ashes and bulky waste for
collection by a Township licensee is a matter of agreement between
the private parties involved; provided, however, that such manner
shall be subject to the power of regulation of the Township
Manager and shall not be unnecessarily offensive to the senses,
attractive to vectors, creative of other nuisances, unsafe or
unhealthy.
B. Collection by Township collector or by Township licensee.
(1) Collection by Township collector.
(a) All refuse, including magazines and other printed matter other
than newspapers, to be regularly collected by the Township or
§ 180-10 SOLID WASTE § 180-11
180:289
Township collector shall be placed in containers or durable
plastic bags.
(b) Recyclables to be regularly collected by the Township or
Township collector, with the exception of newspaper, shall be
placed in a special container for recyclables. The initial
container shall be provided by the Township at no cost; a
charge will be made for additional containers and replacement
of containers for reasons other than defects therein.
(c) Newspapers to be regularly collected by the Township or
Township collector shall be tied together in bundles weighing
not more than 40 pounds or shall be placed in paper grocery
bags, and such papers shall be placed next to the containers
for other recyclable materials.
(d) Cooled ashes shall be placed in a durable plastic bag for
collection, provided that said bag weighs less than 45 pounds.
(e) Only oversized items weighing 45 pounds or less shall be
collected. Persons may dispose of oversized items weighing
over 45 pounds by contracting privately with the Township
collector or with a Township licensee.
(f) Refuse containers shall be of durable watertight rust-resistant
material having a close-fitting lid and handles to facilitate
collection. Plastic bags shall be durable and watertight.
(g) Refuse containers for dwellings and dwelling units shall not be
more than 40 gallons in capacity and shall be of such size as
can be handled easily by one person. The maximum weight of a
filled container shall not exceed 60 pounds. The maximum
weight of a filled plastic bag shall be limited to such weight as
will not cause the plastic bag to break when lifted and carried
to the collector's equipment.
(h) Containers containing garbage shall be covered with a lid that
fits securely and prevents access to flies and other insects.
Plastic bags shall be secured or tied.
(i) It shall be unlawful to permit the accumulation of or residue of
liquids, solids or a combination of such material on the bottom
or sides of containers, it being the intention of this provision
that the interior of containers shall be kept clean by thorough
rinsing and draining as often as necessary.
(j) All containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition and shall be
kept in good condition. Any container that does not conform to
this article or that is likely to injure the collector or his
employees or hampers the prompt collection of refuse shall be
replaced upon notice. Failure to replace such defective
§ 180-11 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 180-11
180:290
§ 180-12. Collection practices.
container may result in the stoppage of service until such time
as the container is replaced.
(2) Containers to be collected by Township licensee. The containers for
refuse, recyclables, ashes and oversized items to be collected by a
Township licensee are a matter of agreement between the private
parties involved; provided, however, that such containers shall be
subject to the power of regulation of the Township Manager, the
Cumberland County Solid Waste Management Authority, if
applicable, and applicable state regulations that containers for
garbage and rubbish to be collected shall consist of tightly closed
containers of sufficient weight, composition and strength to
prevent escape of the contained material; that receptacles for
ashes to be collected shall consist of nonbulk containers of
sufficient weight, composition and strength to prevent escape of
the contained ashes; and that no manner of containing refuse or
recyclables for collection shall be unnecessarily offensive to the
senses, attractive to vectors, creative of other nuisances or unsafe;
and provided, further, that approved bulk containers of metal,
watertight with tight-fitting covers, may be used for commercial,
institutional and industrial refuse and recyclables and waste from
apartment buildings, and that in the case of bulky waste being by
its nature impractical of containment and incapable of causing
litter, no container shall be required for collection purposes. The
Township retains the right to ensure that proper containers are
used if violations or problems persist.
(3) Storing of refuse and recyclables. No person shall place any refuse
or recyclable in any street, alley or public place or upon any private
property, whether owned by such person or not, within the
Township, except in proper containers for collection or under an
express approval by the Township Manager. No person shall throw
or deposit any refuse or recyclables in any stream or other body of
water.
(4) No person shall maliciously spill or scatter the contents of any
refuse container or plastic bag or damage or destroy any such
container or plastic bag.
(5) No person, except the occupant of the premises on which the
refuse container or plastic bag is placed, or Township, Township
collector or Township licensee, shall remove the lids of the
container and/or remove the contents of such container or plastic
bag.
A. Residential building with six or fewer units. On and after January 1,
1993, refuse and recyclables from all residential buildings within the
Township of Lower Allen shall be collected by the Township collector.
§ 180-11 SOLID WASTE § 180-12
180:291
B. Points of collection.
(1) Collection by the Township or Township collector. Refuse, recycling
containers and newspapers intended for collection by the Township
or Township collector from a given property shall be placed at
ground level on the property, along or near the curb abutting said
property and not within the cartway of a street or alley, unless
agreed to by the Township and the Township collector. Where there
is no curb, it shall be placed immediately next to the paved portion
of the roadway. Said material shall be accessible and not more than
10 feet from the side or curb of the street or alley from which
collection is made. Said placement for collection shall be not more
than 24 hours prior to the time of the scheduled collection.
(2) Collection by a Township licensee. Points of collection of refuse and
recyclables by a Township licensee are a matter for agreement
between the private parties involved; provided, however, that such
points shall be subject to the power of regulation of the Township
Manager, that no cartway of a street or alley shall be employed as a
point for the placing of waste containers, that no sidewalk shall be
employed for the placing of such containers in a manner which
disrupts its function and that such points shall not constitute a
nuisance, health or safety peril or unnecessary offense to the
senses.
C. Hazardous waste disposal. Hazardous waste shall not be placed in
containers for regular collections but shall be handled and disposed of
by the owner in an alternate and safe manner and in accordance with all
applicable federal, state and local statutes, ordinances, rules and
regulations.
D. Special refuse problems.
(1) Removal of wearing apparel, bedding or other refuse from homes
or other places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have
prevailed shall be performed under the supervision and direction of
the Township Manager. Such refuse shall not be placed in
containers, plastic bags or bundles for regular collections.
(2) Highly flammable or explosive material shall not be placed in
containers or plastic bags or bundles for regular collection but
shall be disposed of as directed by the Township Manager at the
expense of the owner or possessor thereof. [Amended 5-29-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-07]
(3) This article shall not prohibit resident owners of or occupiers of
farmland containing 10 or more acres from personally collecting,
conveying and disposing of refuse produced on such farmland if
such owners or occupiers comply with all provisions for collection,
conveyance and disposal prescribed in this article or rules and
regulations made by the Township under the provisions hereof and
§ 180-12 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 180-12
180:292
§ 180-13. License or contract required to collect, haul or dispose of
refuse and/or recyclables.
have applied for and been issued a license therefore. There shall
be no charge for issuance of such license. Such license may be
canceled at any time by the Township.
(4) No abatement of fees for collection shall be allowed for the vacancy
of a dwelling unit except where such vacancy has been continued
for a period of not less than 90 days and where notice has been
given by the owner of such dwelling unit to the Township Manager
that such dwelling unit has been vacated.
(5) The Township collector will not collect large appliances, furniture,
broken concrete, dirt, refuse caused by repairs, alterations and
new construction of buildings, structures, sidewalks or curbs or
tree trimmings in excess of three inches in diameter unless an
additional charge has been agreed upon with the Township
collector.
(6) No person shall collect or remove refuse from any place before 7:00
a.m. or after 7:00 p.m., prevailing times; provided, however, this
shall not prevent the collection of refuse on an emergency basis
during other hours subject to the prior approval of the Township
Manager. [Amended 5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-07]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the Township and
Township collector, to collect, haul and/or dispose of refuse or
recyclables in the Township of Lower Allen unless a license to so collect,
haul and/or dispose of such refuse and recyclables shall have been first
obtained or a contract exists between the Township and the person
collecting, hauling and/or disposing of refuse and/or recyclables. Such
license shall be issued by the Township Manager at a fee established by
resolution by the Board of Commissioners and as may be amended from
time to time. Each such collection in violation thereof shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
(1) No such license, however, shall be issued to any person unless it is
shown that:
(a) The proposed operation is in conformity in all respects with the
rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection respecting the collection and
transportation of solid waste, with the regulations
promulgated by the Township Manager pursuant to authority
under this article and with the provisions of this article.
(b) Vehicles to be used in the collection and hauling of refuse are
watertight, easily loaded, readily emptied and easily cleanable.
§ 180-12 SOLID WASTE § 180-13
180:293
(c) Refuse and recyclables shall be suitably enclosed or covered in
such vehicles so as to prevent roadside littering, attraction of
vectors or creation of other nuisances.
(d) Regular collection days are provided for, with the frequency of
collection to be in accordance with the applicable regulations
herein provided.
(e) No disposal of refuse from the Township of Lower Allen shall
be effected other than at a refuse processing or disposal
facility covered by a permit from the Department of
Environmental Protection and in conformity with the
Department's rules and regulations pertaining thereto and
approved by the Cumberland County Solid Waste Management
Authority.
(2) No such license shall be issued to any person unless he or she also
provides assurance, in writing, that any failure during the term of
the license to comply with the Department of Environmental
Protection's and the Cumberland County Solid Waste Management
Authority's rules and regulations, the Township Manager's
regulations or this chapter, as each is constituted during the course
of such term, shall be reported to the Township Manager, and any
such failure or failures to report each occurrence shall constitute
grounds for revocation of the license by the Township, as shall any
other just cause.
(3) All such licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December of the
year of issuance.
(4) Nothing in this article shall operate to preclude the issuance of a
license on the ground that the prospective licensee will employ a
non-watertight vehicle in the collection or hauling of bulky waste
where such waste has, by its nature, no capacity for escape from
the vehicle in any form by reason of the vehicle's not being
watertight; nor shall a Township licensee who collects or hauls
such bulky waste in a non-watertight vehicle be subject thereof or
to any forfeiture or penalty under this article.
B. The Township Manager shall issue to each licensee hereunder, for each
vehicle covered by the license, a permit identifying the vehicle so
covered, stating the year in which it is issued and valid and affixable to
the vehicle. Such permit shall not be transferred to a vehicle different
from that for which it was issued, and each such permit shall be
displayed conspicuously on the outside of the vehicle on the left front
door. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the Township or
Township collector, to collect, haul and dispose of solid waste or
recyclables in the Township of Lower Allen unless such a permit,
current and valid, is so affixed to the vehicle employed.
C. To the extent permitted by law, the Township shall:
§ 180-13 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 180-13
180:294
(1) Use reasonable efforts to inform residents of the benefits which
may be obtained from recycling, the types of waste which are
recyclable and the schedule for collection of recyclables.
(2) Use reasonable efforts to enforce the rules and regulations relating
to containers for recyclables and proper preparation of recyclables
by residents for collection by the Township or Township collector.
(3) Use reasonable efforts to obtain the cooperation of the private
refuse collection hauler(s) (if other than Township collector) with
respect to mailing or delivering notices to residents, placing
recycling stickers or signs on collection vehicles or other ways.
D. All vehicles employed in the collection or hauling of refuse and
oversized items or bulky waste under this article must be provided with
a tight cover so as to prevent offensive odors from escaping therefrom
and solid waste from being blown, dropped or spilled. Vehicles
employed in the collection or hauling of recyclables must be watertight
or must be provided with a tight cover so as to prevent liquid or odors
from escaping or from being blown, dropped or spilled.
E. No license shall be granted if the place and method of disposal, types of
collection equipment or manner of collection, removal or disposal shall
not conform to the requirements of this article or to the ordinance of
any municipal or quasi-municipal corporation or to the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or of the United States and the
insurance coverage is not adequate. Insurance coverage should be as
follows:
(1) Workmen's compensation, including occupational disease and
employer's liability insurance.
(a) Statutory: amounts and coverage as required by workmen's
compensation laws of the commonwealth.
(b) Employer's liability: at least $100,000 each accident.
(2) Public liability, including coverage for direct operations, sublet
work, elevators, contractual liability and completed operations with
limits not less than those stated below:
(a) Bodily injury liability, including personal injuries: $100,000
each person, $300,000 each occurrence.
(b) Property damage liability: $100,000 each occurrence,
$100,000 each aggregate.
(c) Regarding personal injury: written on a nonparticipating basis
(with no participation by insured).
(d) Regarding property damage, including broad form property
damage: remove XCU exclusions (explosion, collapse and
underground property damage).
§ 180-13 SOLID WASTE § 180-13
180:295
§ 180-14. Fees.
(e) Regarding completed operations liability: continue coverage in
force for two years after completion of work.
(3) Comprehensive automobile liability insurance, including coverage
for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with limits not less than
those stated below:
(a) Bodily injury liability: $100,000 each person, $300,000 each
occurrence.
(b) Property damage liability: $100,000 each occurrence.
(4) Owner's contingent liability (owner's protective).
(a) Personal injury: $1,100,000 each person, $1,300,000 each
occurrence.
(b) Property damage: $1,100,000 each occurrence, $1,100,000
each aggregate.
(5) Excess or umbrella policy in the amount of $1,000,000.
(6) Policies and insurers shall be subject to approval of the Board of
Commissioners.
F. The Township collector and Township licensee shall report any violation
of this article observed by them to the Township Manager daily.
A. Dwellings and dwelling units. The fees for collection and disposal of
refuse under this article and recyclable materials under Article I from
dwellings, dwelling units and small businesses may be assessed by
resolution passed by the Board of Commissioners on an annual basis
per dwelling unit per quarter. The owner of the dwelling unit shall pay
the fees provided therein in advance. The Township may designate an
agent, including any bank or trust company, to act on its behalf in the
collection and accounting matters involved. Billing will be done not
later than the first day of the first month of each calendar quarter. Fees
shall be subject to a penalty of 10% per dwelling unit per quarter if not
paid by the 30th day of the first calendar month of the quarter. All
accounts shall be considered delinquent if not paid by the 30th day of
the first calendar month of the quarter, and all delinquent accounts are
subject to stoppage of service without notice. Upon stoppage, service
will be resumed thereafter only on payment of the accumulated fees for
the period of collection and the period of noncollection, plus the tenpercent
penalty as aforesaid and interest. The stoppage of service
herein provided for shall be in addition to the right of the Township to
proceed for the collection of such unpaid charges by action in
assumpsit, by municipal lien or, at the election of the Township, in any
other manner provided by law for the collection of a municipal claim.
§ 180-13 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 180-14
180:296
§ 180-15. Enforcement.
The Township Manager shall have the authority to enforce the provisions
of this article, as shall any code enforcement officer or police officer of the
Township.
§ 180-16. Violations and penalties.
B. Nondwellings and nondwelling units. Fees for collection from other
than dwellings and dwelling units shall be fixed by mutual agreement of
the parties and shall be paid directly to the person making such
collection.
C. Where collection by a Township licensee is permitted, fees for the
collection and disposal of refuse, recyclables, ashes and bulk waste by
such licensee are a matter of agreement between private parties.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject
to a fine of not less than $100 or more than $1,000, plus costs, and to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
B. Any owner, lessee or occupant of a residential building who disposes of
refuse or recyclables through a means of collection by a hauler within
the Township other than the Township collection service shall be
deemed to have violated this article. Each such act in violation hereof
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense, punishable as herein
provided.
C. It shall be a violation of this article for any person(s) not authorized by
the Township to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up
any such refuse or recyclable. Each such collection in violation hereof
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense, punishable as herein
provided.
D. Any premises on which conditions of refuse, bulky waste, oversized
refuse, hazardous waste, leaf waste, newspaper, white goods or yard
waste exist causing it to be a public nuisance is prohibited. Failure to
remove or remedy said public nuisance after receiving written notice to
do so shall be deemed a violation of this article, punishable as herein
provided.
E. No person shall dump, bring, deposit or otherwise dispose of garbage,
ashes, rubbish or refuse of any kind or nature within the jurisdictional
limits of the Township, except for collection as herein provided or
except under express license issued by the Board of Commissioners.
F. Nothing herein is intended to preclude the Township's exercise of any
additional remedies, in law or in equity, for noncompliance with this
article.
§ 180-14 SOLID WASTE § 180-16
180:297

ARTICLE III
Collection and Disposal of Yard Waste
§ 180-17. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases or words shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context in which the word is used clearly indicates otherwise:
APARTMENT BUILDING — A building used for residential purposes with
more than six dwelling units, except hotels, motels, tourist cabins and
dormitories.
CHRISTMAS TREES — Any of several varieties of coniferous trees on which
the trunk has been removed from the roots, or wreaths made from the
branches of such trees.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.[Amended 5-29-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-07]
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people for a common purpose, such as hospitals, schools and
nursing homes.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves fallen from trees, bushes or other woody deciduous
plants.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Public facilities operated by the
Township of Lower Allen and other governmental and quasi-governmental
authorities.
OVERSIZED YARD WASTE — Large items of yard waste, including but not
limited to tree stumps and branches exceeding four inches in diameter.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, institution, cooperative
enterprise, municipality, municipal authority, federal government or agency,
state institution or agency or any other legal entity whatsoever which
is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. It shall also
mean owner, lessee or occupant of a residential dwelling, commercial
establishment or institutional establishment. In any provision of this article
prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty or any combination thereof,
person shall include the officers and directors of any corporation or other
legal entity having officers and directors.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any premises which is capable of being conducive
to a fire, health or safety hazard due to, but not limited to, accumulations
of any flammable materials, refuse, recyclables, hazardous waste, or any
premises which contains unauthorized accumulations of refuse and/or
recyclables.
§ 180-17 SOLID WASTE § 180-17
180:299
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — A building used for residential purposes,
except hotels, apartments with more than six dwelling units, tourist cabins,
motels, fraternities and dormitories.
SMALL BUSINESS — A business establishment that produces five or fewer
forty-gallon containers of garbage, ashes and refuse, including recyclables,
per week.
TOWNSHIP — Lower Allen Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP COLLECTION SERVICE — A service for the collection of leaf
waste, yard waste and Christmas trees, which is provided by the Township
or the Township collector.
TOWNSHIP COLLECTOR — A person or firm designated by the Township by
means of an independent contract to have the right and privilege, subject to
certain limitations, to collect, haul and/or dispose of refuse and recyclables
within the Township of Lower Allen, but shall not be construed as meaning
that such person is an employee, official or representative of the Township.
TRUCKS — Vehicle(s) used for the collection of solid waste and recyclables
which has mounted thereon an approved watertight sanitary body or which
has a standard truck body made watertight and equipped with means of
covering to prevent loss of material by wind.
YARD WASTE — Garden residue, trimmings, prunings and branches of four
inches or less from plants, shrubs and trees. Excludes grass clippings, dirt,
and sod.
§ 180-18. Establishment of program.
Yard waste, as defined above, may not be disposed of as refuse, nor mixed
with refuse for collection by the Township or the Township collector. There
is therefore established in the Township a yard waste collection program for
persons residing in residential dwellings from which solid waste is collected
by or on behalf of the Township
§ 180-19. Precollection practice.
A. Preparation of Christmas trees, leaf waste and yard waste.
(1) Preparation for collection by the Township or Township collector.
(a) All Christmas trees must have all ornaments, tinsel and other
decorations removed. Trees may not be placed in plastic bags.
Trees may be placed at curbside on the appropriate day or
delivered to the Township recycling facility.
(b) Leaves must be raked to curbside in order to be picked up by
Township equipment. Leaves packed into recyclable paper
(Kraft) bags will not be picked up at curbside, but may be
dropped off at the Township recycling facility.
§ 180-17 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 180-19
180:300
(c) Yard waste may be bundled with string or twine, with such
bundles not exceeding four feet in length or 45 pounds in
weight, and left at curbside on the appropriate day. Trashcans
may also be used to set out yard waste at curbside, as long as
such cans are placed a minimum of six feet away from regular
refuse. Branches may not exceed three inches in diameter.
(d) All materials shall be otherwise prepared for collection in
accordance with any regulations established by the Township
Manager.
(2) Preparation for collection by Township licensee. The manner of
preparation of Christmas trees, leaf waste and yard waste for
collection by a Township licensee is a matter of agreement between
the private parties involved; provided, however, that such manner
shall be subject to the power of regulation of the Township
Manager and shall not be unnecessarily offensive to the senses,
attractive to vectors, creative of other nuisances, unsafe or
unhealthy.
B. Collection by Township collector or by Township licensee.
(1) Collection by Township collector.
(a) Persons may dispose of oversized yard waste by contracting
privately with the Township collector or with a Township
licensee.
(b) Grass clippings may be disposed of along with regular refuse
and may not be commingled with yard waste. Sod may not be
commingled with yard waste and may be disposed of by
contracting privately with a contractor.
(c) Yard waste containers for dwellings and dwelling units shall be
of such size as can be handled easily by one person. The
maximum weight of a filled container shall not exceed 45
pounds.
(d) All containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition and shall be
kept in good condition. Any container that does not conform to
this article or that is likely to injure the collector or his
employees or hampers the prompt collection of refuse shall be
replaced upon notice. Failure to replace such defective
container may result in the stoppage of service until such time
as the container is replaced.
(2) Storing of yard waste. No person shall place any yard waste in any
street, alley or public place or upon any private property, whether
owned by such person or not, within the Township, except as
properly prepared in § 180-19A(1) for collection or under an
express approval by the Township Manager. No person shall throw
or dump any yard waste in any stream or other body of water.
§ 180-19 SOLID WASTE § 180-19
180:301
§ 180-20. Collection practices.
(3) Storing of leaf waste and Christmas trees. Leaves fallen from trees
shall be placed or allowed to remain upon or collected in piles upon
any street for collection by the Township on the dates scheduled.
The Township will determine the dates of collection. Christmas
trees must be stored neatly on the property until the collection day
determined by the Township when the trees will be placed on the
curb for pickup by the Township.
(4) No person shall maliciously spill or scatter the contents of any
waste container or damage or destroy any such container.
A. Residential buildings and small businesses. Yard waste collection shall
be available to all residential buildings and small businesses within the
Township of Lower Allen and may be collected by the Township
collector.
B. Points of collection.
(1) Collection by the Township or Township collector. Yard waste
intended for collection by the Township or Township collector from
a given property shall be placed at ground level on the property,
along or near the curb abutting said property and not within the
cartway of a street or alley, unless agreed to by the Township and
the Township collector. Where there is no curb, it shall be placed
immediately next to the paved portion of the roadway. Said material
shall be accessible and not more than 10 feet from the side or curb
of the street or alley from which collection is made, nor may be
placed less than 10 feet from regular refuse. Said placement for
collection shall be not more than 24 hours prior to the time of the
scheduled collection.
(2) Collection by a contractor. Points of collection of yard waste by a
licensed contractor are a matter for agreement between the private
parties involved; provided, however, that such points shall be
subject to the power of regulation of the Township Manager, that no
cartway of a street or alley shall be employed as a point for the
placing of bundles and containers, that no sidewalk shall be
employed for the placing of such bundles or containers in a manner
which disrupts its function and that such points shall not constitute
a nuisance, health or safety peril or unnecessary offense to the
senses.
C. Collection of leaf waste and Christmas trees. The Township at will
collect leaves at specified times each year. The leaves shall be
accessible and placed at the curb of the street or alley from which
collection is made. Collection dates will be announced in advance.
Christmas trees shall be placed at the curb as described in
§ 180-20B(1).
§ 180-19 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 180-20
180:302
§ 180-21. Restrictions.
D. Other collection issues.
(1) This article shall not prohibit residents from personally composting
or recycling yard and leaf waste on their properties, so long as
residents comply with any such provisions or laws regarding
composting as issued by any local, state or federal authority.
(2) No abatement of fees for collection shall be allowed for the vacancy
of a dwelling unit except where such vacancy has been continued
for a period of not less than 90 days and where the owner of such
dwelling unit has given notice to the Township Manager that such
dwelling unit has been vacated.
(3) The Township collector will not collect oversized yard waste, sod or
dirt. Special arrangements may be made with the Township
collector or a private contractor to dispose of these items.
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent a resident from hiring a private
contractor for the removal, hauling and disposal of Christmas
trees, leaf waste and/or yard waste. However, no abatement of
regular fees shall be offered except as described in Subsection D(2)
above.
(5) No person shall collect or remove leaf waste or yard waste from any
place before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m., except that between April
1 and September 30, no person shall collect or remove yard waste
from any dwelling unit before 6:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m.,
prevailing time; provided, however, that this shall not prevent the
collection of yard waste on an emergency basis during other hours
when necessitated by natural catastrophe or other conditions
beyond the control of the Township or the collector. The extension
of the emergency hours shall at all times be subject to prior
approval of the Township Manager.
A. Yard waste shall be suitably enclosed or covered in such vehicles so as
to prevent roadside littering, attraction of vectors or creation of other
nuisances.
B. Township collector shall haul yard waste to the Township recycling
facility to be processed. Township collectors and private contractors
shall not, at any time, dispose of yard waste collected within the
Township into a landfill or in any other manner in violation of
Department of Environmental Protection regulations.
C. To the extent permitted by law, the Township shall:
(1) Use reasonable efforts to inform residents of the benefits which
may be obtained from recycling, the types of waste which are
recyclable and the schedule for collection of recyclables.
§ 180-20 SOLID WASTE § 180-21
180:303
(2) Use reasonable efforts to enforce the rules and regulations relating
to containers for recyclables and proper preparation of recyclables
by residents for collection by the Township or Township collector.
D. Contractors may not collect yard waste or deliver yard waste to the
Township recycling facility unless adequately insured. Insurance
coverage should be as follows:
(1) Workmen's compensation, including occupational disease and
employer's liability insurance.
(a) Statutory: amounts and coverage as required by workmen's
compensation laws of the commonwealth.
(b) Employer's liability: at least $100,000 each accident.
(2) Public liability, including coverage for direct operations, sublet
work, elevators, contractual liability and completed operations with
limits not less than those stated below:
(a) Bodily injury liability, including personal injuries: $100,000
each person, $300,000 each occurrence.
(b) Property damage liability: $100,000 each occurrence,
$100,000 each aggregate.
(c) Regarding personal injury: written on a nonparticipating basis
(with no participation by insured).
(d) Regarding property damage, including broad form property
damage: remove XCU exclusions (explosion, collapse and
underground property damage).
(e) Regarding completed operations liability: continue coverage in
force for two years after completion of work.
(3) Comprehensive automobile liability insurance, including coverage
for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with limits not less than
those stated below:
(a) Bodily injury liability: $100,000 each person, $300,000 each
occurrence.
(b) Property damage liability: $100,000 each occurrence.
(4) Owner's contingent liability (owner's protective).
(a) Personal injury: $1,100,000 each person, $1,300,000 each
occurrence.
(b) Property damage: $1,100,000 each occurrence, $1,100,000
each aggregate.
(5) Excess or umbrella policy in the amount of $1,000,000.
§ 180-21 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 180-21
180:304
§ 180-22. Fees.
§ 180-23. Enforcement.
The Township Manager or his designee is authorized and directed to
enforce the provisions of this article, as shall any code enforcement officer
or police officer of the Township. The Township Manager shall have
authority to make rules and regulations relating to the administration of the
provisions of this article, in addition to any other powers herein conferred
upon him, provided that such rules and regulations are not contrary to the
provisions of this article. An aggrieved person shall have the right of appeal
against any rule or regulation made by the Township Manager to the Board
of Commissioners, which may confirm, modify or revoke any such rule or
regulation.
§ 180-24. Violations and penalties.
(6) Policies and insurers shall be subject to approval of the Board of
Commissioners.
E. The Township collector and Township licensee shall report any violation
of this article observed by them to the Township Manager daily.
A. Dwellings and dwelling units. The fees for collection and disposal of
yard waste under this article from dwellings, dwelling units and small
businesses may be assessed by resolution passed by the Board of
Commissioners on an annual basis per dwelling unit per quarter. The
owner of the dwelling unit shall pay the fees provided therein in
advance. The Township may designate an agent, including any bank or
trust company, to act on its behalf in the collection and accounting
matters involved. Billing will be done not later than the first day of the
first month of each calendar quarter. Fees shall be subject to a penalty
of 10% per dwelling unit per quarter if not paid by the 30th day of the
first calendar month of the quarter. All accounts shall be considered
delinquent if not paid by the 30th day of the first calendar month of the
quarter, and all delinquent accounts are subject to stoppage of service
without notice. Upon stoppage, service will be resumed thereafter only
on payment of the accumulated fees for the period of collection and the
period of noncollection, plus the ten-percent penalty as aforesaid and
interest. The stoppage of service herein provided for shall be in addition
to the right of the Township to proceed for the collection of such unpaid
charges by action in assumpsit, by municipal lien or, at the election of
the Township, in any other manner provided by law for the collection of
a municipal claim.
B. Nondwellings and nondwelling units. Fees for collection from other
than dwellings and dwelling units shall be fixed by mutual agreement of
the parties and shall be paid directly to the person making such
collection.
§ 180-21 SOLID WASTE § 180-24
180:305
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject
to a fine of not less than $100 or more than $1,000, plus costs, and to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
B. Any premises on which conditions of leaf waste, yard waste or oversized
yard waste exists causing it to be a public nuisance is prohibited.
Failure to remove or remedy said public nuisance after receiving
written notice to do so shall be deemed a violation of this article,
punishable as herein provided.
C. No person shall dump, bring, deposit or otherwise dispose of leaf waste,
yard waste, oversized yard waste, Christmas trees or waste of any kind
or nature within the jurisdictional limits of the Township, except for
collection as herein provided or except under express license issued by
the Board of Commissioners.
D. Nothing herein is intended to preclude the Township's exercise of any
additional remedies, in law or in equity, for noncompliance with this
article.
§ 180-24 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 180-24
180:306
Chapter 184
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and safety
standards — See Ch. 70.
Filling and excavating — See Ch. 98.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 110.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
192.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 180-24 SOLID WASTE § 180-24
180:307

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 184-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Lower Allen Township
Act 167 Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 184-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
§ 184-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety and welfare within
the municipality and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing
the benefits described in § 184-2 of this chapter through provisions
designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the
cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines
floodplain management and flood control efforts in downstream
communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public health
and safety and increases nonpoint source pollution of water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety and
welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth, their
resources and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
E. Nonstormwater discharges to storm sewer systems can contribute to
pollution of waters of the Commonwealth.
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim and
restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this
commonwealth.
§ 184-1 SOLID WASTE § 184-3
180:309
§ 184-4. Statutory authority.
B. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
C. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source.
D. Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
E. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface
water and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water
resources.
F. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management (SWM) best management practices (BMPs)
that are implemented within the municipality.
H. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
I. Meet general water quality and soil disturbance goals by implementing
measures to:
(1) Maintain or extend riparian buffers and protect existing forested
buffer.
(2) Establish and maintain nonerosive flow conditions in natural flow
pathways.
(3) Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction.
(4) Direct runoff to pervious areas, wherever possible.
(5) Incorporate the techniques for low-impact development practices
described in the most current version of the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual (SWM Manual).
(6) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of the commonwealth.
A. Primary authority: The municipality is empowered to regulate these
activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the Stormwater Management
Act and the First Class Township Code.85 Hereafter, all earthmoving
activities and land development within this Township, including,
without limitation, the location, design and construction within the
watershed of stormwater management systems, obstructions, flood
control projects, subdivisions and land developments, highways and
transportation facilities, facilities for the provision of public utility
services and facilities owned or financed in whole or in part by funds
from the commonwealth, shall be in full compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and shall be conducted in a manner
85.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
§ 184-3 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 184-4
180:310
§ 184-5. Applicability.
All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff,
including land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to
regulation by this chapter as is reasonably necessary to prevent injury
to health, safety or other property. The following activities are defined as
"regulated activities" and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter
(unless otherwise exempted by § 184-12):
§ 184-6. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the municipality
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to
the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 184-7. Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or
provision of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
consistent therewith. Any violation of the Cumberland County
Stormwater Management Plan shall be considered a violation of this
chapter.
B. Secondary authority: The municipality is also empowered to regulate
land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July
31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code,86 as amended.
A. Land development and/or redevelopment.
B. Subdivision.
C. Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious surfaces
(driveways, parking lots, etc.).
D. Construction of structures or additions to existing structures.
E. Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
F. Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto.
G. Forest management/timber operations that include logging road
construction and timber harvesting.
H. Earth disturbance.
86.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 184-4 SOLID WASTE § 184-8
180:311
§ 184-8. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance.
§ 184-9. Waiver procedure.
A. The provisions of this chapter are intended as minimum standards for
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. The Board of
Commissioners may waive any mandatory provision of these
regulations to the benefit of the applicant, provided the waiver:
(1) Is consistent with the purpose of the Ordinance as described in
§ 184-3.
(2) Will remove or reduce an unreasonable standard or undue hardship
as it applies to the particular property which is grossly
disproportionate to any benefit derived from the standard, or when
an alternative standard provides equal or better results.
(3) Is consistent with § 184-11C when involving water quality
requirements.
B. It shall be the burden of the applicant to demonstrate compliance with
the above conditions.
§ 184-8 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 184-9
180:312
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 184-10. Word usage and definition of terms.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
D. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust company, corporation or any other
similar entity.
E. The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained."
F. Terms defined:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of man's activity and the natural
processes of a rate greater than would occur because of the natural
process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The work of producing crops, including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting
crops, pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation
measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not
considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result
of the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another;
also, the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be
more or less impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application to the municipality for approval to engage in any regulated
activity at a project site in the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one
§ 184-10 SOLID WASTE § 184-10
180:313
of two broad categories or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural."
In this chapter, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational
and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas structural BMPs or
measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that
is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs
include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices,
from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands to smallscale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips,
low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening and headward
cutting of small channels and waterways due to erosion caused by
moderate-to-large floods.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Cumberland County Conservation
District (CCCD).
CULVERT — A structure with appurtenant works which carries a
stream under or through an embankment or fill.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year-storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design
and evaluation of stormwater management systems. See also "return
period."
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
then infiltrated, evaporated, reused or released into the waters of this
commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — See "project site."
DISCONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DIA) — An impervious or
impermeable surface which has its stormwater runoff disconnected
from any stormwater drainage or conveyance system and is redirected
or directed to a pervious area which allows for infiltration, filtration and
increased time of concentration.
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including land clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land development,
agricultural plowing or tilling, operation of animal-heavy use areas,
timber harvesting activities, road maintenance activities, oil and gas
activities, well drilling, mineral extraction and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
§ 184-10 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 184-10
180:314
EROSION — The movement of soil particles by the action of water,
wind, ice, chemical or other actions.
EXISTING CONDITION — The initial condition of a project site prior to
the proposed construction.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN — The lowland and relatively flat areas adjoining inland
and coastal waters, including, at a minimum, that area subject to a onepercent-
or-greater chance of flooding in any given year.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the one-hundred-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies
have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year floodway, it is
assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends
from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
conducting a timber inventory, preparation of forest management
plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Refers to soils grouped according
to their runoff-producing characteristics. The chief consideration is
the inherent capacity of soil bare of vegetation to permit infiltration.
Infiltration rates of soils vary widely and are affected by subsurface
permeability as well as surface intake rates. Soils are classified into
four HSGs (A, B, C and D) according to their minimum infiltration rate,
which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The NRCS
defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the
United States and their group classification. The soils in the area of the
development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can be
obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils
become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D [NRCS (References
3 and 487].
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that
prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces
(or areas) shall include, but not be limited to, compacted aggregate,
roofs, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures, and streets
or sidewalks, driveways, parking areas and other paved surfaces.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface,
underground drainage and caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks,
such as limestone or dolomite.
87.Editor's Note: The list of references is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 184-10 SOLID WASTE § 184-10
180:315
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) — Inclusive of any of the
following activities:
MUNICIPALITY — Lower Allen Township, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania.
NRCS — USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously
SCS).
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENNDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated
activities in the municipality are planned, conducted or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to
perform the work required by this chapter.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Shall include, but not be limited to, any
earth disturbance activities or any activities that involve the alteration
or development of land in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff
as specified in § 184-5.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapters 92a
and 102, or the Clean Streams Law.88
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff
that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more buildings, whether proposed initially or
cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots
regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) Any subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
(3)
88.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 184-10 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 184-10
180:316
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time.
For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be
expected to occur on average once every 25 years; or stated in another
way, the probability of a twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one
year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent chance).
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as
a product of erosion.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim and restore water quality
under Pennsylvania Code Title 25 and the Clean Streams Law.89
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES —
Abbreviated as BMPs or SWM BMPs throughout this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or
man-made, that, due to its condition, design or construction, conveys,
stores or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater
management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and
retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes and infiltration
facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The Cumberland County
Stormwater Management Plan for managing stormwater runoff,
adopted by the County of Cumberland as required by the Act of October
4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), as amended, and known as the "Stormwater
Management Act."90
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by
the developer, municipality or other entity indicating how stormwater
runoff will be managed at the development site in accordance with this
chapter. The stormwater management site plan will be designated as
the "SWM site plan" throughout this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — As defined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.91
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other
surface water of the commonwealth.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and other bodies or channels
89.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
90.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
91.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 184-10 SOLID WASTE § 184-10
180:317
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
including swamps, marshes, bogs, fens and similar areas, and that
have been identified and delineated as wetlands by a qualified design
professional.
§ 184-10 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 184-10
180:318
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 184-11. General requirements.
A. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of a SWM site plan is
specifically exempted in § 184-12:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality
issues written approval of a SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. SWM site plans approved by the municipality, in accordance with
§ 184-21, shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
C. The municipality, after consultation with DEP, may approve measures
for meeting the state water quality requirements, other than those in
this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of,
and do not conflict with, state law, including but not limited to the Clean
Streams Law.92
D. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated and maintained
during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g., during
construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this chapter
and to meet all requirements under the Pennsylvania Code Title 25 and
the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design standards are
listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual
(E&S Manual), Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Protection, No. 363-2134-008 (2000), as amended and
updated.
E. For all regulated activities not exempted by § 184-12, implementation of
the volume controls in § 184-13 is required.
F. For all new development projects, the measurement of impervious
areas shall include all of the impervious areas in the total proposed
development even if development is to take place in stages. Similarly,
for new development projects taking place in stages, the entire
proposed new development plan must be used in determining
conformance with this chapter.
G. Stormwater flows/direct discharges onto adjacent property shall not be
created, increased, decreased, relocated or otherwise altered without
written approval of the adjacent downstream property owner(s). Such
stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
92.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. 691.1 et seq.
§ 184-11 SOLID WASTE § 184-11
180:319
§ 184-12. Exemptions.
H. The design of all facilities over karst shall include an evaluation of
measures to minimize adverse effects in accordance with the
procedures outlined in Section 7.4 (Special Management Areas — Karst
Areas) of the most current version of the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual (SWM Manual).
I. Storage facilities should completely drain both the volume control and
rate control capacities within 72 hours from the end of the design storm
subject to site conditions.
J. The design storm precipitation depth estimates to be used in the
analysis of peak rates of discharge should be obtained from the
Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2,
U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland
20910. NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at Internet address:
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
K. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law,93 and the
Stormwater Management Act.94
L. The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
December 2006 (SWM Manual), is hereby referenced as guidance in
meeting the requirements contained within this chapter.
A. Regulated activities resulting in less than or equal to 1,000 square feet
of new impervious surface area are exempt from Article IV, Site Plan
Requirements, including §§ 184-13 and 184-14 of this chapter.
B. Regulated activities meeting the following parcel size and square
footage requirements are exempt from the peak rate control
requirements, but not the volume control or SWM site plan preparation
requirements of this chapter. These criteria shall apply to the total
proposed development even if development is to take place in phases.
November 12, 2002, shall be the starting point from which to consider
tracts as parent tracts in which future subdivisions and respective
impervious area computations shall be cumulatively considered.
93.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
94.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 184-11 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 184-12
180:320
§ 184-13. Volume controls.
Water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm
Method in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B below for
all regulated activities not otherwise exempted by § 184-12. For regulated
activity areas equal to or less than one acre that do not require hydrologic
routing to design the stormwater facilities, this chapter establishes no
preference for either methodology; therefore, the applicant may select
either methodology on the basis of economic considerations, the intrinsic
limitations on applicability of the analytical procedures associated with
each methodology and other factors.
New Impervious Area Exemption Criteria for Peak Rate Control
Total Parcel
Size
(acres)
Total Parcel Size
(square feet)
New Impervious Area
Exemption
(square feet)
Less than 0.25 Less than 10,890 1,000
0.25 to 0.5 10,890 to 21,780 2,500
Greater than 0.5 Greater than 21,780 5,000
A. The Design Storm Method (See Section 8.7 of the most current version
of the SWM Manual.) is applicable to any size of regulated activity. This
method requires detailed modeling based on site conditions.
(1) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year twenty-four-hour duration
precipitation.
(2) For modeling purposes: Calculate existing (pre-development)
stormwater runoff and infiltration volumes based on existing site
conditions, as verified through design phase soil infiltration testing.
B. The Simplified Method (See Section 8.7 of the most current version of
the SWM Manual,) provided below is independent of site conditions and
should be used if the Design Storm Method is not followed. This method
is not applicable to regulated activities greater than one acre or for
projects that require design of stormwater detention or rate control
facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
(1) Stormwater facilities shall be sized to capture at least the first two
inches of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
(2) At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious surfaces
shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow — i.e., it shall
not be released into the surface waters of this commonwealth.
Removal options include reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and
infiltration.
§ 184-12 SOLID WASTE § 184-13
180:321
§ 184-14. Rate controls.
See Section 8.3 of the most current version of the SWM Manual.
§ 184-15. Stormwater management districts.
(3) Infiltration facilities should be designed to accommodate
infiltration of the entire permanently removed runoff; however, in
all cases, at least the first 1/2 inch of the permanently removed
runoff shall be infiltrated.
(4) The second one inch of runoff from new impervious surfaces shall
be detained using structural and nonstructural BMPs (as outlined
in the most current version of the SWM Manual) and released at a
controlled rate, unless permanently removed from the runoff flow.
A. Areas not covered by the Cedar Run Watershed or Yellow Breeches
Creek Lower Watershed Release Rate Maps: Post-development
discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment discharge rates
for the one-, two-, ten-, and one-hundred-year storms. If it is shown that
the peak rates of discharge indicated by the post-development analysis
are less than or equal to the peak rates of discharge indicated by the
pre-development analysis for one-, two-, ten-, and one-hundred-year
twenty-four-hour storms, then the requirements of this section have
been met. Otherwise, the applicant shall provide additional controls as
necessary to satisfy the peak rate of discharge requirement.
B. Areas covered by the Cedar Run Watershed or Yellow Breeches Creek
Lower Watershed Release Rate Maps (See Appendix B95): For the one-,
two-, ten-, and one-hundred-year storms, the post-development peak
discharge rates will follow the applicable approved release rate maps.
(See Appendix B.) For any areas not shown on the release rate maps,
the post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the
predevelopment discharge rates.
A. The municipality has been divided into two stormwater management
districts as shown on the Cedar Run Watershed and Yellow Breeches
Creek Lower Watershed Release Rate Maps in Appendix B.96 All areas
of the municipality not specifically identified on the Watershed Release
Rate Map are assumed to be in the One-Hundred-Percent Release Rate
District.
B. Standards for managing runoff from each subarea for the one-, two-,
ten-, and one-hundred-year design storms are shown below.
Development sites located in each of the districts must control postdevelopment
runoff rates to pre-development runoff rates for the design
storms as follows:
95.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
96.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 184-13 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 184-15
180:322
§ 184-16. Stormwater management district implementation
provisions; performance standards.
District Control Criteria
One-Hundred-
Percent
Post-development peak discharge for all design
storms must be no greater than pre-development
peak discharges.
Seventy-Five-
Percent
Post-development peak discharge for all design
storms must be no greater than 75% of the predevelopment
peak discharges.
A. General. Post-development rates of runoff from any regulated activity
shall not exceed the peak release rates of runoff prior to development
for the design storms specified on the Stormwater Runoff Peak Rate
Districts Map, Appendix B97 and § 184-15, of this chapter.
B. District boundaries. The boundaries of the stormwater management
districts are shown on the Cedar Run Watershed and Yellow Breeches
Creek Lower Watershed Release Rate Maps, which are available for
inspection at the municipal office. Copies of the maps, at reduced scale,
are included in the Appendix B.
C. Sites located in more than one district. For a proposed development site
located within two or more release rate districts, the peak discharge
rate from any subarea shall be the pre-development peak discharge for
that subarea multiplied by the applicable release rate. The calculated
peak discharges shall apply regardless of whether the grading plan
changes the drainage area by subarea. An exception to the above may
be granted if discharges from multiple subareas recombine in proximity
to the site. In this case, peak discharge in any direction may be a
release rate of 100% provided that the overall site discharge meets the
weighted average release rate.
D. Off-site areas. Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development
site are not subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable
peak runoff rates. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed
to safely convey off-site flows through the development site.
E. Site areas. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed
development activity differs significantly from the total site area, only
the proposed impact area shall be subject to the release rate criteria.
F. Downstream hydraulic capacity analysis. Any downstream capacity
hydraulic analysis conducted in accordance with this chapter shall use
the following criteria for determining adequacy for accepting increased
peak flow rates:
97.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 184-15 SOLID WASTE § 184-16
180:323
§ 184-17. Design criteria for stormwater management facilities.
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased runoff associated with a two-year return period event
within their banks at velocities consistent with protection of the
channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities shall be based upon
criteria included in the DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution
Control Program Manual.
(2) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased twenty-five-year return period runoff without
creating any hazard to persons or property.
(3) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must
pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be designed in
accordance with DEP Chapter 105 regulations (if applicable) and,
at a minimum, pass the increased twenty-five-year return period
runoff.
G. Regional detention alternatives. For certain areas, it may be more cost
effective to provide one control facility for more than one development
site than to provide an individual control facility for each development
site. The initiative and funding for any regional runoff control
alternatives are the responsibility of prospective developers. The
design of any regional control basins must incorporate reasonable
development of the entire upstream watershed. The peak outflow of a
regional basin would be determined on a case-by-case basis using the
hydrologic model of the watershed consistent with protection of the
downstream watershed areas. "Hydrologic model" refers to the
calibrated model as developed for the Stormwater Management Plan.
H. Waiver of peak rate control requirement. For certain development sites
in close proximity to stream channels, the municipality may consider a
waiver of the peak rate control requirement, upon recommendation of
the Municipal Engineer. The developer is responsible to demonstrate no
harm by providing engineering analysis, in accordance with the
following:
(1) The developer must demonstrate that discharge without peak rate
control will improve drainage conditions by draining the
development site prior to peak stream flows from the upstream
drainage area.
(2) The developer must demonstrate that all drainage facilities
downstream from the site have adequate capacity to safely convey
the undetained increased peak flows for the storm events listed in
§ 184-14. This analysis may be required for any drainage facility
between the development site and the discharge point at the Yellow
Breeches Creek. Approval of a detention waiver shall not relieve
the developer from meeting the volume control (§ 184-13)
requirements.
§ 184-16 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 184-17
180:324
A. Detention and retention facilities.
(1) Any stormwater management facility or BMP designed to store
runoff and requiring a berm or earthen embankment required or
regulated by this chapter shall be designed to provide an
emergency spillway to handle flow up to and including the onehundred-
year post-development conditions.
(2) The height of the embankment must be set as to provide a
minimum of one foot of freeboard above the maximum pool
elevation computed when the facility functions for the onehundred-
year post-development inflow.
(3) Emergency spillways must be designed to pass the one-hundredyear
post-development flow, assuming that all discharge orifices
are completely clogged and that any principal spillway grate is 50%
clogged.
(4) Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under DEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter
105 concerning dam safety, which may be required to pass storms
larger than the one-hundred-year event.
B. Any facilities that constitute water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges,
outfalls, or stream enclosures), and any work involving wetlands as
directed in DEP Chapter 105 regulations (as amended or replaced from
time to time by DEP), shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 105
and will require a permit from DEP. Any other drainage conveyance
facility that does not fall under Chapter 105 regulations must be able to
convey, without damage to the drainage structure or roadway, runoff
from the twenty-five-year design storm with a minimum of one-foot of
freeboard measured below the lowest point along the top of the
embankment along the edge of the roadway. Any facility that
constitutes a dam as defined in DEP Chapter 105 regulations may
require a permit under dam safety regulations. Any facility located
within a PennDOT right-of-way must meet PennDOT minimum design
standards and permit submission requirements.
C. Storm sewers must be able to convey post-development runoff from a
twenty-five-year design storm without surcharging inlets.
D. Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels
and at all points of discharge.
E. The design of all stormwater management facilities shall incorporate
sound engineering principles and practices. The municipality shall
reserve the right to disapprove any design that would result in the
creation, occupancy or continuation of an adverse hydrologic or
hydraulic condition.
F. Storm drainage facilities shall be required as necessary to:
§ 184-17 SOLID WASTE § 184-17
180:325
(1) Permit the unimpeded flow of natural watercourses;
(2) Ensure the drainage of all low points along the line of streets and
other applicable areas;
(3) Intercept, retain or detain surface water runoff in a manner
reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area drained;
(4) Provide positive drainage away from on-site sewage disposal
facilities and buildings.
G. General storm drainage facility design requirements:
(1) Design of storm drainage facilities shall generally conform with
PennDOT Design Manual Part 2, Chapter 10.
(2) The minimum design criteria shall be a ten-year storm with a fiveminute
duration. Higher frequency conditions may be required by
the municipality where an overflow would endanger public or
private properties.
(3) The complete drainage system for the subdivision or land
development shall be incorporated into the design. If the
subdivision or land development is to be developed in phases, an
overall stormwater facilities plan for the entire site shall be
submitted with the preliminary plan.
(4) The developer shall be responsible for obtaining any permits
required by state or federal agencies for construction of the
facilities or points of discharge. Copies of hydrologic or other
studies requested by other agencies shall be provided by the
developer.
(5) The existing points of drainage discharge, whether natural or
constructed, shall not be altered without written approval from the
affected property owner(s).
(6) Stormwater runoff or natural drainage water shall not be diverted
so as to overload existing drainage systems, or create flooding or
the need for additional drainage structures on other private
properties or public lands, without provisions being made by the
developer for properly handling such conditions.
(7) Facilities for storm drainage shall be designed to handle the
anticipated peak discharge from the property being subdivided or
developed as well to handle the anticipated increase in runoff that
will occur when all upstream property is fully developed.
(8) Where a watercourse runs across or through a subdivision or land
development, a drainage easement, which conforms with the line of
such watercourse, shall be provided at such a width as will be
adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage.
§ 184-17 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 184-17
180:326
Provisions for reasonable access for maintenance of these facilities
shall be provided.
(9) All drainage structures that are located within the right-of-way of
state highway agencies shall be approved by the applicable agency.
(10) All streets shall be designed so that surface water is discharged
from their cartways and rights-of-way. The minimum street crossslope
shall be 2%.
(11) Storm drainage facilities, as required, shall be placed in front of the
curb or curbline when located in a street right-of-way. When
located in undedicated land, facilities shall be placed within an
easement, as approved by the Municipal Engineer, who may
require additional width of easement as circumstances warrant.
(12) Street drainage shall not be permitted to cross intersections or the
center line of a road.
(13) Stormwater roof drains, sump pump discharge drains and other
stormwater drainage facilities or groundwater discharges shall not:
(a) Discharge directly over a sidewalk.
(b) Discharge within five feet of any lot line.
(c) Cross a lot line.
(d) Be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers or roadside
ditches, to promote overland flow and infiltration of
stormwater where advantageous to do so. When it is more
advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers,
then it shall be permitted on a case-by-case basis by the
municipality.
(14) Stabilized outlets shall be provided for footer drains, floor drains,
downspouts and other point discharges.
(15)No person, corporation or other entity shall block, impede the flow
of, alter, construct any structure or deposit any material or thing or
commit any act which will affect normal or flood flow in any stream
or watercourse without having obtained prior approval from
applicable local, state and federal agencies.
(16) All street inlets shall be the combination inlet and hood type in
compliance with PennDOT Standard Construction Drawings for
Type C Special Inlet. The designation of "special" means a ten-inch
curb reveal which requires the road surface to be sloped into the
inlet for additional effectiveness. Inlets shall be constructed of
reinforced cast-in-place concrete or precast concrete with separate
bottom and top units.
§ 184-17 SOLID WASTE § 184-17
180:327
(17) All storm drainage system manholes shall be reinforced cast-inplace
concrete or precast concrete in compliance with PennDOT
Standard Construction Drawings.
(18) The minimum pipe size shall be 18 inches in diameter for all storm
drainage facilities. Twelve-inch-diameter pipes shall be permitted
in privately owned systems on private property where no upstream
drainage is contributed. All pipes shall meet PennDOT
specifications. A headwall or end section shall be provided at the
start and end of each pipe run.
(19) All springs and sump pump discharges shall be collected by piping
so as not to flow in the streets.
(20) Underdrain shall be required at all low points on the street profile.
The underdrain system shall be designed and installed in
accordance with PennDOT specifications. Combination storm
sewer/underdrain shall be permitted, where applicable.
(21) Pavement base drain shall be provided along each side of each
street, in accordance with PennDOT standards. In locations where
a storm sewer is proposed, combination storm sewer/underdrain
shall be permitted.
H. Storm drainage system design standards:
(1) Minimum slope of smooth-interior storm drainage pipes shall be
0.35%. Minimum slope for corrugated pipes shall be 0.50%.
(2) Pipe runs between structures shall not exceed 400 feet.
(3) Pipe runs shall be designed to align generally parallel to street
center lines, with perpendicular crossings as needed. Diagonal
crossings should be avoided to minimize conflicts with other
underground facilities.
(4) Pipes shall be designed with a minimum of 12 inches of cover
between top of pipe and subgrade elevation for pipes within paved
areas. Pipes outside paved areas shall have a minimum of 12 inches
of cover between top of pipe and finished ground elevation.
(5) Inlet spacing shall be designed to limit spread of water on streets in
accordance with PennDOT criteria.
(6) Inlets, junction boxes or manholes shall be provided at all locations
of pipe size change or direction change, whether horizontal or
vertical.
(7) Frames, covers and grates shall be provided in accordance with
PennDOT standards. All inlets within paved areas shall have
bicycle-safe grates.
(8) Pipe materials shall be one of the following:
§ 184-17 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 184-17
180:328
§ 184-18. Calculation methodology.
Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the rational method or a soil cover complex methodology.
(a) High-density polyethylene.
(b) Reinforced concrete.
(c) Aluminized steel.
(d) Galvanized steel.
(9) Pipe trench excavation and backfill shall be in accordance with
PennDOT standards.
I. Storm drainage system design and construction shall be in
conformance with standards and procedures that may be adopted by
the municipality from time to time. Where adopted, such standards
shall take precedence over PennDOT standards that are referenced
herein.
A. Any stormwater runoff calculations involving drainage areas greater
than 200 acres, including on-and off-site areas, shall use a generally
accepted calculation technique that is based on the NRCS soil cover
complex method. Table 184-1 summarizes acceptable computation
methods. It is assumed that all methods will be selected by the design
professional based on the individual limitations and suitability of each
method for a particular site. The municipality may approve the use of
the Rational Method to estimate peak discharges from drainage areas
that contain less than 200 acres.
Table 184-1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Plans
Method
Method Developed
By Applicability
TR-20 or commercial
package based on
TR-20
USDA - NRCS When use of full model
is desirable or necessary
TR-55 or commercial
package based on
TR-55
USDA - NRCS Applicable for plans
within the models
limitations
HEC-HMS U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers
When use of full model
is desirable or necessary
PSRM Penn State
University
When use of full model
is desirable or necessary
§ 184-17 SOLID WASTE § 184-18
180:329
Table 184-1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Plans
Method
Method Developed
By Applicability
Rational Method or
commercial package
based on Rational
Method
Emil Kuiching (1889) For sites less than 200
acres
Other methods Various As approved by the
municipal engineer
B. All calculations consistent with this chapter using the soil cover
complex method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the
various return period storms presented in Table A-1 in Appendix A98 of
this chapter. If a hydrologic computer model such as PSRM or HEC-1 is
used for stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration of rainfall
shall be 24 hours. The NRCS S curve shall be used for the rainfall
distribution.
C. For the purposes of pre-development flow rate determination,
undeveloped land shall be considered as meadow good condition,
unless the natural ground cover generates a lower curve number or
Rational C value (i.e., forest).
D. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate times of concentration for overland flow
and return periods from the design storm curves from PennDOT Design
Rainfall Curves (1986). Times of concentration for overland flow shall
be calculated using the methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced
from time to time by NRCS). Times of concentration for channel and
pipe flow shall be computed using Manning's Equation.
E. Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions
to be used in the soil cover complex method shall be obtained from
Table A-2 in Appendix A of this chapter.
F. Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for use
in the Rational Method shall be obtained from Table A-3 in Appendix A
of this chapter.
G. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning Equation shall be used
for hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes and storm sewers. Values for Manning's roughness
coefficient (n) shall be consistent with Table A-4 in Appendix A of this
chapter.
98.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 184-18 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 184-18
180:330
§ 184-19. Erosion and sediment control requirements.
H. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this chapter using any
generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.
I. The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the
performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by routing the
design storm hydrograph through these facilities using the Storage-
Indication Method. For drainage areas greater than 20 acres in size, the
design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation method
that produces a full hydrograph. The municipality may approve the use
of any generally accepted full hydrograph approximation technique that
shall use a total runoff volume that is consistent with the volume from a
method that produces a full hydrograph.
J. The municipality has the authority to require that computed existing
runoff rates be reconciled with field observations and conditions. If the
designer can substantiate through actual physical calibration that more
appropriate runoff and time-of-concentration values should be utilized
at a particular site, then appropriate variations may be made upon
review and recommendations of the Municipal Engineer. Calibration
shall require detailed gauge and rainfall data for the particular site in
question.
K. An impervious area flash (IAF) analysis shall be conducted for all sites.
The analysis requires that the watershed impervious area be modeled
without the pervious areas. The time of concentration should also be
determined from the impervious areas only. If the IAF analysis results in
a higher post-development peak runoff rate, this higher value must be
used for the final design/comparison.
A. Whenever the vegetation and topography are to be disturbed, such
activity must be in conformance with Chapter 102, Title 25, Rules and
Regulations, Part I, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Protection, Subpart C, protection of Natural Resources,
Article II, Water Resources, Chapter 102, "Erosion Control," and in
accordance with the Cumberland County Conservation District (CCCD)
and the standards and specifications of the municipality.
B. No regulated activities shall commence until an erosion and sediment
control plan consistent with this chapter is approved by the
municipality.
C. Evidence of any permits required by DEP or CCCD must be provided to
the municipality.
D. Plan review, approval and permitting functions under this section may
be delegated by the municipality to another entity, if such agreement is
entered into by the municipality.
§ 184-18 SOLID WASTE § 184-19
180:331
E. Additional erosion and sediment control design standards and criteria
that must be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed include the
following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase, so as
to maintain their maximum infiltration capacity.
F. A copy of the approved erosion and sediment control plan and any
required permits shall be available at the project site at all times.
G. Any permanent stormwater detention or retention facility that also
functions as a sediment control facility during construction must be
designed to meet the permanent peak rate release design requirements
for the ten-year storm event during the construction period.
Documentation of this design shall be included in the stormwater
management report. This requirement is in addition to design
parameters that may be required by other agencies.
§ 184-19 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 184-19
180:332
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management Site Plan Requirements
§ 184-20. Plan contents.
The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
A. Appropriate sections from the Municipal Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,99 and other applicable local ordinances, shall
be followed in preparing the SWM site plans.
B. The municipality shall not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient
in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion and in
accordance with this article, when a SWM site plan is found to be
deficient, the municipality may either disapprove the submission and
require a resubmission, or in the case of minor deficiencies, the
municipality may accept submission of modifications.
C. Provisions for permanent access and maintenance easements as
determined necessary by the municipality for all physical SWM BMPs,
such as ponds and infiltration structures, to implement the operation
and maintenance plan discussed in § 184-30 below.
D. The SWM site plan shall provide the following information:
(1) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(2) A determination of site conditions in accordance with the site
assessment procedures outlined in Chapter 4 of the most current
version of the SWM Manual (Reference 1100) A site assessment
shall be completed for projects proposed in areas of carbonate
geology or karst topography.
(3) Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as
specified in this chapter, or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate
that measures have been taken to meet the requirements of this
chapter, including the recommendations and general requirements
in § 184-11.
(4) Expected project time schedule.
(5) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as
prepared for and submitted to the approval authority.
(6) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality
and peak flows) on surrounding properties and adjacent aquatic
features and on any existing stormwater conveyance system that
may be affected by the project.
99.Editor's Note: See Ch. 192, Subdivision and Land Development.
100. Editor's Note: The list of references is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 184-20 SOLID WASTE § 184-20
180:333
(7) Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including drainage
structures, pipes, open channels and swales.
(8) The locations of existing and proposed on-lot wastewater facilities
and water supply wells.
(9) An operation and maintenance (O&M) plan for all proposed
physical stormwater management facilities. This plan shall address
long-term ownership and responsibilities for operation and
maintenance as well as schedules for O&M activities.
(10) Plans shall be no larger than 18 inches by 24 inches and shall be
prepared in a form that meets the requirements for recording at
the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Cumberland County. The
contents of the plan(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities
or other identifiable landmarks.
(b) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep
slopes (greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be
used. Spot elevations at significant points are required.
(c) Existing streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within
the project area.
(d) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, areas of natural
vegetation to be preserved and the total extent of the upstream
area draining through the site.
(e) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and waterlines.
(f) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
(g) Proposed changes to the land surface and vegetative cover,
including the type and amount of impervious area that would
be added.
(h) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas and buildings.
(i) Final contours at intervals at two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%, five-foot contour intervals may be used.
Spot elevations at significant points are required.
(j) The name of the development, the name and address of the
owner of the property and the name of the individual or firm
preparing the plan.
(k) The date of submission and any subsequent revision dates.
(l) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet.
§ 184-20 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 184-20
180:334
(m) A North arrow.
(n) The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(o) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(p) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project.
(q) Plan and profile of all pipes, swales and open channels.
(r) Overland drainage paths.
(s) Stormwater management easements, a minimum of 20 feet in
width, around all stormwater management facilities and
permanent BMPs.
(t) A twenty-foot-wide access easement to provide access for
inspection and maintenance of all stormwater management
facilities and permanent BMPs.
(u) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would
be located off site. All off-site facilities shall meet the
performance standards and design criteria specified in this
chapter.
(v) A construction detail of any improvements to sinkholes.
(w) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the
stormwater management facilities and BMPs to be permanent
fixtures that can be altered or removed only after approval of a
revised plan by the municipality.
(x) The following signature block for the Design Engineer:
"(Design Engineer), on this date (date of signature), have
reviewed and hereby certify that the drainage plan meets all
design standards and criteria of the Lower Allen Township Act
167 Stormwater Management Ordinance."
(y) An erosion and sediment control plan in accordance with
§ 184-19.
(z) A BMP operations and maintenance plan in accordance with
§ 184-30.
(aa) All stormwater management facilities and permanent BMPs,
including construction details.
(bb) When infiltration methods are proposed, the locations of
existing and proposed on-lot sewage disposal systems and
infiltration areas and water supply wells.
§ 184-20 SOLID WASTE § 184-20
180:335
§ 184-21. Plan submission.
For all activities regulated by this chapter, the steps below shall be followed
for submission. For any activities that require a DEP joint permit application
and are regulated under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway
Management) or Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management) of DEP's Rules and
Regulations, require a PADOT highway occupancy permit or require any
other permit under applicable state or federal regulations, the permit(s)
shall be part of the plan.
§ 184-22. Plan review.
E. Supplemental information.
(1) A written description of the following information shall be
submitted.
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(b) Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this chapter.
(c) Stormwater management techniques to be applied both during
and after development.
(2) A geologic assessment of the effects of runoff on sinkholes as
specified in this chapter.
(3) A declaration of adequacy and highway occupancy permit from the
PennDOT when utilization of a PennDOT storm drainage system is
proposed.
(4) All calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the design of the
stormwater management facilities and BMPs.
A. The SWM site plan and application shall be submitted by the developer
as part of the submission for the regulated activity.
B. If the SWM site plan is incorporated in plans submitted as a subdivision
or land development (SLD) plan, the SWM site plan may be reviewed
and approved as part of those plans.
C. If the SWM site plan is submitted independently for a regulated activity,
two complete copies of the SWM site plan must be submitted.
A. The Municipal Engineer shall review the SWM site plan for consistency
with the adopted Cumberland County Act 167 Stormwater
Management Plan and this chapter. The municipality shall require
receipt of a complete plan, as specified in this chapter.
B. The Municipal Engineer shall review the SWM site plan for any
submission or land development in accordance with the municipal
subdivision and land development ordinance provisions not superseded
by this chapter.
§ 184-20 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 184-22
180:336
C. Should the SWM site plan be determined to be inconsistent with the
Stormwater Management Ordinance, the Municipal Engineer will
forward a disapproval letter to the developer with a copy to the
Township Manager citing the reason(s) for the disapproval. Any
disapproved SWM site plans may be revised by the developer and
resubmitted consistent with this chapter.
D. In lieu of a disapproval letter, the Municipal Engineer may provide a list
of comments that will bring the plan into an approvable format, if
adequately addressed.
E. For regulated activities requiring a DEP joint permit application, the
Municipal Engineer shall notify DEP whether the SWM site plan is
consistent with the Stormwater Management Ordinance and forward a
copy of the review letter to the Township Manager and the developer.
DEP may consider the Municipal Engineer's review comments in
determining whether to issue a permit.
F. The municipality shall not approve any subdivision or land development
for regulated activities if the SWM site plan has been found to be
inconsistent with the Stormwater Management Ordinance, as
determined by the Municipal Engineer. All required permits from DEP
must be obtained prior to approval or as a condition of approval.
G. The Municipal Building Code Official and/or Zoning Officer shall not
issue a permit for any regulated activity until a SWM site plan has been
approved by the Municipal Engineer. All required permits from DEP
must be obtained prior to issuance of a permit.
H. The developer shall be responsible for completing an as-built survey of
all stormwater management facilities and BMPs included in the
approved SWM Plan. The as-built survey and an explanation of any
discrepancies with the design plans shall be submitted to the Municipal
Engineer for final approval. In no case shall the municipality approve
the as-built survey until the municipality receives a copy of an approved
declaration of adequacy, highway occupancy permit from the PennDOT
District Office, and any applicable permits from DEP.
I. The municipality's approval of a SWM site plan shall be valid for a
period not to exceed one year. This one-year time period shall
commence on the date that the municipality signs the approved SWM
Plan. If construction of stormwater management facilities included in
the approved SWM Plan has not commenced, then the municipality may
consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke any and all
permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by the
municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 184-24 of this
chapter. The municipality may, at its discretion, grant time extensions
for completion of work on approved SWM Plans. Nothing in this section
shall supersede a developer's rights under the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code101 to pursue approved plans.
§ 184-22 SOLID WASTE § 184-23
180:337
§ 184-23. Modification of plans.
§ 184-24. Resubmission of disapproved plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the municipality's concerns, to the municipality in accordance
with this article. The applicable review fee must accompany a resubmission
of a disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 184-25. Recording of documents.
The owner of any property upon which stormwater management facilities or
permanent BMPs will be placed, constructed or implemented, as described
on the SWM site plan, shall record or cause to have recorded the following
documents in the office of the Recorder of Deeds for Cumberland County
prior to the start of any site construction:
§ 184-26. Authorization to construct; term of validity.
The municipality's approval of a SWM site plan authorizes the regulated
activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity of
five years following the date of approval. Terms of validity shall commence
on the date the municipality signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If
an approved SWM site plan is not completed according to §§ 184-27 and
184-28 within the term of validity, then the municipality may consider the
SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits issued
by the municipality. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by
A. A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in
SWM BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of
SWM BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are
not as stated on the SWM site plan as determined by the municipality,
shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in
accordance with this article.
B. A modification to an already approved or disapproved SWM site plan
shall be submitted to the municipality, accompanied by the applicable
municipal review fee. A modification to a SWM site plan, for which a
formal action has not been taken by the municipality, shall be submitted
to the municipality, accompanied by the applicable municipal review
fee.
A. The approved SWM site plan.
B. The BMP operations and maintenance plan, if such is not included in a
recorded SWM site plan.
C. Stormwater facilities and BMP maintenance and monitoring
agreement.
101. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 184-23 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 184-26
180:338
the municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 184-24 of this
chapter.
§ 184-27. As-built plans.
The applicant shall be responsible for providing as-built plans of all SWM
BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The as-built plans and
an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction plans shall be
submitted to the municipality.
§ 184-26 SOLID WASTE § 184-27
180:339

ARTICLE V
Inspections, Operation and Maintenance
§ 184-28. Schedule of inspections.
§ 184-29. Right of entry procedures.
§ 184-30. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
A. The Municipal Engineer or his/her designee shall be permitted to
inspect all phases of the installation of the permanent stormwater
management facilities and BMPs.
B. The Municipal Engineer or his/her designee shall be permitted to
inspect all phases of the site development work in progress to insure
compliance with erosion and sediment control requirements. Inspection
functions under this Section may be delegated by the municipality to
another entity, if such agreement is entered into by the municipality.
C. During any stage of the work, if the Municipal Engineer determines that
the permanent stormwater management facilities or BMPs are not
being installed in accordance with the approved SWM site plan, the
municipality shall revoke any existing municipal permits and/or issue a
stop-work order until a revised SWM site plan is submitted and
approved, as specified in this chapter.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the municipality to inspect the implementation,
condition or operation of the stormwater BMPs in regard to any aspect
governed by this chapter.
B. BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on behalf of the
municipality ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes
of determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any BMP in the municipality such devices as are
necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges
from such BMP.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the municipality access to a BMP is a
violation of this chapter.
A. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance and inspection responsibilities prior to final approval of
the SWM site plan. The municipality may require a dedication of such
facilities as part of the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan.
Such a requirement is not an indication that the municipality will accept
the facilities. The municipality reserves the right to accept or reject the
ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the
stormwater management controls.
§ 184-28 SOLID WASTE § 184-30
180:341
§ 184-31. Municipal stormwater maintenance fund.
B. Facilities, areas or structures used as stormwater management BMPs
shall be enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and
recorded as deed restrictions or conservation easements that run with
the land.
C. The operation and maintenance plan shall be recorded as a restrictive
deed covenant that runs with the land.
D. The municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for
any failure to satisfy the provisions of this article.
E. No regulated activities shall commence until a BMP operations and
maintenance plan (O&M plan) consistent with this chapter is approved
by the municipality.
F. The SWM site plan content requirements are applicable to the O&M
plan and are incorporated herein by reference. O&M plan requirements
can be shown concurrently in the plan set with the SWM site plan
requirements.
G. The O&M plan shall establish responsibilities for the continuing
operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater facilities and
BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements
are to be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater facilities and
BMPs may also be dedicated to and maintained by the municipality.
(2) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single owner, or
if sewers and other improvements are to be privately owned and
maintained, then the operation and maintenance of stormwater
facilities and BMPs shall be the responsibility of the owner.
H. The property owner shall execute a stormwater facilities and BMP
maintenance and monitoring agreement with the municipality covering
all stormwater facilities and BMPs that are to be privately owned. The
agreement shall be in a form provided by the municipality.
A. If stormwater facilities are accepted by the municipality for dedication,
persons installing stormwater facilities or BMPs shall be required to
pay a specified amount to the municipal stormwater BMP operation and
maintenance fund to help defray costs of operations and maintenance
expenses. The amount of the deposit shall be determined as follows:
(1) If the stormwater facility or BMP is to be owned and maintained by
the municipality, the deposit shall cover the estimated costs for
operations and maintenance for 10 years, as determined by the
municipality.
§ 184-30 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 184-31
180:342
§ 184-32. Post-construction maintenance and monitoring
inspections.
(2) The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to the
present worth of the annual series values.
B. If a stormwater facility or BMP is proposed that also serves as a
recreation facility (e.g., ballfield, lake), the municipality may reduce or
waive the amount of the maintenance fund deposit based upon the
value of the land for public recreation purpose.
A. Stormwater facilities and permanent BMPs must be inspected in
accordance with the O&M plan. The property owner has two options to
accomplish this:
(1) Employing a qualified registered professional to conduct the
inspections and prepare reports; or
(2) Entering into an agreement with the municipality for the
municipality to conduct the inspections and prepare reports. This
can be included in the stormwater facilities and BMP maintenance
and monitoring agreement.
B. If the option in Subsection A(1) is chosen, the entity conducting the
inspection shall be required to submit a report to the municipality
within one month following completion of the inspection. The report
will present documentation regarding the condition of the facility and
recommending necessary repairs, if needed. Any needed repairs shall
be implemented by the owner within one month of the report issuance
date.
C. If the option in Subsection A(2) is chosen, the owner will be responsible
for reimbursing the municipality for the costs involved, such
reimbursement to be specified in the stormwater facilities and BMP
maintenance and monitoring agreement.
§ 184-31 SOLID WASTE § 184-32
180:343

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 184-33. General.
The fee required by this chapter is the municipal review fee. The municipal
review fee shall be established by the municipality to defray review costs
incurred by the municipality and the Municipal Engineer. All fees shall be
paid by the applicant.
§ 184-34. Fee schedule.
The municipality shall establish a fee schedule by resolution of the
municipal governing body. The municipality shall periodically update the fee
schedule to ensure that costs are adequately reimbursed.
§ 184-35. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall, at a minimum, cover:
§ 184-36. Additional costs.
The developer will be invoiced for any additional costs incurred by the
municipality in the course of reviewing the SWM site plan. These costs may
include, but are not limited to, special studies by qualified engineers or
surveyors, field reconnaissance and testing.
A. Administrative costs.
B. The review of the SWM site plan by the municipality and the Municipal
Engineer.
C. Fees and expenses to record plans at the Cumberland County Recorder
of Deeds office.
D. Pre-construction meetings and site inspections.
E. The inspection of stormwater management facilities and BMPs during
construction.
F. The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities and BMPs presented in the SWM site plan.
G. Work required to monitor and enforce provisions of this chapter, to
correct violations and to assure proper completion of remedial actions.
§ 184-33 SOLID WASTE § 184-36
180:345

ARTICLE VII
Prohibited Acts
§ 184-37. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including, but not limited to,
sewage, process wastewater, wash water, ammonia, chlorine,
petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.) pesticides, pollutants and
other hazardous materials to enter the municipality's separate storm
sewer system or to enter the waters of the commonwealth is prohibited.
Handling and disposal of all materials and wastes shall comply with all
federal and state requirements. Structural and nonstructural BMPs, in
accordance with Chapters 5 and 6 of the most current version of the
SWM Manual, shall be implemented where necessary to preserve the
quality of stormwater runoff.
B. Discharges to the municipality's separate storm sewer system or to
waters of the commonwealth which are not composed entirely of
stormwater shall be prohibited, except as provided in Subsection C
below, and discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of this
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities, including training.
(2) Potable water sources, including dechlorinated waterline and fire
hydrant flushing.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Air-conditioning condensate.
(5) Springs.
(6) Water from crawl space or basement sump pumps.
(7) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(8) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(9) Lawn watering.
(10) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(11) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(12)Water from individual residential car washing.
(13) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
§ 184-37 SOLID WASTE § 184-37
180:347
§ 184-38. Roof drains and sump pumps.
§ 184-39. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, structures or easements without the written approval of the
municipality.
(14) Routine external building wash down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
D. In the event that the municipality or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection C significantly contribute to
pollution of the waters of this commonwealth, the municipality or DEP
will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
E. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state or federal law.
A. Roof drains and sump pumps shall not discharge to any impervious area
if site conditions permit.
B. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside swales, except as provided in § 184-38C.
C. When it is more advantageous to connect roof drains directly to streets,
storm sewers or roadside swales, such connections may be permitted
by the municipality on a case-by-case basis.
D. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable.
§ 184-37 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 184-39
180:348
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 184-40. Municipality's right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the municipality may enter at
reasonable times upon any property within the municipality to inspect the
condition of the stormwater structures and facilities in regard to any aspect
regulated by this chapter.
§ 184-41. Inspection of BMPs.
SWM BMPs must be inspected by the landowner, or the owner's designee
(including the municipality for dedicated and owned facilities), according to
the schedule in the O&M plan. All inspection reports shall be submitted to
the municipality according to the schedule in the O&M plan.
§ 184-42. Enforcement.
The municipal governing body is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter. All inspections regarding compliance
with the SWM site plan shall be the responsibility of the Municipal Engineer
or other qualified persons designated by the municipality.
§ 184-43. Suspension and revocation of approvals and permits.
A. A copy of the SWM site plan approved by the municipality shall be on
file at the site throughout the duration of the construction activity.
Periodic inspections may be made by the municipality or designee
during construction.
B. It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity
except as provided in an approved SWM site plan, unless specifically
exempted in § 184-12.
C. Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan during
project construction are a responsibility of the municipality.
D. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless all requirements of
this chapter have been met.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the municipality may be suspended or
revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or operation and maintenance agreement.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard or
§ 184-40 SOLID WASTE § 184-43
180:349
§ 184-44. Public nuisance.
§ 184-45. Notice of violation.
nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended approval may be reinstated by the municipality when:
(1) The municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension.
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
D. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health or
property, at its sole discretion, the municipality may provide a limited
time period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the
municipality will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a
written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner
to correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation
within the allowed time period, the municipality may revoke or suspend
any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision
of this chapter.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Whenever the municipality finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the municipality may
order compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such
notice may require, without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
(2) The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices or operations;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) The implementation of stormwater BMPs; and
(6) Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Said notice
§ 184-43 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 184-45
180:350
§ 184-46. Violations and penalties; enforcement remedies.
§ 184-47. Appeals.
may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take
the required action within the established deadline, the work will be
done by the municipality or designee and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator. Said notice shall state the penalty for failure to
comply.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Any one violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $500 for each violation, plus court costs and attorney fees.
Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense.
B. In addition, the municipality, through its solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate
forms of remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the
municipality within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality, relevant to
the above appeal of this chapter, may appeal to the Cumberland County
Court of Common Pleas within 30 days of the municipality's decision.
§ 184-45 SOLID WASTE § 184-47
180:351

ARTICLE IX
Stormwater Authority
[Added 10-22-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10]
§ 184-48. Delegation of duties.
The Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen Township hereby delegates
certain duties related to stormwater management in Lower Allen Township
to the Lower Allen Township Stormwater Authority, as stated herein.
§ 184-49. Fees.
Lower Allen Township Stormwater Authority shall have the power to enact
and collect stormwater fees, and to provide a system for collection of fees
for payment to Lower Allen Township to maintain stormwater facilities and
fund other stormwater related expenditures.
§ 184-48 SOLID WASTE § 184-49
180:353
Chapter 187
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Filling and excavating — See Ch. 98.
Sewers — See Ch. 175.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 184.
Trees — See Ch. 202.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 209.
§ 184-49 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 184-49
180:354
ARTICLE I
Excavations
[Adopted 6-10-1985 as Art. 901 of the 1985 Code of Ordinances]
§ 187-1. Definitions. [Amended 9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
A. The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings given herein, except where the context in which the
word or phrase is used clearly indicates otherwise. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular include the
plural and words in the plural shall include the singular, and words used
in the present tense include the future. The word "shall" is mandatory.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person applying for a permit or to whom a permit
may be issued.
CARTWAY — That portion of a street or alley which is improved,
designed or intended for vehicular use.
CLEARED AND/OR TREATED PORTION OF A PUBLIC STREET OR
ROAD — That portion of a public street or road which has been plowed
or otherwise cleared of snow or which has been treated with de-icing or
anti-skid material.
CLEAR ZONE — A one-and-one-half-foot-wide area behind any curb
face within the Township right-of-way.
ENTITY — Any organization of people, other than an individual person,
whether in the form of a partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation (whether for or not for profit) or otherwise.
EXCAVATION or EXCAVATIONS — The digging of any trench or
excavating through or under the roadway or sidewalk or the cutting
into or opening or removal of any of the pavement surfaces of any
street, highway, alley or thoroughfare within the limits of the Township.
ICE — Frozen water, whether as a result of precipitation or otherwise.
OBSTRUCTIONS — Any temporary objects sited within the public rightof-
way, including, but not limited to, portable basketball goals, and
excluding leaves that are placed in the public right-of-way in
compliance with Township leaf collection program procedures.
OWNER — The real or equitable owner of property abutting sidewalks
or streets, as in this chapter are defined.
PERSON — A natural person, as well as a firm, partnership, association
or corporation.
PROJECTING OBSTRUCTIONS — Anything sited within the public
right-of-way that projects into the Township cartway or over Township
sidewalks and does not clear the sidewalk by eight feet or the public
cartway by 14 feet.
§ 187-1 SOLID WASTE § 187-1
180:355
PROPERTY OWNER — Any person or persons, male or female,
corporation, partnership, association, company, individual, owner,
occupant, lessee, tenant or organization.
PUBLIC STREET OR ROAD — Any street or road within the territorial
limits of the Township as maintained by the Township or the
Commonwealth.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication,
forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be
occupied or occupied by a road, sidewalk, railroad, oil or gas pipeline,
water line, sanitary or storm sewer, electric transmission lines, bus
shelters, with or without advertising signs as where the Board of
Commissioners granted a franchise with respect thereto, and other
similar uses; generally, the right of one to pass over the property of
another.
SIDEWALK — Any space located between the curbline or the lateral line
of a cartway of a street or highway and the adjacent property line or
right-of-way line of a street or highway, intended for use by pedestrians,
whether improved or unimproved.
SNOW — Natural frozen precipitation.
SNOW OR BAD WEATHER PARKING EMERGENCY — A state of
condition(s) which may include whenever snow falls during any period
of 12 hours or less to an accumulative depth of three inches or more, or
at any other such time at the discretion of the Township Manager or his
designee.
STREET — Any highway within the Township, when maintained by
either the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the Township.
TENANT — The occupant, lessee, tenant or person having charge of
any building, lot or parcel of ground abutting the sidewalk or street, as
is defined in this chapter.
TOWNSHIP — The elected officials of Lower Allen Township or any
authorized representative, agency or agencies of the Township
appointed by the Board of Commissioners of the Township.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The Township Manager appointed by the
Board of Commissioners.
UNAPPROVED STRUCTURE — Anything constructed and sited within
the clear zone of the public right-of-way, excluding mailboxes that are
mounted on breakaway posts, and anything constructed and sited in
the portion of the public right-of-way that is used for or reserved for a
sidewalk.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person and/or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, or trailer or
semitrailer, except devices used exclusively upon rails or tracks.
§ 187-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 187-2
180:356
§ 187-2. Permit required.
No person shall make or cause to be made any excavation of any nature
whatsoever in any street, highway, alley or thoroughfare within the limits of
the township without first securing a permit granting authority therefor as
hereinafter provided.
§ 187-3. Information for permit application.
Any application for the issuance of an excavation permit shall be filed in
the office of the Township Manager or his designee, upon forms furnished
by the township for that purpose, and shall be signed by the applicant.
Such application shall set forth the location and purpose of the proposed
excavation, the dates between which such excavation is to be opened, the
length, width and depth of the trench, the area of the roadway surfaces to
be removed, the date on which all work will be completed and the names of
all persons interested in or to be benefited by the work to be done.
§ 187-4. Deposit for restoration. [Amended 10-13-1986 by Ord. No.
86-9]
Before issuance of an excavation permit, the Township Manager or his
designee shall collect from the applicant and the applicant shall deposit
with the Township Manager or his designee an estimated amount of money
required to backfill and repave or otherwise restore the street, highway,
alley or thoroughfare, a permit issuance fee and permit inspection fees,
which fees and amounts shall be determined from time to time by
resolutions of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 187-5. Permit issuance, display and revocation. [Amended
11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-16]
Upon an application for the issuance of an excavation permit being
approved by the Township Manager or his designee and the deposit by
the applicant with the Township Manager or his designee, the deposit
determined in accordance with the provisions of § 187-4, there shall be
issued to the applicant a permit granting authority to make the excavations
specified in the application. This permit shall at all times be in the
possession of a competent person actually on the work and shall be shown
at all times to any police officer or properly authorized officer or employee
of the township upon demand. The Township Manager or his designee shall
have the right to refuse to permit an excavation during the period from
November 15 to March 15, unless directed by the Board of Commissioners
to grant such permit. All permits are subject to revocation at any time by
the Township Manager or his designee or by the Board of Commissioners
in the event of failure of the holder of such permit to comply with any of
the conditions upon which the permit has been granted; such conditions,
however, shall be in accordance with the provisions of this article. All
permits shall be invalid and expire on the date set forth therein. An
extension of time beyond such date shall be granted on payment of an
§ 187-2 SOLID WASTE § 187-5
180:357
additional fee per day as set forth from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners.
§ 187-6. Liability.
By acceptance of the excavation permit, the applicant agrees to pay the
entire cost and expense incurred in the replacement of the excavation
and agrees to protect, defend, indemnify and save harmless the township
and the officers, agents, servants or employees thereof from all claims,
suits, actions and proceedings of every nature and description which may
be brought against the township, officers, agents, servants or employees
thereof or for any injuries or damage to persons or public or private
property due to any materials or appliances used in the work or by or
on account of improper materials or workmanship or for or on account of
any accident or any other act, negligence or omission of such applicant or
his agents servants or employees, and the township, the officers, agents,
servants or employees thereof shall not in any way be liable therefor. The
applicant agrees to safeguard and maintain in good order the excavation
until such time as the township may restore the street surface, and the
applicant further agrees to abide by all the terms and conditions of this
article whether specifically mentioned in the application or not. The grant
of a permit by the township does not relieve the applicant from obtaining
any consent otherwise required from the owner or owners of the abutting
property and does not confer upon the applicant the right to cut, remove
or destroy trees or shrubbery within the legal limits of the street, highway,
alley or thoroughfare except under such conditions, restrictions and
regulations as the permit may specifically prescribe.
§ 187-7. Tunneling prohibited; exception.
No part of a trench or excavation shall be tunneled or undermined so as
to leave the surface undisturbed, but all materials shall be removed to the
full length, width and depth of the excavation, except in such cases as may
be approved by the Township Manager or his designee. The charges for the
permit, however, shall be the same as if the surface had been removed.
§ 187-8. Safeguards.
The applicant, during the progress of the excavation work, shall provide
and maintain such fences, barriers, "street closed" or "danger" signs, red
lights and watchmen as may be necessary to prevent avoidable accidents
to the public and adjoining property owners. The convenience of the public
and temporary approaches to and crossings of intersecting streets shall be
provided for and kept in good condition when practicable. The sidewalks or
portions of the street adjoining the work or its vicinity shall not be littered
or obstructed more than necessary, and the drainage gutters and inlets to
the stormwater sewers shall at all times be kept clean and unobstructed.
Plates or bridging may be required on all openings made within the
improved surface which have a shortest dimension in length or width of
six feet or less whenever work cannot be completed within the same day,
§ 187-5 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 187-8
180:358
during peak traffic hours. The plate or bridging is to be extended a
minimum of 18 inches on either side of the opening and tied into the
existing cartway.102
§ 187-9. Supervision.
The Township Manager or his designee or his duly authorized
representative shall have authority to regulate the excavation and shall
have authority to see that the excavation is filled and closed as required by
this article.
§ 187-10. Procedure.
A. Excavations shall be by open cut from the surface, and no tunneling or
drifting shall be permitted except by permission as required by § 187-7
and so noted on the permit. Where there is an asphalt or macadam
surface, the surface shall be cut with a jackhammer or a saw to the
width of one foot on either side of the maximum trench width. The
amount of trench opened shall at all times be subject to the decision of
the Township Manager or his designee. No trench or excavation shall
be undercut or have a greater width at the bottom than at the top. In
case of slips or slides of the sides of the excavation, the same shall be
trimmed to solid earth and the top surface cut back to the limit of the
same before any backfilling is commenced. When necessary or
required, the sides of a trench shall be sheathed and braced and
rendered secure until the construction has been laid therein and the
trench refilled.
B. Care shall be taken not to move or disturb other subsurface structures,
and in crossing these or running parallel with or near them, they shall
be securely hung, braced and supported in place until the work is
completed. The applicant shall maintain their respective services and
shall repair all damages done to any of such structures.
C. In rock excavation, all drilling and blasting shall be conducted with the
greatest possible care and all possible precautions taken to guard
against accidents, and if the applicant is required to use certain
blasting operations in the excavation, the applicant shall agree to make,
execute and deliver to the township a bond in the sum stipulated by the
Township Manager or his designee, with surety in the form approved by
the Township Manager or his designee, conditioned that the applicant
will save harmless the township from any damage whatsoever to its
subgrade, special subgrade, subbase, drainage facilities, road material
and any other installations or matters in, under or upon the highway
right-of-way for a period from the date of the completion of the last
work covered by the permit.
102. Editor's Note: Original Section 901.09, Notification to officials, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 187-8 SOLID WASTE § 187-11
180:359
§ 187-11. Restoration materials and methods.
A. The person making or causing to be made the excavation shall retain
suitable material from the excavated trench to provide insulation
around and over subsurface structures, including but not limited to
pipes or conduits, not to exceed 12 inches over the same, and it shall be
compacted in four-inch layers. This excavated material shall be stored
at the side of the excavation in such a manner that there will be no
interference with the flow of water in any gutter, drain, pipe, culvert or
ditch. The remaining excavated material shall be removed from the site.
Completion of the backfill and restoration of the base and surface
course shall be performed by the Township Highway Department, but
the township may, at its option, require the applicant to backfill and
restore the base and surface course at the sole cost and expense of the
applicant in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Surface replaced five years or less prior to permit application.
(a) Suitable material from the excavated trench must be retained
to provide insulation around and over the utilities, if any, to a
height not to exceed 12 inches over the top of the pipe,
conduit, etc. This material shall be compacted in four-inch
layers. This material shall be placed or stored on the side of the
operation farthest from the road pavement, unless otherwise
authorized in the permit, and in such manner that there will be
no interference with the flow of water in any gutter, drain,
pipe, culvert, ditch or waterway. The remaining excavated
material must be removed from the site. The trench must then
be backfilled with 2A modified limestone compacted in layers
not to exceed four inches, using the mechanical tamper up to
within four inches of the finished grade. The 2A modified
limestone must meet the requirements of Section 703.3(D),
Form 408, as specified in the latest revision of the
specifications issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(b) The surface course shall be replaced in accordance with the
depths of existing bituminous surface, but in no case shall the
wearing course be less than four inches of ID-2A. The edges
shall be sealed with two applications of E-8 emulsion. An
additional one foot on each side of the trench must be sawed or
cut in a neat straight line prior to replacing the bituminous
surface and the base course as specified above.
(2) Surface replaced in excess of five years prior to application for
permit.
(a) The method of trench backfilling shall be in accordance with
the requirements as set forth in Subsection A(1) hereof.
(b) The base course and binder and surface course shall be
replaced in accordance with the requirements as set forth in
§ 187-11 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 187-11
180:360
§ 187-12. Necessary additional work; supplemental application.
In no case shall an applicant open or remove a greater area of surface and
in no other location than specified in the original application. However, if,
at the time of actually doing the work, it is necessary to open or remove a
greater area of surface than originally applied for, the applicant shall first
notify and secure, by telephone or otherwise, the consent of the Township
Manager or his designee to do so, upon the express condition that the
applicant, before 12:00 noon of the following business day, files a
supplemental application for the making of an additional excavation.
§ 187-13. Increased area; charges; refunds.
Before the backfilling of any excavation, the Township Manager or his
designee shall verify the actual area of the excavation. If actual area of the
excavation exceeds the area of the excavation set forth in the application
for a permit and the amount required to backfill and restore the street
determined in accordance with the schedule of charges per square yard
set forth in § 187-4 exceeds the amount deposited by the applicant, then
the excess shall be charged to the applicant. Where the completion of the
backfilling and restoration of the base and surface course is to be performed
by the Township Highway Department, the Township Highway Department,
as soon as practicable to do so, shall permanently backfill, replace and
restore the pavement surface in such manner and with like material existing
in the roadway previous to the making of the excavation and shall determine
and charge the cost of backfilling and restoring of the base and surface
course to the applicant, together with any other charges to the applicant
Subsection A(1) hereof. Where the applicant backfills and
restores the base and surface course, the applicant shall be
responsible for any failure of the highway surface during a
period of two years following completion of the permanent
restoration work. The township may require, in its discretion,
that the applicant furnish a bond, conditioned that the
applicant shall complete and maintain the work in accordance
with the terms of this article, sufficient in amount to cover
the cost of the required improvements, as estimated by the
Township Engineer.
B. In the case of an improved street or alley, fill shall be replaced in
excavation in eight-inch layers and tamped with an approved gasoline
or mechanical tamper, and a suitable top of ballast and fine stone shall
be placed on the excavation to a minimum depth of 10 inches.
C. Excavation in grassed areas of street rights-of-way shall be backfilled
with excavated material, compacted in eight-inch lifts. Excavated sod
shall be removed and preserved for replacement after excavation. If the
excavated sod is destroyed, new sod shall be replaced over excavation.
D. Backfill operations shall be done in the presence of the Township
Manager or his designee.
§ 187-11 SOLID WASTE § 187-13
180:361
authorized by this article. The township shall retain a like amount of all
sums deposited by the applicant for the permit. The township shall refund
to the applicant the difference where the amount deposited exceeds the cost
and expense determined by the township for the backfill and restoration of
the pavement and surface area and any other costs or expenses chargeable
to the applicant under the terms and provisions of this article or where
the applicant, when required, performs the backfilling and restoration of
the base and surface course; and where the completion of the backfill and
restoration of the base and surface course is performed by the Township
Highway Department and it is determined that the cost and expense of the
backfilling and restoration of the base and surface course and any other
costs and expenses chargeable to the applicant under the provisions of this
article exceed the amount so deposited, then the excess shall be charged
to the applicant. The sum due the township shall be paid within 30 days
from the date of rendering a statement to the applicant, and no permit shall
be issued to any applicant until all accounts due the township on previous
permits granted to the applicant and owing by the applicant shall have been
paid. Notwithstanding any provision herein set forth to the contrary, 15%
of the total cost and expenses for all street excavations shall be retained by
the township for inspection and supervision.
§ 187-14. Emergencies. [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
In case of an emergency arising at night, Sundays, legal holidays or at
such times as the office of the Township Manager or his designee is closed
and an immediate excavation may be necessary for the protection of public
or private property, the same shall be reported to the Police Department,
which shall immediately notify the Township Manager or his designee of
the excavation. The person granting permission to make the emergency
excavation shall make application for said excavation to the Township
Manager or his designee on or before 12:00 noon of the next business day.
§ 187-15. Inspection.
The Board of Commissioners reserves the right to place an inspector on
any and all excavations it deems necessary in order to ensure good
workmanship, and the actual expense of such inspection shall be charged to
the applicant.
§ 187-16. Work beyond street center line; length.
No excavation in any street, highway, alley or thoroughfare shall extend
from the curbline into the highway a distance greater than one foot beyond
the center line of the street, highway, alley or thoroughfare before being
backfilled and the surface of the highway restored to a condition safe and
convenient for travel. No more than 500 feet longitudinally shall be opened
in any street at any one time, unless written permission has been granted
by the Board of Commissioners or the Township Manager or his designee.
§ 187-13 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 187-17
180:362
§ 187-17. Work not properly completed; penalty.
If the excavation is not performed promptly or shall be unskillfully or
improperly or incompletely done, the Board of Commissioners may cause
the same to be done in a manner it deems proper, and the expense thereof,
including any overhead expense, shall be charged to the applicant, together
with 15% additional as a penalty.
§ 187-18. Exemptions to required deposit.
No deposit shall be required and no charge shall be made for an excavation
made under permits issued for the construction or repair of sidewalks,
curbing or gutters nor for a contract executed by the township, but in all
other cases, proper application shall be made and permits secured as herein
provided.
§ 187-19. (Reserved)103
103. Editor's Note: Former § 187-19, Violations and penalties, as amended, was repealed
9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08. See now § 187-67.
§ 187-17 SOLID WASTE § 187-19
180:363

ARTICLE II
Sidewalk Construction and Repair
[Adopted 6-10-1985 as Art. 905 of the 1985 Code of Ordinances]
§ 187-20. Sidewalk width requirements.
Sidewalks are hereby established on all streets and highways in the
township and, unless specifically designated otherwise in a particular
ordinance affecting a street or highway, the width of such sidewalks shall
include all space between the property line and the vehicular driveway, even
though the space is not paved as a walkway.
§ 187-21. Width and location specified.
Unless specifically designated otherwise in a plan of streets approved by the
Board of Commissioners or in a particular ordinance affecting a street or
highway, the sidewalk pavement shall be not less than four feet in width, the
sidewalk pavement herein designated being located between the property
line and the inside of the six-inch curbline.
§ 187-22. Notice to construct.
All owners of property abutting on any street or highway in the township,
upon 60 days' notice to do so from the Board of Commissioners through
the Township Secretary, shall construct, grade, pave, curb, repave and
recurb the sidewalks along such property, and upon failure of such owner
or owners to comply with such notice or without notice to the property
owner or owners as above provided, the township shall in either case cause
the same to be done and shall levy and collect the costs thereof from such
owner or owners. The cost of any such grading, paving, curbing, repaving
and recurbing shall be a lien upon the premises from the time of the
commencement of the work, which date shall be fixed by the Township
Engineer and shall be filed with the Township Secretary. Any such lien may
be collected by action of assumpsit or by lien filed in the manner provided
by law for the filing and collection of municipal claims.
§ 187-23. Notice to repair; costs and penalty. [Amended 11-10-1997
by Ord. No. 97-16]
All owner or owners of property abutting on any street or highway in the
township shall keep the sidewalk, together with any portion of his property
paved and used as a sidewalk or public walk immediately in front of his
property, in good order and repair. All owner or owners of property abutting
on any street or highway in the township, upon 60 days' notice to do so from
the Board of Commissioners through the Township Secretary, shall repair
the sidewalks along such property in the manner stipulated on such notice.
If such owner or owners fail to comply with the requirements of such notice
within 60 days from the date of its service, the Board of Commissioners shall
cause the same to be done. The cost of the same, together with a penalty of
10%, shall be paid by such owner or owners and may be collected by action
§ 187-20 SOLID WASTE § 187-23
180:365
of assumpsit or by lien filed against the property in the manner provided by
law for the filing and collection of municipal claims. The township may, in
its discretion, grant extensions to the sixty-day notice requirement due to
adverse weather conditions.
§ 187-24. Inspections; specifications.
All sidewalk pavements and curb shall be laid to a line and grade obtained
from the Township Engineer and constructed in accordance with the
specifications provided in Article IV. The Township Engineer may, at any
time during the course of such work, visit the site of such work to ascertain
whether such work is being done according to requirements, and such
engineer or one of his agents or employees shall visit any such site for such
purpose whenever requested by the property owner or owners. Within two
days after the completion of such work by the property owner or owners,
it shall be the duty of such owner or owners where such work was done to
notify the Township Engineer of that fact so that he may inspect the same
to determine whether such work has been done according to requirements.
§ 187-25. Repair by owner without notice.
Any property owner or owners, upon his own initiative and without notice
from any township authority, may grade, pave, curb, repave, recurb and
repair the sidewalks along such property. However, such owner or owners
shall conform to the requirements of this article as to line and grade and
as to materials used, and he shall also notify the Township Manager or
Township Engineer within two days after completion of the work so that
he may inspect the same to determine whether such work has been done
according to requirements.
§ 187-26. Contracts.
The Board of Commissioners is hereby authorized to enter into contracts,
upon compliance with the requirements of law, for the construction,
grading, paving, curbing, repaving, recurbing, and repairing of the
sidewalks within the township, or, if the Board of Commissioners by
resolution so desires, such work or any part thereof shall be done under the
supervision of the Township Manager.
§ 187-23 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 187-26
180:366
ARTICLE III
Curb Construction and Repair
[Adopted 6-10-1985 as Art. 909 of the 1985 Code of Ordinances]
§ 187-27. Notice to construct or repair. [Amended 11-10-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-16]
All owners of property abutting on any street or highway in the township
shall, upon 60 days' notice to do so from the Board of Commissioners
through the Township Secretary, curb, recurb or repair the curbing of such
street or highway. The township may, in its discretion, grant extensions to
the sixty-day notice requirement due to adverse weather conditions.
§ 187-28. Action by township; assessment.
Upon failure of the owner or owners of property to curb, recurb or repair
the curbing of such street or highway abutting such property after 60
days' notice so to do as provided in § 187-27, the Board of Commissioners
shall cause the same to be done and shall assess and collect the whole
cost thereof by an equal assessment on the foot front. The Board of
Commissioners may make equitable adjustments for corner lots or lots of
irregular shape where an assessment for full frontage would be unjust.
§ 187-29. Notice of assessment.
The Secretary of the township shall cause 30 days' notice of the assessment
to be given to each party assessed, either by service on the owner or his
agent, or to be left on the premises.
§ 187-30. Unpaid assessments; interests; lien.
If any assessment remains unpaid at the expiration of the notice, it shall be
the duty of the Township Solicitor to collect the same, with interest, from 30
days after completion of the improvement by action of assumpsit or by lien
to be filed and collected in the same manner as municipal claims.
§ 187-31. Work according to specifications; inspections.
All curbs shall be laid to a line and grade obtained from the Township
Engineer and constructed in accordance with the specifications provided
in Article IV. The Township Engineer may, at any time during the course
of such work, visit the site of such work to ascertain whether such work
is being done according to requirements, and he or one of his agents or
employees shall visit any such site for such purpose whenever requested
by the property owner. Within two days after the completion of the work,
it shall be the duty of the owner of property where such work was done
to notify the Township Engineer of that fact so that he may inspect such
work to determine whether such work has been done according to the
requirements.
§ 187-27 SOLID WASTE § 187-32
180:367
§ 187-32. Repair by owner without notice.
Any property owner may, upon his own initiative and without notice from
any township authority, curb, recurb or repair the curbing of the street or
highway along such property. However, such owner shall conform to the
requirements of this article as to the line and grade and as to materials
used, and he shall notify the Township Manager or Township Engineer
within two days after completion of the work so that he may inspect the
same to determine whether such work has been done according to
requirements.
§ 187-33. Contracts.
The Board of Commissioners is hereby authorized to enter into contracts,
upon compliance with the requirements of law, for the curbing, recurbing
or repair of curbing of streets and highways within the township, or, if the
Board of Commissioners by resolution so desires, such work or any part
thereof shall be done under the supervision of the Township Manager.
§ 187-32 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 187-33
180:368
ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk and Curb Specifications
[Adopted 6-10-1985 as Art. 913 of the 1985 Code of Ordinances]
§ 187-34. Compliance required.
All curbs, curb cut ramps and sidewalks shall be constructed or
reconstructed in accordance with the terms and provisions of this article. It
shall be the duty of all owners of real estate, contractors, subcontractors,
mechanics and laborers to comply with this article in the construction or
reconstruction of curbs and sidewalks within the township.
§ 187-35. Curb specification. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No.
97-16]
All curbs shall be vertical plain cement concrete constructed or
reconstructed in accordance with specifications and design standards of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication 408 Specifications,
1994, Section 630, as amended from time to time, including but not limited
to excavation, forms, placing, finishing, curing, joints and all materials.
Replacement curb shall be installed to the existing line and grade of the
curbing, unless otherwise directed by the Township Engineer.
§ 187-36. Sidewalk specification. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No.
97-16]
All sidewalks shall be four inches of cement concrete on an aggregate
bed which shall be constructed or reconstructed in accordance with the
specifications as set forth in the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Publication 408 Specifications, 1994, Section 767, as amended from time to
time, including but not limited to preparation of foundation, aggregate bed,
forms, concrete, joints, curing and all materials.
§ 187-37. Curb ramps.
Curb cut ramps shall be provided when constructing new sidewalks and
curbs or reconstructing existing sidewalks and curbs. Curb cut ramps will
not be required when an existing single-family dwelling has a curb and
sidewalk and there is a replacement of only one item, curbing or sidewalk.
Handicapped ramps shall be provided, where feasible, at all intersections
and crosswalks if there is no driveway depression in the curb within 100
feet. Ramps shall be constructed in accordance with the guidelines and
design criteria contained in the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Publication 70, entitled "Guidelines for Design of Local Roads and Streets,"
as amended from time to time. The Board of Commissioners may waive
installation of ramps where not feasible, at hazardous conditions or at
unavoidable permanent obstructions.
§ 187-34 SOLID WASTE § 187-38
180:369
§ 187-38. Cleanup.
All curbs, curb cut ramps or sidewalks shall be backfilled with clean earth
to the top of the curb or sidewalk and to match existing grades. All excess
material shall be removed and all disturbed areas shall be reseeded. Any
pavement cut, damaged or disturbed shall be replaced.
§ 187-39. Existing nonconforming curbs.
§ 187-40. Special curbing on private properties.
The Board of Commissioners, upon request, may approve substitute
materials for curbing for landscaping purposes on public or private property
when the Township Engineer provides an opinion that the substitute
material shall have an expected life of not less than 20 years.
§ 187-41. Special sidewalks on public or private property.
The Board of Commissioners, upon request, may approve substitute
materials for sidewalk for landscaping purposes on public or private
property when the Township Engineer provides an opinion that the
substitute material shall have an expected life of not less than 20 years.
§ 187-42. Approval required for deviations.
Any deviation from the regulations set forth in this article is subject to the
approval of the Township Engineer or the Board of Commissioners.
§ 187-43. Permit required.
Before constructing or reconstructing any curb or sidewalk, it shall be the
duty of all owners of real estate, contractors, subcontractors, mechanics
and laborers to secure the necessary permit, line and grade from the
township, authorizing the requested construction or reconstruction.
§ 187-44. Application for permit.
It shall be the duty of every owner of real estate, previous to the
construction or reconstruction of curbing or sidewalks, footways or gutters
on any street or alley in the township, to make application for a permit to
the township to fix the line and grade for the construction or reconstruction
of curbing, sidewalk or gutters. Such permit, when duly issued by the
A. All macadam, timber or other noncement concrete curbs shall be
replaced with vertical plain cement concrete curbing as provided in this
article.
B. Existing rolled cement concrete curbs can be replaced to match
existing rolled curb, provided that less than 50% of the existing rolled
curb of the property requires replacement, and further provided that
abutting properties have rolled curb.
§ 187-38 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 187-44
180:370
township, shall be sufficient authority for such owner or his contractor,
subcontractor, mechanic or laborer to commence and complete, along such
lot or ground as may be described in such permit and in accordance with
the regulations, rules and specifications fixed and established by this article
and none other, to construct or reconstruct sidewalks or gutters for which
such permit has been granted. Grade stakes and offset stakes will be given
by the Township Engineer at the time of the issuance of the permit. The
township will be given five days' notice prior to the date the owner wishes
to commence construction so that there will be sufficient time to place the
construction stakes.
§ 187-45. Permit fee.
The fee for such permit shall be set by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners, which fee schedule shall be posted for public inspection in
the office of the Township Code Official and shall be based on cost. When
sidewalk or curb is constructed or reconstructed simultaneously, only one
permit and fee shall be required.
§ 187-46. Effect of failure to conform to line and grade.
If any sidewalk or curb hereafter constructed or reconstructed is not
constructed or reconstructed in conformity to the lines and grades
established by the Township Engineer, it shall be the duty of the person
laying the same, upon notice from the Township Engineer or the Township
Manager, so to alter and construct the same as to conform to the official
lines and grades. Failure within five days after such notice to comply with
the notice and the requirements of this article shall be a violation of this
article, and each day's neglect and refusal to comply with the terms of the
notice shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 187-47. (Reserved)104
104. Editor's Note: Former § 187-47, Violations and penalties, as amended, was repealed
9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08. See now § 187-67.
§ 187-44 SOLID WASTE § 187-47
180:371

ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 11-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-7 (Art. 729 of the 1985 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 187-48. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Lower Allen Township
Snow, Ice and Bad Weather Ordinance."
§ 187-49. (Reserved)105
§ 187-50. Declaration of snow or bad weather parking restrictions.
[Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12; 12-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-16]
Snow or bad weather parking restrictions may be declared to exist in
the Township whenever snow falls during any period of 12 hours or less
to an accumulative depth of three inches or more or at any other time,
at the discretion of the Township Manager or his designee, the weather
conditions are too hazardous and dangerous to vehicular and pedestrian
travel because of the elements. The Township Manager or his designee
shall have authority to declare a snow or bad weather emergency, notice
of which shall immediately be given through the press, if possible, but in
any event through not less than two radio or television stations with a
normal operating range covering the Township. Notification of termination
of snow or bad weather emergency shall be provided to the media for
announcement.
§ 187-51. Prohibited conduct. [Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-16]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any snow or ice (whether by
shoveling, sweeping, plowing, blowing, pushing, dumping or otherwise)
upon any public street or road within this Township.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to cause or permit any
person to place any snow or ice (whether by shoveling, sweeping,
plowing, blowing, pushing, dumping or otherwise) upon any public
street or road within this Township.
C. A person or entity shall be presumed to have caused or permitted a
person to place snow or ice upon a public street or road where such
person or entity owns, occupies or otherwise controls the land from
which the snow or ice originated and employs, contracts with or
otherwise engages the person placing the snow or ice upon said street
or road.
105. Editor's Note: Former § 187-49, Definitions; word usage, as amended, was repealed
9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08. See now § 187-1.
§ 187-48 SOLID WASTE § 187-51
180:373
§ 187-52. Snow and ice removal.
§ 187-53. Method of snow and ice removal.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to cause or permit any
person to place any snow or ice (whether by shoveling, sweeping,
plowing, blowing, pushing, dumping, or otherwise) upon the property of
another with the exception of authorized agents of the Township in the
course of snow/ice removal from the public streets or roads or
sidewalks.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any snow or ice (whether by
shoveling, sweeping, plowing, blowing, pushing, dumping or otherwise)
upon, or in front of any fire hydrant. [Added 10-10-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03]
A. Every person in charge or control of any building or lot of land fronting
or abutting on a sidewalk, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee
or otherwise, shall remove and clear away or cause to be removed or
cleared away all snow, ice, slush, or any combination thereof from all of
the sidewalks in front of or alongside such building or lot from a path of
at least 36 inches in width from so much of said sidewalk as is in front of
or abuts on said building or lot of land within 24 hours after the snow,
ice, slush or combination ceases to fall, to form or to accumulate. If the
sidewalk is less than 36 inches in width, said sidewalk shall be cleared
the entire width thereof.
B. Every person in charge or control of any building or lot of land fronting
or abutting on a public right-of-way, whether as owner, tenant,
occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall remove and clear away, or cause to
be removed or cleared away all snow, ice, slush, or any combination
thereof from any fire hydrant in front of, or alongside such building in
an area 36 inches in radius around the fire hydrant within 24 hours
after the snow, ice, slush or combination ceases to fall, to form, or to
accumulate. [Added 10-10-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
A. Snow, ice, slush or any combination thereof removed from the sidewalk
shall be placed on the property of the person. Said snow, ice, slush or
any combination thereof shall not be placed next to a fire hydrant or on
any sidewalk, roadway or loading or unloading area of a public
transportation system.
B. If there shall be an excessive amount of snow, ice, slush or combination
thereof and there is no longer any place on the property of the person to
pile the snow, ice, slush or combination thereof, it may be placed along
the curbline but may not be placed in the street.
C. In the event that the snow and/or ice on a sidewalk has become so hard
that it cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the sidewalk,
the person charged with its removal shall, within the time set forth in
§ 187-52, cause enough sand, ashes, sawdust or any other abrasive
§ 187-51 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 187-53
180:374
§ 187-54. Parking of motor vehicles. [Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-16]
§ 187-55. (Reserved)106
material to be put on the sidewalk to make travel reasonably safe and
shall, as soon thereafter as weather permits, cause to be cleared a path
in said sidewalk of at least 36 inches in width.
A. Upon declaration of snow or bad weather parking restrictions, all
vehicles shall be removed from the streets and roadways within the
Township by a time designated by the Township Manager or his
designee. Said time shall not be less than six hours after the snow or
bad weather parking restrictions have been declared.
B. No vehicles shall be parked on the streets and roadways of the
Township until the snow or bad weather parking restrictions have been
lifted. During the snow or bad weather parking restrictions, certain
other parking restrictions such as blocking sidewalks and parking
within the front or side yards of residences shall be relaxed.
C. Upon the lifting of the snow or bad weather emergency, regular parking
restrictions shall apply unless otherwise notified.
106. Editor's Note: Former § 187-55, Violations and penalties, as amended, was repealed
9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08. See now § 187-67.
§ 187-53 SOLID WASTE § 187-55
180:375

ARTICLE VI
Unapproved Right-of-Way Structures
[Adopted 7-8-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-08]
§ 187-56. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Lower Allen Township
Unapproved Right-of-Way Structures Ordinance."
§ 187-57. (Reserved)107
§ 187-58. Prohibited conduct.
§ 187-59. (Reserved)110
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct an unapproved structure
upon the Township right-of-way.
B. Any unapproved structures in the public right-of-way street or sidewalk
constructed before the date of this ordinance shall be permitted if the
owner or tenant provides an indemnification agreement to the
Township on the form prescribed (Appendix A).108
C. Mailboxes. [Added 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-05]
(1) Mailboxes located in the right-of-way must be installed to the U.S.
Postal Service specifications contained in Appendix B.109
Additionally, there must be at least 36 inches of clear zone under
the mailbox support arm, as measured from the road surface.
(2) During winter maintenance operations, if a mailbox is hit by a plow,
the Township will replace it with a standard four-inch by four-inch
wooden post and standard polyvinyl chloride (PVC) mailbox.
(3) The Township will not replace ornamental or decorative fixtures.
(4) The Township will only replace the mailbox if it is contacted by the
truck or plow itself.
(5) The Township will not replace mailboxes not installed in
accordance with the specifications in § 187-58C(1).
107. Editor's Note: Former § 187-57, Definitions; word usage, was repealed 9-22-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-08. See now § 187-1.
108. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
109. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
110. Editor's Note: Former § 187-59, Violations and penalties, was repealed 9-22-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-08. See now § 187-67.
§ 187-56 SOLID WASTE § 187-59
180:377

ARTICLE VII
Name Changes
[Adopted 9-11-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-05]
§ 187-60. Manner of changing Township streets, roads or avenue
names.
All name changes for Township streets, roads or avenues shall be enacted as
ordinances upon public notice and public hearing, or adopted as resolutions
of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 187-60 SOLID WASTE § 187-60
180:379

ARTICLE VIII
Temporary Right-of-Way Obstructions
[Adopted 1-11-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-01]
§ 187-61. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Lower Allen Township
Temporary Right-of-Way Obstructions Ordinance."
§ 187-62. Intent. [Amended 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
It is the intent of the Board of Commissioners to protect the health and
safety of the residents and visitors of Lower Allen Township by restricting
or prohibiting the use of public rights-of-way for temporary obstructions.
After a review of safety issues, the Board of Commissioners has determined
that placement of temporary obstructions in the public right-of-way is a
hazard to the public safety, since they can obstruct the sight distance of
motorists using the public street and obstructs public rights-of-way for use
by emergency vehicles. Moreover, it also obstructs snowplows and other
Township maintenance crews from their public responsibilities. Further,
the continued use of temporary right-of-way obstructions may result in the
damage to the property of Township residents.
§ 187-63. (Reserved)111
§ 187-64. Prohibited conduct.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any obstruction in the
cartway portion of the public right-of-way.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any obstruction in the public
right-of-way that projects into the required eight feet of height
clearance over Township sidewalks or 14 feet of height clearance over
Township cartways including, but not limited to, basketball goals.
[Amended 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
C. No roll-off container, storage pod or similar container shall be placed
upon any street or public right-of-way. Any person seeking a temporary
exemption from this article may make said application to the Township
Manager, who will review the application for the following criteria:
[Added 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
(1) Will the placement create a safety hazard or sight distance
obstruction.
(2) Valid reasons why the ROW obstruction can’t be placed on the
property instead of the street.
(3) Reasonable duration of the placement.
111. Editor's Note: Former § 187-63, Definitions, was repealed 9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08.
See now § 187-1.
§ 187-61 SOLID WASTE § 187-64
180:381
§ 187-65. Enforcement.
The Police Department and Community Development Department are
authorized to issue violation notices and conduct enforcement activities in
response to violations of this article.
§ 187-66. (Reserved)112
(4) Potential interference with road maintenance, leaf collection, snow
and ice removal, or stormwater drainage.
112. Editor's Note: Former § 187-66, Violations and penalties, was repealed 9-22-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-08. See now § 187-67.
§ 187-64 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 187-66
180:382
ARTICLE IX
Violations and Penalties
[Adopted 9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
§ 187-67. Violations and penalties.
A. Any police officer or law enforcement officer of the Township is hereby
authorized to place a violation notice for any traffic and/or parking
violation, under the provisions of any ordinance of the Township or for
any of the traffic or parking prohibitions contained in this chapter, in a
visible place on any vehicle found to be in violation thereof in the
Township, commanding the person to remit fines to the Township office
within 48 hours.
B. When any person who has received a violation notice for a violation of
any ordinance of the Township has refused to appear within 48 hours
and to remit the fine provided for in the violation, the Chief of Police or
equivalent official shall cause a proceeding to be instituted in
accordance with the provisions of the First Class Township Code.113
[Amended 1-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
C. When any person who has received a violation notice for a violation of
any parking or traffic provisions of the Vehicle Code114 has refused to
appear at the Township office within 48 hours and to remit the fine
provided for in the violation, the Chief of Police or equivalent official
shall cause a proceeding to be instituted in accordance with the
provisions of the ordinances of Lower Allen Township. [Amended
1-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
D. The form of the violation notice for the violation of ordinances shall be
approved by the Township Manager.
E. Whenever a violation notice is issued for any snow or bad weather
emergency violation under the provisions of any ordinance of the
Township pursuant to this chapter, the fine shall be not less than $100
nor more than $300, and costs of suit, and in default thereof, such
violator shall be imprisoned not more than 90 days.
F. In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, the Township shall be
authorized to remove or cause the removal of any vehicle parked in
violation of this chapter and to store said vehicle in a public garage or
other place of safety selected by the Township, provided that said
registered owner of said vehicles, if known, together with the
addressee, shall be notified, in writing, of the fact of said removal and
the place of deposit of said vehicle, and provided that said vehicle may
be reclaimed and surrendered upon payment of towing and storing
charges.
113. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
114. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 187-67 SOLID WASTE § 187-67
180:383
G. In addition to the penalties here hereinabove provided, whenever a
violation notice is issued pursuant to Article VI of this chapter:
(1) The Township shall be authorized to remove or cause the removal
of any unapproved structure located in the Township right-of-way,
streets or sidewalks at the owner's expense.
(2) On notice of said violation, an owner or tenant shall have 30 days to
remove such unapproved structure before further enforcement
activity shall be conducted by the Township.
H. In addition to the penalties here hereinabove provided, whenever a
violation notice is issued pursuant to Article VIII of this chapter:
(1) The Township shall be authorized to remove or cause the removal
of any obstruction located in the Township right-of-way, streets or
sidewalks at the owner's expense.
(2) On notice of a projecting obstruction violation, an owner or tenant
shall have five days to remove such obstruction before further
enforcement activities shall be conducted by the Township.
(3) On notice of a cartway obstruction violation, an owner or tenant
shall immediately remove such obstruction to avoid further
enforcement activities.
§ 187-67 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 187-67
180:384
Chapter 192
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Intergovernmental cooperation — See Ch. 23.
Official Map — See Ch. 36.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 40.
Building construction and safety
standards — See Ch. 70.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 73.
Contractors — See Ch. 80.
Filling and excavating — See Ch. 98.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 110.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 151.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 162.
Sewers — See Ch. 175.
Solid waste — See Ch. 180.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 184.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 187.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 187-67 SOLID WASTE § 187-67
180:385

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 192-1. Intent.
This chapter provides for the regulation and control of the subdivision of
lots and the development of land; the approval of plans, plots or replots
of land laid out in building lots; standards for the design of streets, lots,
easements, blocks and other improvements; certain minimum
improvements and construction standards for streets and improvements;
financial security requirements for improvements; the administration of this
chapter by the Lower Allen Township Planning Commission and Board of
Commissioners; and penalties for the violation of this chapter.
§ 192-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Lower Allen Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance" of 2010.
§ 192-3. Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to create conditions favorable to the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens by assisting in
the orderly and efficient integration of subdivisions; ensuring conformance
of subdivision plans with the public improvement plans of the Township;
ensuring sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation;
facilitating the efficient movement of traffic and avoiding traffic hazards
and congestion; securing equitable handling of all subdivision plans by
providing uniform procedures and standards; improving land records by
establishing standards for surveys and plans; safeguarding the interests
of the public, the property owner, the subdivider and the municipality;
preserving natural and historic features; and carrying out the goals and
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan and the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.115
§ 192-4. Applicability.
A. No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land
shall be made, and no street, sanitary sewer main, water main or other
improvements required in connection with a proposed subdivision or
land development shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated
for use of the public or the occupants of the proposed subdivision or
land development, except in accordance with this chapter.
B. A lot or parcel that was not a legal lot of record prior to adoption of this
chapter shall not be created, sold or transferred, and no land
development may occur on a lot, unless and until:
115. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 192-1 SOLID WASTE § 192-4
180:387
§ 192-5. Exemptions.
§ 192-6. Interpretation of standards.
§ 192-7. Modifications and waivers.
(1) The subdivision of the lot and/or the approval of the land
development, as applicable, has been granted final plan approval
and any subdivision has been recorded at the Cumberland County
Recorder of Deeds Office; and
(2) Either of the following occurs, as provided in Article VIII:
(a) The Township has been assured by means of a development
agreement and guaranties acceptable to the Board of
Commissioners that the improvements will subsequently be
installed; or
(b) The required improvements in connection therewith have been
entirely completed and accepted by the Township.
C. Landowner. No subdivision or land development shall be submitted to
the Township for review except by the landowner of such land or his/her
specifically authorized agent. (See the definition of "landowner" in
Article II which includes "equitable owner".)
D. Zoning. All subdivisions and land developments shall comply with the
Township Zoning Ordinance116 and other relevant Township codes and
ordinances.
A. Agriculture. The subdivision by lease of land solely for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new
street or easement of access or residential dwelling, shall be exempted
from the regulations of this chapter.
B. Revisions to Township regulations after submittal of an application.
Section 508(4) of the State Municipalities Planning Code117 shall apply.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted and applied as
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare.
B. Where provisions, standards and specifications of this chapter conflict
with those of any state statute, other ordinance or regulations, the more
restrictive requirement shall apply, regardless of its source, unless
specified to the contrary.
A. An applicant seeking a modification or waiver to this chapter shall
submit to the Township staff a request, in writing, that states the
116. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
117. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 192-4 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-7
180:388
specific chapter section(s) involved and the reasons for the request.
The staff shall provide the request to the Planning Commission for
a recommendation. After the Planning Commission has had an
opportunity for review at a meeting, the Board of Commissioners may,
in writing, grant a waiver or modifications to the specific requirements
of this chapter.
B. The applicant must prove that the request will meet one or more of the
following conditions:
(1) Avoids an undue hardship that was not self-created and that results
from the peculiar and uncommon conditions of the property; or
(2) Avoids a clearly unreasonable requirement that would not serve
any valid public purpose; or
(3) Allows an alternative standard that is clearly demonstrated by the
applicant to provide equal or better results; or
(4) Allows a layout or improvements that would clearly be more in the
public interest than what would occur if the modification were not
granted; or
(5) Removes a requirement that is not applicable, especially because of
the limited scope of the proposed subdivision or land development;
or
(6) Recognizes that individual lots within a proposed commercial or
industrial subdivision will require future land development
approvals and that certain engineering matters can be deferred
until specific land development plans are later submitted.
C. Modification of requirements for conservation subdivisions.
(1) In addition to the authority granted in § 192-7B, the Board of
Commissioners shall have the authority to modify specific
requirements of this chapter for an application approved as a
conservation subdivision under the Zoning Ordinance118 in any of
the following cases.
(a) To result in a higher quality site design, including a design that
is more pedestrian-friendly, encourages lower-speed traffic on
residential streets and/or promotes patterns of development
similar to traditional villages.
(b) To minimize adverse impacts upon important natural features,
scenic views and historic buildings.
(2) Deferral of submission requirements. For an application for a
conservation subdivision, an applicant may defer the submittal of
the following specific detailed engineering information until the
118. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 192-7 SOLID WASTE § 192-7
180:389
§ 192-8. Fees.
final plan submission if the applicant commits to not construct any
improvements, begin grading nor remove mature woodlands until
after final plan approval. This provision shall not restrict routine
soil testing.
(a) The applicant shall submit a written list of the information that
is proposed to be deferred and the draft text of an agreement
to carry out this subsection. The agreement shall be in a legally
binding document that is acceptable to the Township. The list
of information that is deferred shall require written approval
by the Board of Commissioners. The agreement shall be
prepared in a manner that is binding upon all of the applicant's
heirs, successors and assigns.
(b) This deferral of submission requirements may include detailed
road data, utility profiles, grading plans, stormwater
calculations, improvement construction details and road
profiles, provided that the applicant shall be required to show
that design standards will be met.
(c) In place of submitting this information at the preliminary plan
stage, an applicant shall submit sufficient information at the
preliminary plan stage to demonstrate the feasibility of
proposed development. The Township Engineer, Planning
Commission or Board of Commissioners may require that
specific information be provided to show this feasibility. This
shall include demonstrating the ability of all final plan stages to
fully function in a coordinated manner, even if all stages are
not completed.
D. An applicant seeking a modification or waiver must provide a plan
showing the proposed development, including the item that is
requested to be waived or modified, and a plan showing the proposed
development if the waiver or modification is granted.
A. The Board of Commissioners has established by resolution a schedule of
fees, requirements for escrow accounts and a payment procedure for all
applications and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The applicant
shall pay the reasonable charges by the Township's Engineer and other
professional consultants for review of the proposed project and for
related preparation of reports and meeting time. At the time of
submittal of a final plan, the applicant shall also be required to deposit
funds into the escrow account to pay the anticipated costs of the
Township's Engineer and other professional consultants to oversee the
system of financial security of improvements and for inspections. This
schedule of fees may be amended by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 192-7 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-8
180:390
§ 192-9. Revisions, alternate plans and resubdivisions.
(1) The applicant shall also be required to fund, in advance, any
necessary legal advertisements that are placed by the Township in
regard to the applicant's project.
B. The applicant is also required to pay any review fees and/or permit fees
required by the County Planning Commission, the Township Authority
and the County Conservation District, as well as any other applicable
agencies.
C. Plans shall not be considered filed until all fees are paid and the
applications are properly signed as required.
D. If the expenses of the Township for reviews of a subdivision or land
development exceed the total fees that have been paid or placed in
escrow by an applicant, additional funds shall be required to be
deposited by the applicant. If expenses exceed the amount placed into
escrow, such excess expenses shall be paid by the applicant prior to
recording of the final plans. If the funds exceed the amount of the
expenses, the balance remaining shall be refunded to the applicant,
without interest, after inspection and final release by the Board of
Commissioners of any security posted with respect to maintenance or
repair of the improvements.
E. If the applicant disputes the fees, the applicant can appeal in
accordance, with Section 503 and Section 510 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code119 as amended.
F. Other fees.
(1) Fees for all other permits required for or by the Township or Lower
Allen Township Authority for opening roads, connecting to sanitary
sewer, building, zoning, etc., shall be paid to the Township or
Authority, as applicable.
(2) Failure of the applicant to make any required deposit or to pay any
bill submitted under or within the time specified in this section
shall be a reason for disapproval of the final plan or revocation of
any building or zoning permit issued to the applicant or the
applicant's heirs, successors or assigns.
A. Alternate plans. Only one plan concerning any one area of land shall be
before the Township for review at any one moment in time, unless the
Planning Commission specifically permits simultaneous review of
alternative plans. When an alternative plan is permitted, a new
submission fee shall be required.
B. Revisions and resubdivisions.
119. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 192-8 SOLID WASTE § 192-9
180:391
§ 192-10. Township records.
In accordance with state public records retention law, the Township shall
maintain records of the findings, decisions and recommendations of the
Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners regarding all subdivision
and land development plans. Such records shall be available to the public
for review in accordance with the state Right-to-Know Law.120
§ 192-11. Amendments.
(1) Revised plans:
(a) Until a submission is approved or rejected by the Board of
Commissioners, the applicant may withdraw the submission
and submit a revised plan following the submission and review
procedures which apply to that plan. For any submittal of a
revision of a previously submitted plan, the Township may
require the applicant to submit additional amounts into an
escrow account or other fees if needed based upon the
Township's expenditures on the review up to that time. If any
plan is withdrawn and a revised plan is submitted, then such
revised plan shall be considered a new submittal, and the
ninety-day maximum time period for Township action shall
restart after the first regular Planning Commission meeting
after such submittal of the revised plan.
(b) Alternate plan: See § 192-9A.
(2) A revision or resubdivision of a recorded plan or a final plan
approved by the Board of Commissioners shall be considered as a
new plan and shall comply with all of the regulations of this
chapter.
(3) If the Township staff determines that a revision of a previously
approved plan is only to correct erroneous data or minor omissions
or revise engineering details or supporting documentation, the
plan may be submitted under the simplified requirements and
procedures of § 192-41.
A. The regulations set forth in this chapter may, from time to time, be
amended by the Board of Commissioners, following the procedures of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,121 as amended,
including a Commissioners public hearing (with public notice required
by the Municipalities Planning Code) and the required legal
advertisement.
B. Reviews. The Township shall submit each proposed amendment (other
than an amendment prepared by or under the direction of the Planning
120. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
121. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 192-9 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-11
180:392
§ 192-12. Appeals.
Decisions of the Board of Commissioners may be appealed in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code122 as amended.
§ 192-13. Enforcement.
§ 192-14. Violations and penalties.
Commission) to the Planning Commission for recommendations at least
30 days prior to the date set for the Commissioners public hearing.
The Township shall submit any proposed amendment to the County
Planning Commission at least 30 days before the public hearing on such
amendment.
A. Inspectors. The Board of Commissioners shall authorize one or more
persons, which may include the Zoning Officer, Codes Officials and the
Township Engineer and his/her representatives, to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and the accompanying design standards and
improvement specifications.
B. Inspection. Any action under this chapter is subject to on-site inspection
by the Township or its authorized representatives to ensure compliance
with this chapter, other Township ordinances and the approved plans.
C. Remedies. Any action inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to an enforcement notice, which may include a cease
and desist order and other appropriate measures by the Board of
Commissioners or their authorized representatives.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated any
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Board of
Commissioners or their authorized representatives, pay a judgement of
not more than $500, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys
fees incurred by the municipality as a result thereof, unless a higher
penalty is established under state law. This shall include, but not be
limited to, any person, partnership or corporation that accomplishes
any act listed under § 192-4, Applicability, without following the
applicable procedures of this chapter.
B. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the district justice determining that there has
been a violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for
the person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have
believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be
deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
122. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 192-11 SOLID WASTE § 192-14
180:393
§ 192-15. Liability.
Neither the approval nor the granting of any building permit, floodplain
permit, site plan review, subdivision approval, land development approval,
zoning permit, erosion review, stormwater runoff review, wetland
delineation or wetland review, steep slope review or any other review or
permit of this chapter, involving any land governed by the provisions of
this chapter, by an officer, employee, consultant or agency of the Township
shall constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by
the Township or its employees, consultants, officials or agencies of the
practicality or safety of any structure, use or subdivision and shall create no
liability upon, nor a cause of action against any Township body, consultant,
official or employee for any damage that may result pursuant thereto.
§ 192-16. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that:
§ 192-17. Repealer.
All other Township ordinances or parts thereof that were adopted prior
to this chapter and are clearly in conflict with this chapter, including the
preexisting Lower Allen Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, as amended, except any provisions that are specifically
referenced by this chapter, are hereby repealed.
§ 192-18. Amendments to Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.
The provisions of this chapter that only repeat, summarize or reference
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code123 shall be
following the date of the determination of a violation by the district
justice, and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. Imprisonment shall not be authorized as
a penalty under this chapter.
C. See also the remedies provisions of § 192-3C of this chapter. All fines
collected for such violations shall be paid over to the Township.
A. If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provisions of this
chapter to be invalid or ineffective, in whole or in part, the effect of such
decision shall be limited to those provisions which are expressly stated
in the decision to be invalid or ineffective, and all other provisions of
this chapter shall continue to be separately and fully effective.
B. The Board of Commissioners hereby declares that it would have passed
this chapter and each section or part thereof irrespective of the fact
that any one or more sections or parts thereof be declared invalid.
123. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 192-14 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-18
180:394
deemed to be automatically superceded and replaced by any applicable
amendments to such provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code at the date such amendments become effective as state law.
§ 192-19. Land development requirements.
See § 192-30, regarding the requirements for a land development.
§ 192-20. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective five days after adoption by the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 192-18 SOLID WASTE § 192-20
180:395

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 192-21. General interpretation.
§ 192-22. Terms defined.
When used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the following meanings, unless expressly stated otherwise or unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application for
a subdivision or land development, including his/her heirs, successors and
assignees.
AVERAGE ANNUAL DAILY TRAFFIC (AADT) VOLUME — The total number
of motor vehicles traveling on a road or street during an average weekday,
other than a Friday, Saturday or Sunday.
BLOCK — A tract of land or a lot or group of lots, bounded by streets, public
parks, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses or bodies of water, boundary
lines of the Township or by any combination of the above.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners of Lower
Allen Township.
BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT — Shall have the same meaning as "lot
line adjustment."
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. This shall include all manufactured/mobile homes
and trailers used for human habitation.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, words and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as listed in § 192-22 of this chapter.
B. If a word is not defined by this chapter, but is defined by the Zoning
Ordinance,124 as amended, then the Zoning Ordinance definition shall
apply to this chapter. If a word is not defined in this chapter, but is
defined in the Stormwater Management Ordinance,125 then the
Stormwater Management Ordinance definition shall apply to this
chapter.
C. When the word "includes" is used, it shall mean "including but not
necessarily limited to."
D. Any word or term not defined in this article or the Zoning Ordinance
has a meaning of standard usage as determined by the Subdivision
Administrator, within the context of the word's use within the
applicable section of this chapter.
124. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
125. Editor's Note: See Ch. 184, Stormwater Management.
§ 192-21 SOLID WASTE § 192-22
180:397
CARTWAY — The paved portion of a street or highway designed for
vehicular traffic and paved areas intended for on-street parking.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular area required to be designed
at street intersections to avoid the placement of certain types of sight
obstructions. This triangular area is defined by lines along each street,
connected by a third longer leg of the triangle.
COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Lower Allen Township.
CONDOMINIUM — The definition in the State Uniform Condominium Act126
shall apply.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Cumberland County Conservation
District.
CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION — A development meeting the
requirements for such use as provided in the Zoning Ordinance.127
DAYS — Calendar days.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and its
successor agencies.
DEVELOPER (SUBDIVIDER) — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or
tenant with permission from a landowner who makes or causes to be made
a subdivision of land or land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the
placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling operations and the
subdivision of land, as well as sewage disposal systems and water supply
systems.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT — An agreement in a form and manner
acceptable to the Township requiring a developer to install the
improvements required by this chapter or which appear on the official
approved plans.
DWELLING TYPES — The definitions in the Township Zoning Ordinance128
shall apply.
EASEMENT — A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation,
a person, or group of persons, or another tract of land or a use of land for
specified purposes.
ENGINEER, PROFESSIONAL — A person licensed to practice as a
professional engineer in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ENGINEER, TOWNSHIP — The registered professional engineer
designated by the Board of Commissioners to perform all duties required of
the Township Engineer by the provisions of this chapter.
126. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
127. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
128. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 192-22 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-22
180:398
FINISHED GRADE — The proposed elevation of the land surface of a site
after the completion of all site preparation work.
FLOODPLAIN — See the Township Zoning Ordinance.129
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY — See "right-of-way, future."
GRADE — The elevation of ground or paving.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
The improvement of one or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving either or both of the following:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single principal
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
The following shall not, by themselves, be considered a land
development:
The construction of only one accessory agricultural building that
is not intended for the storage of animal wastes or the housing of
animals.
(1)
The conversion of a one- or two-family dwelling into a maximum of
three dwelling units.
(2)
The construction of structures, stormwater controls or parking lots
that do not involve any new building.
(3)
The construction or placement of residential accessory buildings/
structures.
(4)
The establishment of an allowed accessory use within an existing
building.
(5)
The conversion of an existing building into a single different
permitted use.
(6)
B.
The following are examples of applications that shall be considered a
land development:
A new principal building intended to be occupied by a
nonresidential use.
(1)
(2) A manufactured/mobile home park.
C.
129. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 192-22 SOLID WASTE § 192-22
180:399
LOT — A contiguous area of land within defined lot lines that is a distinct
and legally recorded separate parcel of land according to the official
records of the Cumberland County Recorder of Deeds.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT — The revision or deletion of one or more lot lines
in such a way that all of the following are true:
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A lot that abuts a public street on one side of
the lot, but has vehicular access only from a public street on the opposite
side of the lot.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — An agreement, in a form and manner
acceptable to the Board of Commissioners, requiring the developer of
required improvements to make any repairs or reconstructions and to
maintain such improvements for a certain period.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Financial security which is acceptable to
the Township to secure the promise made by a developer in the
maintenance agreement that required improvements shall be maintained
by the developer. (Note: These guaranties typically include irrevocable
letters of credit, performance bonds, escrow agreements and other similar
collateral or surety agreements.)
MAJOR AND MINOR SUBDIVISIONS — See "subdivision, major" and
"subdivision, minor."
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME SPACE — An area of land in a
manufactured/mobile home park, improved with the utilities and other
improvements needed for the placement of a single manufactured/mobile
home, with the land leased or rented by the park owner to the occupants of
the mobile home.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (MPC) — The Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.131
(3) An apartment building.
(4) Multiple residential buildings on a single lot.
See § 192-30A, which states which type of land developments need a
preliminary plan.
D.
A. No new lots will be created beyond what was previously approved;
No additional street segments or changes in alignment are proposed
other than what was previously approved;
B.
No additional nonconformities will be created nor existing
nonconformities expanded under the Township Zoning Ordinance;130
and
C.
No new land development will occur other than land development that
was previously approved or buildings to support crop farming.
D.
130. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
131. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 192-22 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-22
180:400
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOODPLAIN — Also known as "one-percentannual-
chance flood," areas designated as being within the one-hundredyear
floodplain on official federal floodplain mapping. Such mapping is
generally intended to show areas that have a one-percent chance of being
flooded each year.
OPEN SPACE — The area of a lot unoccupied by principal or accessory
structures, streets, driveways or parking areas but may include areas
occupied by walkways, play equipment and other noncommercial outdoor
recreation facilities.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — Permanently preserved open space that meets
the applicable requirements of the Zoning Ordinance132 and common open
space provisions of § 192-60 of this chapter. See also "recreation land."
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — Common open space owned by a government
agency or the Township for public recreation.
ORDINANCE, THIS — The Lower Allen Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, as amended, and any provisions thereof, enacted
by the Board of Commissioners.
PATHWAY — A pedestrian accessway which is not adjacent to a street or
access drive and conforms with this chapter.
PENNDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Financial security which is acceptable to
the Board of Commissioners to ensure that the developer will install
required improvements. (Note: This typically includes irrevocable letters of
credit, performance bonds, escrow agreements and other similar collateral
or surety agreements.)
PLAN — A map of a land development or subdivision and accompanying
notations.
PLANNING COMMISSION — See "commission."
PUBLIC MEETING, REGULAR PLANNING COMMISSION — A regular
meeting of the Planning Commission at which the Commission is authorized
to conduct official action and which has been scheduled based upon an
SKETCH PLAN — An informal plan, identified with the title "sketch
plan" on the plan, indicating the general layout of the proposed
subdivision or land development.
A.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — A complete plan identified with the title
"preliminary plan," accurately showing proposed streets and lot layout
and such other information as required by this chapter.
B.
FINAL PLAN — A complete and exact plan identified with the title "final
plan," including the plan prepared for official recording as required by
this chapter to define property rights and proposed streets and other
improvements.
C.
132. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 192-22 SOLID WASTE § 192-22
180:401
annual meeting schedule (as may be adjusted by the Chairperson) and
which is not a workshop meeting.
PUBLIC NOTICE — As defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.133
RECREATION LAND — Land that is set aside for noncommercial recreation
uses and that complies with § 192-60 of this chapter.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A system designed to collect, treat and
dispose of sewage from users in compliance with regulations of
Pennsylvania DEP and the Township.
SIDEWALK — A pedestrian accessway which is adjacent to a street or
access drive and conforms to the regulations of this chapter.
SOIL SURVEY — The latest version of the official Soil Survey of Cumberland
County, published by the U.S. Natural Resource (formerly "Soil")
Conservation Service, or more updated and detailed information prepared
by such agency.
STATE or COMMONWEALTH — The government of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and its relevant subparts.
STATE PLANNING CODE — See the Municipalities Planning Code.134
STEEP SLOPE — An area of fifteen-percent-or-greater slope.
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal
means of access to abutting property or that is a limited access highway,
but not including an alley or a driveway.
STREET CLASSIFICATIONS — See the definitions in § 192-57.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A type of street which is terminated at one end
by a permitted turnaround and which intersects another street at the other
end.
STREET, FRONTAGE OR SERVICE — A type of local street which is parallel
and adjacent to collector or arterial streets and provides access to abutting
properties.
CENTRAL SEWAGE SERVICE — Service by a sewage disposal system
which collects, treats and disposes sewage from more than one lot.
PUBLIC SEWAGE SERVICE — Central sewage service with the
mains and the treatment facility owned or operated by a
municipality, a public authority or the county.
(1)
PRIVATE CENTRAL SEWAGE SERVICE — Central sewage service
that does not meet the definition of "public sewage service."
(2)
A.
ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage disposal system which collects,
treats and disposes of sewage or holds sewage from only one lot.
B.
133. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
134. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 192-22 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-22
180:402
STREET, PRIVATE — A street that is not owned or maintained by the state
or the Township.
STREET, STUB — A street or portion of a street with only one vehicular
outlet, but which has a temporary turnaround and which is designed to be
continued when adjacent land is subdivided or developed.
SUBDIVIDER — See "developer."
SUBDIVISION — The definition in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended,135 shall apply. As of the enactment date of this chapter,
this definition was as follows:
SUBDIVISION ADMINISTRATOR or PLANS ADMINISTRATOR — The
staffperson(s) charged by the Board of Commissioners with the
responsibility of administering the subdivision application submission
procedure. Said staffpersons shall be the Township Engineer and Zoning
Officer of Lower Allen Township to and until the Board of Commissioners by
resolution shall designate an alternative person.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision of land which does not qualify as
a "minor subdivision."
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A proposal involving land, other than a land
development, which is either:
The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means
into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to
heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development.
A.
The subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into a parcel
of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or residential dwellings, is not a subdivision.
B.
A. A lot line adjustment; or
A subdivision:
That results in up to three total single-family detached residential
lots (including the existing lot and up to two new lots);
(1)
Which does not involve an extension or new segment of a street
(other than what was previously approved), except that a minor
subdivision may utilize a private street if it meets the requirements
of § 192-57 regarding private streets; and
(2)
Which has not involved the final subdivision approval of two or
more new lots from the same parent tract since after the enactment
date of this chapter.
(3)
B.
135. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 192-22 SOLID WASTE § 192-22
180:403
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE — The Lower Allen Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance, as amended.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — In the judgment of the Township
Engineer, at least 90%. (based upon the cost of the required improvements
for which financial security was posted) of those improvements required
as a condition for final approval have been completed in accordance with
the approved plan, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or
operated for its intended use.
TOWNSHIP — Lower Allen Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
Unless otherwise stated, this shall mean the Board of Commissioners and
their authorized agents.
TOWNSHIP AUTHORITY — The Lower Allen Township Authority or its
successor entity.
USGS — United States Geological Survey or its successor agency.
VEHICLE TRIP — A vehicle movement in one direction with the origin or
destination within the study area.
WALKWAY — A strip of land, including a right-of-way dedicated to public use
in order to facilitate pedestrian and bicycle access through or into a block.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial waterway, stream, river, creek,
ditch, channel, millrace, canal, conduit, gully, ravine or wash in which water
flows in a definite direction or course, either continuously or intermittently,
and which has a definite channel and bed and shall include any area
adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow of floodwaters.
WATER, CENTRAL SYSTEM OR SERVICE — Service by a water system
which transmits water from a common source to more than one lot.
WATER, ON-LOT SYSTEM OR SERVICE — Service by a water system which
transmits water from a source on the lot to only one lot.
WATER PUBLIC SYSTEM OR SERVICE — Central water service that is
owned and/or operated by a municipal authority or a Pennsylvania PUC
regulated water company.
A.
WATER, PRIVATE SYSTEM OR SERVICE — Central water service that
does not meet the definition of "public water service."
B.
§ 192-22 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-22
180:404
ARTICLE III
General Procedures
§ 192-23. Purpose.
This article summarizes the general procedures for the submission and
review of proposed subdivisions and land developments. This article is only
a general explanation and is not binding on the Township or an applicant.
See the actual provisions of the other articles of this chapter.
§ 192-24. General procedure for subdivisions and land
developments.
A. Review and approval stages. Three types of plan submissions are
established: sketch, preliminary and final, as outlined below.
Type of Proposed Subdivision or Land
Development(1)
Stage
Article
of This
Chapter
Land
Development
Major
Subdivision
Minor
Subdivision or
Lot Line
Adjustment
Sketch plan IV Recommended Recommended(5)Recommended
Preliminary
plan(3)
V Required(4) Required(3) Not required
Final plan VI Required Required Required(2)
Guarantee of
improvements
installation
See Article VIII
Recording of
final plan
See Article IX
NOTES:
(1) See definitions in Article II.
(2) See Article VII for minor subdivision final plan submission and
review requirements. See § 192-41 for submission requirements
for a lot line adjustment.
(3) At their option, the Board of Commissioners may grant a waiver
of the preliminary plan requirement if the plan submission meets
the requirements of a final plan submission.
(4) Except where exempted by § 192-30.
(5) If applicant chooses to use the conservation subdivision option, a
sketch plan is required.
B. Sketch plan. While a sketch plan is not required, it is strongly
recommended that it be filed to allow the applicant to consult early and
informally with the Township staff and Planning Commission before
§ 192-23 SOLID WASTE § 192-24
180:405
§ 192-25. General plan submission procedures.
preparing a preliminary plan. This will often avoid expensive redesign
and delay to the applicant.
C. Preliminary plan. Preliminary plans are required to be submitted for
any major subdivision and for certain land developments, as described
above.
D. Final plan. After approval of the preliminary plan of a major subdivision
or certain land developments, and to obtain approval of a minor
subdivision, the applicant must file a final plan. A final plan must be
approved prior to recording of the plans at the County Recorder of
Deeds Office and prior to the sale of any lots or the construction of any
buildings. (See Article IX.)
E. Guarantee of improvements installation. Where improvements are
required by this chapter, the Township will require that the applicant
enter into a development agreement, including the posting of financial
security sufficient to guarantee the costs of any improvements which
may be required. See Article VIII.
A. Submission. Sketch, preliminary and final plans and all required
accompanying information are required to be submitted to the
Township staff.
B. Completeness. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to
recommend rejection by the Board of Commissioners or to table an
application that the Commission determines is significantly incomplete.
C. Attendance. The applicant or his/her duly authorized representative
should attend the Commission meeting to discuss the filed plans. The
Commission may request such attendance. If the applicant fails to
appear when so requested at a meeting where the plans will be
considered, it may result in plan disapproval, if the Township
determines that it resulted in insufficient information to render a
decision.
D. Action by the Commission and the Board of Commissioners. The
Planning Commission advises the Board of Commissioners on proposed
plans. There are time limits in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code136 for approval of a subdivision or land development, unless the
applicant grants a time extension.
136. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 192-24 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-25
180:406
ARTICLE IV
Sketch Plan
§ 192-26. Pre-plan consultation.
Prior to submitting a sketch plan, applicants are encouraged to informally
discuss their proposal with the Township staff. See also discussion of a site
inspection in § 192-29.
§ 192-27. Sketch plan submission requirements.
Prior to the submission of a preliminary plan, applicants are very strongly
encouraged to submit a sketch plan. A sketch plan review often allows
an applicant to save substantial time and engineering costs because many
concerns about layout and issues concerning Township ordinances can be
resolved prior to detailed engineering. This can often reduce the need
for future redesign at a more detailed stage, thereby saving the applicant
significant money and time. When submitted, sketch plans shall include the
following information:
A. Submission requirement. If submitted, 17 print copies of the sketch
plan and the accompanying application should be submitted to the
Township staff prior to a regular Township Planning Commission
meeting. It is strongly encouraged that a sketch plan be provided at
least 30 days before a Planning Commission meeting where it will be
discussed.
B. Drawing requirements. Any sketch plan shall be drafted to approximate
scale, shall be clearly labeled as "sketch plan only" and is recommended
to include the following, as applicable:
(1) Boundary line of the development.
(2) Existing Resources and Site Analysis Map:
(a) Existing contour lines and identification of any slopes of 15% to
25%, and greater than 25%.
(b) The locations of watercourses (with any name), natural
springs, ponds, lakes and wetlands.
(c) Rock outcrops, stone fields, sinkholes and topical depressions.
(d) Location of any areas within the one-hundred-year floodplain.
(e) Approximate locations and abbreviated names of soil types,
according to the County Soil Survey (or more detailed
professional study) with identification of those that are alluvial,
hydric, have a depth to bedrock of less than three feet or a
seasonally high water table of less than three feet. If such soils
do not exist, that shall be stated on the plan.
(f) Ridgelines and watershed boundaries.
§ 192-26 SOLID WASTE § 192-27
180:407
(g) Area and location of any proposed common open space, with a
description of the rationale used to locate the open spaces.
(h) If any common open space is proposed; method of ownership
and entity proposed to be responsible for maintenance.
(i) If any common open space is proposed: description of intended
purposes and uses.
(j) Any proposed trails, existing trails and trail easements.
(k) Buildings of historical significance that could be impacted by
the project, with name and description.
(l) Existing and proposed utility easements and restrictive
covenants and easements for purposes which might affect
development (stating which easements and rights-of-way
proposed for dedication to the municipality).
(m) Locations of treelines and existing forested areas, with a
description of the approximate average trunk diameter of the
older trees on the tract (such as "less than 12 inches").
(n) Locations of individual mature trees of greater than 18 inches
in trunk diameter measured at a height of three feet above the
surrounding average ground level, other than trees within
forested areas and treelines (not required for areas that will
not be affected by the proposed plan, if so noted on the plan).
(o) Areas of existing mature woods that are proposed to be
protected and preserved or removed.
(p) An identification of scenic views onto the tract and from the
tract.
(q) Proposed access onto existing streets.
(3) Conceptual proposed lot and street layout with approximate areas
of lots (such as "two acres").
(4) Site data, including:
(a) Acreage of the entire tract.
(b) Number of lots and types of dwelling units (if residential).
(c) Zoning district, including any overlay districts, and applicable
lot area and setback requirements.
(5) North point and scale and a tentative name of the project.
(6) Approximate proposed locations of any nonresidential buildings
and statement of the general proposed types of any nonresidential
uses.
§ 192-27 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-27
180:408
§ 192-28. Sketch plan review procedures.
(7) A map showing the general location of the project in relation to
nearby streets and creeks.
(8) Tentative approximate locations of any stormwater detention
basins, best management practices and stormwater drainage
channels.
(9) For residential developments, whether the applicant proposes to
dedicate recreation land or provide fees in lieu of land, if required.
(10) Note stating the general methods of providing water and sewer
service, including sufficient information to show the general
feasibility of any proposed nonpublic central sewer service.
(11) Names of any adjacent nonresidential uses and any zoning district
boundaries in the area.
(12)Name and address of person responsible for the preparation of the
plan and the date of preparation.
(13) Statement of the proposed uses of the land.
(14) Plans should be of a standard size, such as 18 inches by 24 inches,
and should be a maximum of 24 inches by 36 inches.
C. Overlay. As part of a preliminary plan application, accurate mapping is
required of natural features of the tract. Applicants are encouraged to
submit this same accurate natural feature mapping as part of the sketch
plan. Applicants are also encouraged to show a conceptual sketch of the
proposed development on a transparent overlay over this map of
natural features.
D. Conservation design process. See § 192-33, which requires applicants
for certain subdivisions and land developments to submit maps showing
how their project follows the conservation design process. Applicants
choosing the conservation subdivision option are required to submit
these maps as part of the sketch plan process, to avoid delays to the
applicant in preliminary plan approval. Submittal at the sketch plan
stage will greatly increase the likelihood that all issues will be able to
be resolved in time to meet the standard ninety-day time clock for
approval of a preliminary plan, without needing time extensions.
A. No official action shall be taken on a sketch plan. The Township shall
not be bound by comments made or not made as part of a sketch plan
review.
B. The Township should distribute copies of the sketch plan to the
Township Engineer, the relevant Township staff and the Planning
Commission for advisory reviews.
§ 192-27 SOLID WASTE § 192-28
180:409
C. The sketch plan should be reviewed by the Planning Commission and
the Board of Commissioners, with any comments reported to the
applicant or his/her representative. It is recommended that the
following matters be emphasized in a review of a sketch plan:
(1) The suitability of areas proposed for development and areas
proposed as open space, considering the process of § 192-33.
(2) The most suitable methods of providing street access, including
access points onto existing streets, and possible interconnections
with existing streets or streets within approved developments.
(3) Methods to reduce the total percentage of the site that will be
regraded, paved or deforested.
D. If the sketch plan proposes to include three or more dwelling units, then
a copy of the plan should be provided to the Township Recreation and
Park Board for a review of whether open space or recreation fees
should be required.
E. If the applicant chooses the conservation subdivision option, a field
view at the project site to review the sketch plan with the Planning
Commission is required, unless such requirement is waived by action of
the Planning Commission.
§ 192-28 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-28
180:410
ARTICLE V
Preliminary Plans for Major Subdivisions and Certain Land
Developments
§ 192-29. Initial steps.
§ 192-30. Submission and review procedure.
A. Presubmission consultation. As described in § 192-26, applicants are
encouraged to informally discuss their proposals with applicable
Township staff before preparing engineered plans.
B. Design process. See § 192-33, which requires that applicants for certain
types of applications must show compliance with the specified design
process at the time of a sketch plan, preliminary plan or conditional use
application. Applicants are strongly encouraged to meet this
requirement at the earliest submittal made to the Township.
C. Site tour. Applicants are very strongly encouraged to cooperate in an
on-site tour of the property by Township officials. See the language in
the application form that requests permission for a site tour. This site
tour should be scheduled as soon as possible after the applicant has
provided copies of a map of existing conditions. At best, this would
occur after a sketch plan has been submitted, but before preliminary
plans have been completed.
(1) This site tour is intended to informally:
(a) Familiarize Township officials with the property's existing
features, particularly including scenic views and the site's
relationship to surrounding areas;
(b) Identify potential site design issues that will need to be
addressed; and
(c) Discuss site design concepts, including the general layout of
proposed development and open spaces.
(2) Comments made during the site visit shall not be binding upon the
Township, and no formal action or recommendation shall be made
during the site visit.
D. Sketch plan. Prior to the submission of a preliminary plan, applicants
are very strongly encouraged to submit a sketch plan, prepared in
accordance with the requirements of § 192-27. A sketch plan review
often allows an applicant to save substantial time and engineering costs
because many concerns about layout and issues concerning Township
ordinances can be resolved prior to detailed engineering. This can often
reduce the need for future redesign at a more detailed stage, thereby
saving the applicant significant money and time. No official action is
required on a sketch plan, so it will not delay the submittal of a
preliminary plan.
§ 192-29 SOLID WASTE § 192-30
180:411
A. Preliminary plan submission required.
(1) A preliminary plan submission for a major subdivision or land
development (except as provided in Subsection A(2) below)
meeting all of the requirements of this article shall be filed by the
applicant and reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
(2) A preliminary plan submission is not required for the following
applications, which instead shall meet the requirements of Article
VII:
(a) A minor subdivision (as defined in Article II); or
(b) A submission that only involves a lot line adjustment (as
defined in Article II) or minor adjustments to a previously
approved plan as specified in § 192-41; or
(c) A land development that involves only one principal
nonresidential building or addition of less than 10,000 square
feet of building floor area on one lot without any additional
dwelling units.
B. Required submission.
(1) The applicant shall file with the Township staff, at least 30 calendar
days prior to a regular Planning Commission meeting; the required
fees and the information and plans required under § 192-31. Any
subsequent submittal of revised plans shall be submitted at least 12
days before a Planning Commission meeting where the plans are
intended to be reviewed, unless permission is granted for a later
submittal by the Township Engineer or Planning Commission,
particularly when a revision only involves minor technical changes
or corrections. These deadlines may be revised by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners.
(2) The staff shall forward applicable plans to the following agencies to
seek their comments prior to preliminary plan approval:
(a) Township Authority or Sewage Enforcement Officer (if
applicable);
(b) Public Safety Department;
(c) The Township Park and Recreation Board (layout, natural
features and grading plan only; if recreation land or common
open space is proposed or if deemed appropriate by the
Township staff);
(d) The Township Planning Commission, with such information
provided prior to or at the first regularly scheduled Planning
Commission meeting after a proper submission; and
§ 192-30 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-30
180:412
(e) The County Planning Commission.
(3) Applicant's distribution. The applicant is fully responsible for the
following:
(a) Contacting the appropriate utility authorities/companies, as
appropriate, including the water supplier;
(b) Seeking at least an informal review by PennDOT of any
proposed access onto a state road, and providing PennDOT
with sufficient information for such a review;
(c) Determining whether any permits or approvals are needed
from any agency outside of the Township, including PaDEP and
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers;
(d) Providing a copy of the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Plan (ESPCP) to the County Conservation District, together
with its required review fees, if any earth disturbance is
proposed, unless the applicant states, in writing, in a signed
letter to the Township that earth disturbance will not occur
until approval of the final plan, in which case the ESPCP may
be submitted at final plan stage;
(e) Providing copies to adjacent municipalities if any portion of a
subdivision or land development is within the boundary of that
municipality;
(f) Providing the County Planning Commission review fees to the
Township with the plan submission;
(g) Providing copies and making submittals to the Township and
review agencies as required under PaDEP's sewage planning
module process, if applicable.
(4) Each preliminary plan and supporting documents should
incorporate any revisions recommended by the Planning
Commission, the Township Engineer and other appropriate
Township Officials during any sketch plan review.
(5) Colored layout plan. It is recommended that the applicant provide
one copy of the layout plan that is colored to highlight major
features such as paving, trees, waterways, streets, wetlands and
building locations to allow clear understanding by the general
public at public meetings.
(6) Revisions. A detailed list of revisions and response to each
comment from a previously submitted plan shall be provided
whenever a revised plan is submitted. The developer's plan
preparer shall certify that the list of revisions is complete.
C. Determination of completeness of the submission.
§ 192-30 SOLID WASTE § 192-30
180:413
(1) Based upon the initial review by the Township staff and/or the
Township Engineer, the Planning Commission shall have authority,
at its first regularly scheduled meeting after the submission is filed
in a timely fashion, to determine that a submission is incomplete
and therefore to refuse to review the submission further and to do
one of the following:
(a) Not accept the submission, indicating deficiencies in writing,
and return the fee (minus the costs of any Township review) to
the applicant.
(b) Accept the submission as being filed for review on the
condition that the applicant shall file such additional required
materials and information to the staff or appropriate agency or
person by a specific deadline.
(c) Table the acceptance of the submission until the next Planning
Commission meeting after the applicant has met all of the
submittal requirements within the required time period prior
to the meeting. The ninety-day time limit for action shall not
begin until the plan is accepted as complete.
(d) Recommend that the plan be rejected by the Board of
Commissioners for just cause, such as the submission being
significantly incomplete.
(2) If the Commission determines that the submission is complete, as
filed and as required, the Commission shall accept the plans and
may begin its review.
(3) Zoning variances and approvals.
(a) Applications for a subdivision or land development shall
comply with the Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended. An
application under the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance shall not be considered to be complete for the
purposes of starting the state-mandated ninety-day time limit if
one or more zoning variances or special exception or
conditional use zoning approval will be required for the
subdivision or land development to legally occur as submitted,
until such time as the needed zoning variances and approvals
have been granted. During this time, the application may still
be reviewed by the Township.
[1] If a zoning variance or special exception or conditional use
approval is needed for the plan to be completed as
submitted, and such approval has not been granted, then
the Board of Commissioners shall have sufficient grounds
to deny approval of the application under this chapter.
[2] At the discretion of the Board of Commissioners, a
subdivision or land development may be approved
§ 192-30 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-30
180:414
conditioned upon the later approval of a zoning variance,
special exception or conditional use.
(b) A subdivision or land development approval shall not be
delayed because of a court appeal of a zoning variance, special
exception or conditional use that was granted to the developer.
Instead, satisfactory resolution of such appeal shall be a
condition for approval under this chapter. If a developer
appeals a zoning variance, special exception approval or
conditional use approval that was not granted to him/her, then
Subsection C(3)(a) above shall still apply.
D. Review by Township staff.
(1) Review by Township Engineer.
(a) After the plans are duly submitted for review, unless granted
an extension by the Planning Commission or unless the plans
are incomplete, the Township Engineer should review the
engineering considerations of the preliminary plan and
prepare one or more reports on such considerations to the
Planning Commission.
(b) The Township Engineer may make additional reports and
recommendations to the Planning Commission and the Board
of Commissioners during review of the plan.
(c) The applicant and/or his/her engineer shall make reasonable
efforts to resolve technical engineering considerations outside
of and prior to Planning Commission meetings. The Township
Engineer may require the applicant or his/her engineer to meet
with him/her for this purpose.
(d) A copy of findings of the Township Engineer should be sent to
the applicant or his/her representative by the Township staff.
(2) Review by Township Zoning Officer.
(a) After the plans are duly submitted for review, unless granted
an extension by the Planning Commission or unless the plans
are incomplete, the Zoning Officer should review the zoning
considerations of the preliminary plan and prepare one or
more reports on such considerations to the Planning
Commission.
(b) The Zoning Officer may make additional reports and
recommendations to the Planning Commission and the Board
of Commissioners during review of the plan.
(c) The applicant and/or his/her engineer shall make reasonable
efforts to resolve zoning considerations outside of and prior to
Planning Commission meetings. The Zoning Officer may
§ 192-30 SOLID WASTE § 192-30
180:415
require the applicant or his/her engineer to meet with him/her
for this purpose.
(d) A copy of findings of the Zoning Officer should be sent to the
applicant or his/her representative by the Township staff.
E. Review by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission should
accomplish the following within the time limitations of the State
Planning Code (unless the applicant grants a written time extension),
while allowing a sufficient number of days within this deadline for a
decision by the Board of Commissioners.
(1) Review applicable reports received from any official reviewing
agencies.
(2) Provide a recommendation regarding whether the preliminary plan
submission meets the requirements of this chapter and other
applicable ordinances.
(3) Recommend any revisions to the submission that are needed to
comply with this chapter or that would generally improve the plan.
(4) Recommend approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the
preliminary plan submission in a written report to the Board of
Commissioners that should specify any recommended conditions
for approval, identify defects found in the application, describe
requirements which have not been met and cite the provisions of
the ordinance relied upon.
(5) Offer recommendations on waivers and modifications requested by
the applicant.
F. Review and action by Board of Commissioners. The Board of
Commissioners shall:
(1) Review the report of the Planning Commission and any reports that
have been received from reviewing agencies;
(2) Determine whether the preliminary plan submission meets the
requirements of this chapter and other ordinances;
(3) Approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the preliminary plan
submission within the time limits required by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.137 As of adoption date of this
chapter, this law requires:
(a) The Board of Commissioners to act not later than 90 days
following the date of the first regular meeting of the Planning
Commission held after the preliminary plan has been properly
filed for review, but in no case shall the Board of
Commissioners' decision be made later than 90 days following
137. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 192-30 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-30
180:416
the date the submission was accepted as being filed for review,
unless the applicant grants a written extension of time; and
(b) That no subdivision or land development shall be granted final
approval until a report is received from the County Planning
Commission or until the expiration of 30 days from the date the
application was forwarded to the County Planning
Commission, whichever comes first.
G. Decision by Board of Commissioners.
(1) The decision of the Board of Commissioners shall be in writing and
shall be communicated to the applicant or agent for the applicant
personally or by mail or as otherwise allowed by state law at his/her
last known address not later than 15 days following the decision.
(2) Approval of the preliminary plan submission shall constitute
conditional approval of the subdivision or land development as to
the character and intensity, but shall not constitute approval of the
final plan nor authorize the sale of lots or construction of buildings.
(3) If the preliminary plan submission is disapproved, the decision
shall specify defects found in the submission, describe
requirements which have not been met and cite the provisions of
the statute or ordinance relied upon in each case.
(4) At the discretion of the Board of Commissioners, the Board may
waive the requirement to submit a preliminary plan if the
preliminary plan submission also meets all of the requirements of a
final plan submission and the Board determines that there are no
significant outstanding matters regarding the plan.
(5) Acceptance of conditions. If conditions are placed upon an
approval, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant, in writing,
to accept or reject the conditions within a maximum of five days
after the date of receipt of the decision. If the applicant fails to
accept or reject the conditions within such time period, then it shall
be presumed that the applicant has accepted all of the conditions
upon the approval. If the applicant rejects any condition, then the
approval shall be rescinded, unless a decision of a court determines
such condition was not valid.
H. Final plan submission deadline.
(1) An applicant shall file a final plan within five years from the date of
the approval of the preliminary plan by the Board of
Commissioners.
(2) Failure to comply with this requirement shall render the
preliminary plan null and void, and a new preliminary plan
submission and approval shall be required.
I. Development in stages. See § 192-35H.
§ 192-30 SOLID WASTE § 192-31
180:417
§ 192-31. Preliminary plan requirements.
See § 192-30, regarding when a preliminary plan is required.
§ 192-32. Certification.
All certification shall comply with the state professional licensing laws. All
subdivisions of land shall be certified and stamped by a registered land
surveyor. At least one set of all plans provided to the Township, including
revisions, shall bear original signatures and original seals of plan preparers,
and applicant's notarized signature, which shall be marked as a "Township
File Copy."
§ 192-33. Design process.
As part of the submittal of a sketch plan, preliminary plan or conditional
use, whichever comes first, for a major subdivision or land development
that involves over three acres of land for a nonresidential project or six or
more dwelling units for a residential project, the applicant shall provide the
following mapping and demonstrate to the Planning Commission that the
following process was followed in designing the proposed development.
A. All of the following information and materials listed in this section are
required as part of all preliminary plans for any land development and
any major subdivision.
(1) This list of requirements shall serve both:
(a) To establish the requirements; and
(b) As a checklist for the applicant and the Township to use to
ensure completeness of submissions.
(2) The applicant shall submit completed photocopies of the § 192-31D
checklist as part of the application.
B. The required information listed in this section may be combined or
separated onto different sheets, provided that all information is clearly
readable.
C. Deferral of information. See § 192-7C(2), which may allow an applicant
to defer submitting of engineering details from the preliminary to the
final plan stage.
D. Preliminary plan for Major Subdivisions or Land Developments
Checklist and List of Submittal Requirements.138
A. Applicants are strongly encouraged to submit these sketches as part of
the sketch plan process to avoid delays to the applicant in preliminary
plan approval. Submittal at the sketch plan stage will greatly increase
the likelihood that all issues will be able to be resolved in time to meet
138. Editor's Note: Said checklist is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 192-31 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-33
180:418
the standard ninety-day time clock for approval of a preliminary plan,
without needing time extensions.
B. This process is intended to demonstrate how the special features of the
property relate to resource areas on adjacent lands and how the
development will properly relate to the features of the land that are
most worthy of conservation. See the Existing Resources and Site
Analysis Map provisions in § 192-31D. Existing conditions shall be
accurately mapped. For the sole purposes of meeting this section, the
mapping of proposed development may be at a sketch plan level of
detail.
(1) Delineation of recreation land and any common open space. Using
the map of Existing Resources and Site Analysis Map, the applicant
shall delineate areas that are proposed to be preserved as
recreation land if required by § 192-60 of this chapter or common
open space if required by the Zoning Ordinance139 and/or otherwise
through conservation easements.
(a) If a conservation subdivision is proposed, then the applicant
shall show compliance with the applicable requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to the following:
[1] Providing calculations of the minimum percent and
acreage of required common open space, which shall be
submitted at the sketch plan stage or the preliminary plan
stage, whichever submission occurs first.
[2] Proposed common open space shall be designated using
the Existing Resources and Site Analysis Map as a base
map. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with
applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and
§ 192-60 of this chapter. One-hundred-year floodplains,
wetlands and slopes over 25% shall be shown.
[3] The proposed common open space shall maximize
opportunities to interconnect open spaces with important
natural features and common open space on neighboring
properties. (See the context map in Section 192-31.) The
applicant should consider the mapping of conservation
areas in the Comprehensive Plan, unless or until a more
detailed map is prepared for Lower Allen Township.
[4] In delineating other proposed conservation areas, the
applicant shall prioritize natural and cultural resources on
the tract in terms of their highest to least suitabilities for
inclusion in the proposed common open space in
consultation with the Planning Commission and in
accordance with § 192-60 of this chapter and applicable
sections of the Zoning Ordinance. The highest priority
139. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 192-33 SOLID WASTE § 192-33
180:419
shall be given to open space and trails that can link into
existing or approved adjacent public recreation land or
that will preserve stream corridors.
[5] On the basis of those priorities and practical
considerations given to the tract's configuration, its
context in relation to resource areas on adjoining and
neighboring properties, and the applicant's subdivision
objectives, proposed conservation areas shall be
delineated to meet at least any minimum area percentage
requirements for common open space and in a manner
clearly indicating their boundaries as well as the types of
resources included within them.
(b) If a conservation subdivision is not proposed, the applicant
shall show measures that will be used to minimize impacts
upon important natural features. The applicant shall show that
every reasonable effort has been made to locate development
to avoid the slopes over 25%, one-hundred-year floodplain and
wetlands and minimize impact upon other important
conservation areas. In addition to meeting any requirement for
common open space, important natural features should also be
protected as part of individual lots (such as large rear yards
and/or through conservation easements).
(2) Potential development areas concept map. Based upon
consideration of the existing features map and the natural features
and conservation areas described above, the potential development
areas shall be mapped. These potential development areas are
areas that are best suited for the majority of the development on
the tract.
(3) Location of home sites. In respect of the natural features and other
conservation areas described above, the approximate proposed
locations of new homes/principal buildings shall then be selected. It
is recognized that on-lot sewage disposal system suitability needs
to influence these choices when on-lot systems are used. Proposed
development shall be carefully located and designed to minimize
impacts upon natural features and other conservation areas.
(a) While the mapping of existing features required by this section
is required to be accurate and to scale, the locations of
proposed home sites, lot lines, roads and trails may be at a
sketch plan level of detail for the purposes of complying with
this section.
(b) The applicant shall provide a written and graphic analysis of
how the proposed development will respect and incorporate
the important resources of the site and be coordinated with
resources, open space/trail corridors and views on surrounding
§ 192-33 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-33
180:420
properties. This may involve an overlay map that shows
important natural features and proposed development.
(4) Layout of streets and trails. A sketch of the tentative street layout
shall then be designed to serve the appropriate building sites.
Trails should also be considered to link together common open
spaces, clusters of homes and other destinations (such as nearby
stores, parks and schools). Building sites should be clustered
together to minimize wetland impacts and the number of stream
crossings by roads. See the proposed trail network on the
Township's Official Map.
(5) Drawing the lot lines. Tentative lot lines should then be drawn on
the site to encompass the proposed building sites, to result in a
development concept plan. Once this sketch is prepared, then more
detailed engineering may be completed.
§ 192-33 SOLID WASTE § 192-33
180:421

ARTICLE VI
Final Plans for Subdivisions and Certain Land Developments
§ 192-34. Applicability.
This article lists the requirements for final plans for a major subdivision or
any land development, except that a land development that only involves
the following may be submitted under the simplified requirements of Article
VII:
§ 192-35. Submission and review procedure.
A. A lot line adjustment;
B. A single nonresidential building or building addition of up to 10,000
square feet of building floor area with no new dwelling units on an
existing lot; or
C. Minor corrections or minor revisions to a previously approved plan as
specified in § 192-41.
A. Final plan submission required.
(1) A final plan submission for each major subdivision or land
development must be filed by the applicant and reviewed in
accordance with the provisions of this Article VI.
(2) A final plan shall only be submitted after a preliminary plan has
been approved by the Board of Commissioners, if a preliminary
plan is required.
B. Final plan submission deadline. An applicant shall file a final plan
submission within five years from the date of the approval of the
preliminary plan by the Board of Commissioners. Failure to comply with
this requirement shall render the preliminary plan submission null and
void, and a new preliminary plan submission must be filed under any
currently applicable ordinances.
C. Filing and distribution.
(1) The applicant shall file with the Township staff at least 30 calendar
days prior to a regular Planning Commission meeting:
(a) The required fees; and
(b) The information and plans required under § 192-36.
(2) Any subsequent submittal of revised plans shall be submitted at
least 12 days before a Planning Commission meeting where the
plans are intended to be reviewed, unless permission is granted for
a later submittal by the Township Engineer or Planning
Commission. These deadlines may be revised by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners.
§ 192-34 SOLID WASTE § 192-35
180:423
(3) The Township staff shall forward applicable plans to the following
agencies to seek their comments prior to final plan approval:
(a) Township Authority or Sewage Enforcement Officer (if
applicable);
(b) Township Public Safety Department;
(c) The Township Planning Commission, with such information
provided at or before the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the Commission; and
(d) The County Planning Commission for review.
(4) Applicant's distribution. It is the applicant's responsibility to:
(a) Make agreements with the appropriate utility companies;
(b) Submit a complete application to PennDOT for any needed
permit for access to or work within a state road right-of-way;
(c) Provide information to PaDEP or other agencies for any
permits that might be required;
(d) Submit a copy of the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Plan to the County Conservation District, and pay their
required review fees, if earth disturbance is proposed, and if
such erosion control plan was not approved at the preliminary
plan level;
(e) Pay the fees required by the County Planning Commission; and
(f) If a sewage facility planning module is required by DEP, the
applicant shall submit two complete copies for Township use,
plus shall submit copies of the module and plans to various
agencies as required under state regulations. A sewage
planning module shall be completed and fully approved prior to
final plan approval.
(5) The filing of the final plan shall conform with the approved
preliminary plan and any conditions and changes recommended by
the Township during the preliminary plan review.
(6) Revisions. A detailed list of revisions and response to each
comment from a previously submitted plan shall be provided
whenever a revised plan is submitted. The developer's plan
preparer shall certify that the list of revisions is complete.
D. Determination of completeness by Commission.
(1) Based upon the initial review by the Township staff and/or the
Township Engineer, the Planning Commission shall have authority,
at its first regularly scheduled meeting after the submission is filed
in a timely fashion, to determine that a submission is significantly
§ 192-35 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-35
180:424
incomplete and therefore to refuse to review the submission
further and to do one or more of the following:
(a) Not accept the submission, indicating deficiencies in writing,
and return the fee (minus the costs of any Township review) to
the applicant.
(b) Accept the submission as being filed for review on the
condition that the applicant shall file such additional required
materials and information to the Staff or appropriate agency or
person within a certain number of days from the date of such
acceptance.
(c) Table the acceptance of the submission until the next Planning
Commission meeting where the applicant has met all of the
submittal requirements, and has filed such materials within the
required time period prior to the meeting. The ninety-day time
limit for action shall not begin until the plan is accepted as
complete.
(d) Recommend that the plan be rejected by the Board of
Commissioners for just cause, such as the submission being
incomplete.
(2) If the Commission determines that the submission is complete, as
filed and as required, the Commission shall accept the plans and
may begin its review.
(3) If the Commission determines that a final plan submission, as filed,
departs substantially from the approved preliminary plan, the
Commission may classify the submission as a revised preliminary
plan (with the applicable review fees required) and process the
application as such.
E. Review by Township staff.
(1) Review by Township Engineer.
(a) After the plans are duly submitted for review, unless granted
an extension by the Planning Commission or unless the plans
are incomplete, the Township Engineer should review the
engineering considerations of the preliminary plan and
prepare one or more reports on such considerations to the
Planning Commission.
(b) The Township Engineer may make additional reports and
recommendations to the Planning Commission and the Board
of Commissioners during review of the plan.
(c) The applicant and/or his/her engineer shall make reasonable
efforts to resolve technical engineering considerations outside
of and prior to Planning Commission meetings. The Township
§ 192-35 SOLID WASTE § 192-35
180:425
Engineer may require the applicant or his/her engineer to meet
with him/her for this purpose.
(d) A copy of findings of the Township Engineer should be sent to
the applicant or his/her representative by the Township staff.
(2) Review by Township Zoning Officer.
(a) After the plans are duly submitted for review, unless granted
an extension by the Planning Commission or unless the plans
are incomplete, the Zoning Officer should review the zoning
considerations of the preliminary plan and prepare one or
more reports on such considerations to the Planning
Commission.
(b) The Zoning Officer may make additional reports and
recommendations to the Planning Commission and the Board
of Commissioners during review of the plan.
(c) The applicant and/or his/her engineer shall make reasonable
efforts to resolve zoning considerations outside of and prior to
Planning Commission meetings. The Zoning Officer may
require the applicant or his/her engineer to meet with him/her
for this purpose.
(d) A copy of findings of the Zoning Officer should be sent to the
applicant or his/her representative by the Township staff.
F. Review by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall
accomplish the following within the time limitations of Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code140 (unless the applicant grants a written
time extension), while allowing a sufficient number of days within this
deadline for a decision by the Board of Commissioners.
(1) Review applicable reports received from official review agencies.
(2) Consider whether the final plan submission meets the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances.
(3) Recommend some/all of any revisions needed for the submission to
conform to this chapter or that would generally improve the plan.
(4) Recommend whether any proposed waivers or modifications should
be granted.
(5) Recommend approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the
final plan submission in a written report to the Board of
Commissioners. The Commission may recommend conditions for
approval or describe requirements which have not been met.
G. Review by Board of Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners shall:
140. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 192-35 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-35
180:426
(1) Review the report of the Planning Commission and any reports
received from official reviewing agencies;
(2) Determine whether the final plan submission meets the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances; and
(3) Approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the final plan
submission within the time limits established by the Municipalities
Planning Code.141
H. Decision by Board of Commissioners.
(1) Notice to applicant. The decision of the Board of Commissioners
shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant or
applicant's representative personally or mailed or otherwise
provided in accordance with state law to him/her at his/her last
known address not later than 15 days following the decision.
(2) Dedications.
(a) The approval of the final plan by the Board of Commissioners
shall not by itself constitute an acceptance of the dedication of
any street or other proposed public way, space or area, unless
such acceptance is specified at such time.
(b) Any such acceptance of dedication shall only occur after formal
action by the Board of Commissioners at such time.
(c) As part of an improvements agreement, if the Board of
Commissioners elects to accept lands offered for dedication,
the submission shall be accompanied by duly executed
instruments of conveyance to the Township. Such instruments
shall state that the title thereof is free and unencumbered.
(d) The Board of Commissioners may require that a subdivider
provide title insurance.
(3) Disapproval. When a final plan submission is disapproved, the
decision shall specify defects found in the submission, shall
describe requirements which have not been met and shall cite the
provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon in each case.
(4) Conditions. The Board of Commissioners may attach reasonable
conditions to an approval to ensure the carrying out of this chapter,
other Township Ordinances and State laws and regulations. If
conditions are placed upon an approval, it shall be the
responsibility of the applicant, in writing, to accept or reject the
conditions within a maximum of five days after the date that the
decision of the Board of Commissioners is mailed. If the applicant
fails to accept or reject the conditions within such time period, then
it shall be presumed that the applicant has accepted all of the
141. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 192-35 SOLID WASTE § 192-35
180:427
§ 192-36. Final plan requirements.
conditions upon the approval. If the applicant rejects any condition,
then the approval shall be rescinded, unless a decision of a court
determines such condition was not valid.
I. Development in phases.
(1) If requested by the applicant, the Board of Commissioners may
permit the undertaking of the required improvements and the
preparation of the final plan to be completed in a series of sections
or phases, each covering a portion of the proposed subdivision or
land development as shown on the preliminary plan.
(2) If final plans are to be filed in sections or phases, each section or
phase shall provide sufficient access, utilities and amenities to
allow the development to properly function if future phases are not
built.
(3) The boundaries of phases and the timing of related improvements
shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners.
J. Statement of approval. At the request of the applicant, the Township
shall furnish the applicant with a signed statement indicating approval
of the applicant's final plan contingent upon the applicant providing a
satisfactory financial security. The final plan will not be signed by
Township officials until a satisfactory financial security is presented.
The resolution of contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be
revoked if the financial security agreement is not provided within 90
days, unless a written extension is granted by the Township.
A. All of the information and materials listed in this section are required as
part of all final plans for:
(1) A major subdivision; or
(2) A land development. This list of requirements shall serve as both a
list of requirements and as a checklist for the applicant and the
Township to ensure completion of submissions. The applicant shall
submit completed photocopies of this section as part of the
application.
B. The required information listed in this section may be combined or
separated onto different sheets, provided that the plans will be clearly
readable. If a particular plan or item was submitted at the preliminary
plan stage, and is still complete and accurate, then the applicant may
reference that submittal in the final plan submission instead of
providing additional copies.
C. Final plan for Major Subdivisions and Certain Land Developments
Checklist and List of Submittal Requirements.142
§ 192-35 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-37
180:428
§ 192-37. Certification.
All certification shall comply with the state professional licensing laws. All
subdivisions of land shall be certified and stamped by a registered land
surveyor, as required by state law. At least one set of plans provided to the
Township (including revisions) shall bear original signatures and original
seals of plan preparers and a notarized signature of the applicant and shall
be marked as a "Township File Copy."
142. Editor's Note: Said checklist is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 192-37 SOLID WASTE § 192-37
180:429

ARTICLE VII
Minor Subdivisions, Certain Land Developments and Lot Line
Adjustments
§ 192-38. Purpose.
This article provides simplified procedures for submitting and reviewing
minor subdivisions, certain land developments and lot line adjustments.
§ 192-39. Submission and review procedure.
The following submission and review process shall apply for minor
subdivisions, lot line adjustments, annexations, land developments involving
only a single nonresidential building or building addition of less than 10,000
square feet of building floor area with no additional dwelling units, and what
the Township determines to be minor revisions of approved plans under
§ 192-41.
A. Final plan submission required. A final plan submission for each
application under this section shall be filed by the applicant and
reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this Article VII. A
preliminary plan is not required for a submittal under this Article VII.
B. Required submission.
(1) The applicant shall file with the Township staff at least 30 calendar
days prior to a regular Planning Commission meeting the required
fees and the information and plans required under this Article VII.
Any subsequent submittal of revised plans shall be submitted at
least 12 days before a Planning Commission meeting where the
plans are intended to be reviewed, unless permission is granted for
a later submittal by the Township Engineer or Planning
Commission. These deadlines may be revised by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners.
(2) If a state road is involved, the applicant shall forward the required
information to PennDOT and apply for a highway occupancy
permit. If such permit is not granted prior to final plan approval,
then it shall automatically be a condition of final plan approval, and
the plans shall not be signed or released for recording by the
Township until the PennDOT permit is granted.
(3) Each final plan filed for minor subdivisions shall provide the
information required by § 192-40. Plans for lot line adjustments
shall provide the information required by § 192-41.
(4) A soil erosion and sediment pollution control plan shall be provided
to the County Conservation District, unless waived by the
Township.
(5) Revisions. A detailed list of revisions and response to each
comment from a previously submitted plan shall be provided
§ 192-38 SOLID WASTE § 192-39
180:431
whenever a revised plan is submitted. The developer's plan
preparer shall certify that the list of revisions is complete.
C. Initial actions by the staff.
(1) The staff shall review the submission items filed against a checklist
for completeness and shall report such review to the Commission at
its next regularly scheduled meeting.
(2) The staff shall retain one file copy of all materials submitted by the
applicant.
(3) The staff shall forward to the Commission at or before the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission at least one copy of
the application form, at least one copy of the final plan checklist,
several copies of the final plan and at least one copy of the
supporting documents.
D. Determination of completeness by Planning Commission.
(1) Based upon the initial review of the Township staff and/or the
Township Engineer, the Planning Commission shall have authority,
at its first regularly scheduled meeting after the submission is filed
in a timely fashion, to determine that a submission is incomplete
and therefore to refuse to review the submission further and to do
one of the following:
(a) Not accept the submission, indicating the deficiencies, and
return the fee (minus the costs of any Township review) to the
applicant.
(b) Accept the submission as being filed for review on the
condition that the applicant shall file such additional required
materials and information to the staff or appropriate agency or
person within a certain number of days from the date of such
acceptance.
(c) Table the acceptance of the submission until the next Planning
Commission meeting where the applicant has met all of the
submittal requirements and has filed such materials within the
required time period prior to the meeting. The ninety-day time
limit for action shall not begin until such acceptance.
(d) Recommend that the plan be rejected by the Board of
Commissioners for just cause.
(2) If the Commission determines that the submission is significantly
complete, as filed and as required, the Commission shall accept the
plans and may begin its review.
(3) Zoning variances and approvals.
§ 192-39 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-39
180:432
(a) Applications for a subdivision or land development shall
comply with the Township Zoning Ordinance,143 as amended.
An application under the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance shall not be considered to be complete for the
purposes of starting the clock for the state-mandated ninetyday
time limit if one or more zoning variances or special
exception or conditional use zoning approval will be required
for the subdivision or land development to legally occur as
submitted, until such time as the needed zoning variances and
approvals have been granted. During this time, the application
may still be reviewed by the Township.
[1] If a zoning variance or special exception or conditional use
approval is needed and has not be granted, then the Board
of Commissioners shall have sufficient grounds to deny
approval of the application.
[2] At the discretion of the Board of Commissioners, a
subdivision or land development may be approved
conditioned upon the later approval of a zoning variance,
special exception or conditional use.
(b) A subdivision or land development approval shall not be
delayed because of a court appeal of a zoning variance, special
exception or conditional use that was granted to the developer.
Instead, satisfactory resolution of such appeal shall be a
condition for approval under this chapter. If a developer
appeals a zoning variance, special exception approval or
conditional use approval that was not granted to him/her, then
Subsection D(3)(a) above shall still apply.
E. Review by Township staff.
(1) Review by Township Engineer: The Township Engineer shall review
the engineering considerations in the plan and prepare an initial
report on such considerations to the Planning Commission. The
Township Engineer may make additional reports and
recommendations to the Planning Commission and the Board of
Commissioners during review of the plan.
(2) Review by Township Zoning Officer: The Zoning Officer shall
review the zoning considerations in the plan and prepare an initial
report on such considerations to the Planning Commission. The
Zoning Officer may make additional reports and recommendations
to the Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners
during review of the plan.
F. Review by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall
accomplish the following within the time limitations of the Pennsylvania
143. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 192-39 SOLID WASTE § 192-39
180:433
Municipalities Planning Code144 (unless the applicant grants a written
time extension).
(1) Review all applicable reports received from the appropriate review
agencies and officers;
(2) Determine whether the final plan submission meets the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances;
(3) Review the final plan submission and recommend some or all
revisions that may be needed to address compliance with this
chapter and other applicable ordinances;
(4) Recommend whether any requested waivers or modifications
should be approved; and
(5) Recommend approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the
final plan submission in an advisory report to the Board of
Commissioners, which may include recommending conditions for
approval or describing requirements which have not been met.
G. Review by Board of Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners shall:
(1) Review the report of the Commission and any reports received from
any other official reviewing agencies;
(2) Determine whether the final plan submission meets the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances; and
(3) Approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the final plan
submission within the time required by the Municipalities Planning
Code.145 (Note: As of 2008, this law requires the Board of
Commissioners to act not later than 90 days following the date of
the first regular meeting of the Commission held after it has been
duly filed for review, but in no case shall the Board of
Commissioners' decision be made later than 120 days following the
date the submission was accepted as being filed for review, unless
the applicant grants a written extension of time.)
(4) County Planning Commission review. No subdivision or land
development shall be granted final approval until a report is
received from the County Planning Commission or until the
expiration of 30 days from the date the application was forwarded
to the County Planning Commission, whichever shall occur first.
H. Decision by Board of Commissioners.
(1) The decision of the Board of Commissioners shall be in writing and
shall be communicated to the applicant or his/her representative
personally or mailed to him/her or otherwise provided in
144. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
145. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 192-39 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-39
180:434
§ 192-40. Minor subdivision final plan requirements.146
All of the following information and materials listed in this section are
required as part of all minor subdivision submissions, other than lot line
adjustments or submittals under § 192-41. This list of requirements shall
serve as both a list of requirements and as a checklist for the applicant
and the Township to ensure completion of submissions. The applicant shall
submit completed photocopies of this section as part of the application.
§ 192-41. Lot line adjustments and minor revisions of approved
plans.
compliance with state law at the last known address not later than
15 days following the decision.
(2) The approval of the final plan by the Board of Commissioners shall
not by itself constitute an acceptance of the dedication of any street
or other proposed public way, space or area, unless such
acceptance is specifically made at such time.
(a) Any such acceptance of dedication shall only occur after formal
action by the Board of Commissioners at such time.
(b) If the Board of Commissioners elects to accept lands offered
for dedication, the submission shall be accompanied by duly
executed instruments of conveyance to the Township. Such
instruments shall state that the title thereof is free and
unencumbered. The Board of Commissioners may require an
applicant to provide title insurance.
(3) If a final plan submission is disapproved, the decision shall specify
defects found in the submission, shall describe requirements which
have not been met, and shall cite the provisions of the statute or
ordinance relied upon in each case.
(4) Conditions. If conditions are placed upon an approval, it shall be
the responsibility of the applicant, in writing, to accept or reject the
conditions within a maximum of five days after the date that the
decision of the Board of Commissioners is mailed. If the applicant
fails to accept or reject the conditions within such time period, then
it shall be presumed that the applicant has accepted all of the
conditions upon the approval. If the applicant rejects any condition,
then the approval shall be rescinded, unless a decision of a court
determines such condition was not valid.
A. The reduced submission requirements listed in this section147 shall
apply, together with the procedural requirements of § 192-39, if either
of the following apply:
146. Editor's Note: This checklist is included at the end of this chapter.
147. Editor's Note: This checklist is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 192-39 SOLID WASTE § 192-41
180:435
§ 192-42. Certification.
Section 192-32 shall apply.
§ 192-43. Recording plans.
Article IX shall apply.
(1) The proposal will meet the definition of a "lot line adjustment"; and/
or
(2) In the determination of the Township staff, which may be based
upon the advice of the Township Engineer, the proposal will involve
revisions to a previously approved plan and those revisions only
involve changes in the supporting documentation or engineering
details or are to correct erroneous data or minor omissions
concerning a plan previously granted final plan approval.
B. The list of requirements on the following page148 shall serve as both a
list of requirements and as a checklist for the applicant and the
Township to ensure completion of submissions. The applicant shall
submit completed photocopies of this section as part of the application.
The required information listed in this section may be combined or
separated onto different sheets, provided that the plans will be clearly
readable.
C. Additional information. The Planning Commission may require that a
plan under this section include the submission of specific additional
information that would be required if the plan would be a final minor
subdivision plan, if such specific information is necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter.
148. Editor's Note: This checklist is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 192-41 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-43
180:436
ARTICLE VIII
Improvements Guaranties
§ 192-44. Guarantee of improvements installation required.
§ 192-45. Improvements to be provided by applicant.
§ 192-46. Development agreement.
A. Before approving any subdivision or land development plan for
recording, the Board of Commissioners shall require that the Township
be assured by means of a proper development agreement and
performance guarantee that the improvements required by this chapter
and the improvements appearing on the plan will be installed in strict
accordance with the standards and specifications of this chapter, unless
a developer chooses to install all required improvements prior to
construction of any building, in place of using performance guaranties.
In that case, the Township shall, as deemed necessary, require the
developer to have adequate insurance, hold harmless agreements, an
escrow account to cover the costs of inspections and a professional
estimate of the costs of the improvements, to be used to establish the
amount of the inspections escrow.
B. Purpose of security. The security required by this article shall stand as
security for compliance with all Township ordinances, other laws,
covenants, stipulations, conditions and rules applicable to the
subdivision or land development for which it is filed.
C. No construction of permanent buildings or sales of any individual lot or
condominium unit shall occur within a subdivision or land development
unless:
(1) There is, on file with the Township, current duly executed and
approved security; or
(2) All required public improvements, utilities, streets, drainage
facilities, sewers and streetlights have been completed and
accepted by the Board of Commissioners.
A. In all cases, the subdivider or land developer shall be responsible for
the installation of all improvements required by this chapter, including
utilities.
B. The Township Engineer or other Township designee shall make such
inspections of the required improvements, including utilities, at such
intervals as may be reasonably necessary to assure compliance with
this chapter. The reasonable costs of such inspection shall be borne by
the subdivider or land developer, making use of an escrow account.
A. Development agreement required.
§ 192-44 SOLID WASTE § 192-46
180:437
(1) All applicants proposing any subdivision or land development
which provides for the installation of improvements required by
this chapter or any improvements or amenities which appear on the
final plan shall be required to enter into a legally binding
development agreement with the Township prior to recording of
the final plan, unless the applicant agrees to meet the requirements
of § 192-44 concerning the construction of all improvements prior
to the construction of any buildings or the sale of any lots or
homesites.
(2) The development agreement shall guarantee the installation of said
improvements in strict accordance with all Township requirements.
B. Terms of development agreement. The development agreement shall be
acceptable in legal form to the Township Solicitor and shall be
acceptable in content to the Township Board of Commissioners. The
Township may require that a development agreement include any of the
following items, where applicable, and such additional items as are
necessary to carry out this chapter:
(1) The construction depicted on the approved plans, listed in itemized
format, including all approved streets, drainage facilities, utility
lines and other improvements.
(2) A work schedule setting forth the beginning and ending dates of
such work tied to the construction of the development and
provisions to allow proper inspection by the Township Engineer.
(3) The provision of a performance guaranty for completion of required
improvements in compliance with § 192-47, including a detailed
breakdown of the estimated costs of the improvements, including
the total amount of the performance guaranty.
(4) Provisions concerning the developer's responsibilities for damage
to other property, including maintenance by the developer of public
liability insurance for the duration of improvements construction,
with a hold-harmless clause to protect the Township from liability
related to such work. A copy or other evidence of such liability
coverage shall be provided to the Township prior to such work.
(5) Provisions requiring that the applicant and/or other responsible
entities ensure that erosion and sediment pollution control plans
and Stormwater Management Plans are implemented and
maintained.
(6) Provisions for the dedication of streets, water and sewer lines and
any other rights-of-way or improvements proposed to be dedicated.
(7) See § 192-52, concerning the requirement for a record plan.
(8) Provisions for the developer to reimburse the Township for all
reasonable engineering costs directly related to the review,
§ 192-46 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-46
180:438
§ 192-47. Performance guaranty.
The performance guaranty for completion of required improvements shall
meet the following requirements:
construction and inspection of the proposed development and to
the review and preparation of the development agreements.
(9) Provisions concerning any violations of the development
agreement.
(10) Any other lawful terms which the Board of Commissioners may
require to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
(11) Signatures. The development agreement shall be signed by all
responsible landowners and/or developers.
C. Ownership of land and Guaranty.
(1) A certificate of ownership shall be executed in the exact name in
which title is held. If the developer(s) is someone other than the
landowner(s), the developer shall also execute this affidavit, along
with a security agreement.
(2) Change in ownership or developer. Any conveyance of all or a
portion of the unimproved lots or public improvements or streets of
any subdivision or land development or change in developers,
whether voluntary or by action of law or otherwise, shall require
the prior approval of the Board of Commissioners. In giving or
denying said approval, the Board of Commissioners shall require
that such new landowner and/or developer fully assume all
applicable responsibilities under the development agreement and
post all the appropriate security agreements.
D. Utility agreements. If a development will connect into a public water or
public sanitary sewage system, the applicable authority, agency or
company may also require separate development agreements.
A. Security.
(1) The guaranty shall be secured by the credit of any of the following:
(a) An irrevocable and unconditional letter of credit of a federal or
state chartered lending institution;
(b) A restrictive or escrow account in a federal or state chartered
lending institution; or
(c) Such other financial security approved by the Board of
Commissioners, but not including a second or third mortgage
on the unimproved lands.
(2) Such approved security shall provide for, and secure to the public,
the completion of any improvements which may be required by the
§ 192-46 SOLID WASTE § 192-47
180:439
date fixed in the development agreement for the completion of such
improvements.
(3) Such financial security shall be posted with a federally issued or
state chartered lending institution chosen by the party posting the
financial security, or such other approved entity, provided such
institution or entity is authorized to conduct such business within
the state.
(a) The Board of Commissioners may require that evidence be
provided that such institution or entity has sufficiently
adequate and secure assets to cover the security.
(b) The Township shall be the authorized signatory on any account
in which the escrow funds are held.
B. Amount of security.
(1) The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of
the required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of
completion estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for
completion by the developer in the official development schedule
and within the process for increases to cover inflation as permitted
by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.149
(2) The cost of the improvements shall be established by an estimate
prepared by a Pennsylvania-registered professional engineer,
which shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer, within the
arbitration process permitted by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
(3) If the party posting the financial security requires more than one
year from the date of posting of the financial security to complete
the required improvements, the amount of financial security may
be increased by a maximum of an additional 10% for each one-year
period beyond the first anniversary date from posting of financial
security or to an amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of
completing the required improvements as reestablished on or
about the expiration of the preceding one-year period by using the
above procedure.
(4) Inspection fees. The amount of financial security shall also include
an additional 5% of the estimated cost of completion of the work to
guarantee payment of inspection fees and related engineering
costs. The funds needed for inspection of the improvements by the
Township or the Township's representatives shall be funded in
advance by the applicant through an escrow account. See § 192-8
of this chapter.
149. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 192-47 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-47
180:440
§ 192-48. Approval of improvements, including utilities.
C. Multiyear or Multistage Development. In the case where development
is projected over a period of years, the Board of Commissioners may
authorize submission of final plans by phases/stages of development,
subject to such requirements or improvement guaranties concerning
future improvements as it finds necessary for the proper functioning of
each phase and for the eventual development as a whole.
A. Advance notice by developer of construction of improvements.
(1) Meetings. Prior to construction or installation of improvements in
any new phase or any facet of construction, the developer or his/
her representative shall contact the Township Engineer to
determine whether a pre-construction meeting is needed. The
Township Engineer may require that such meeting be attended by
the responsible contractor(s) and responsible representatives of
the developer. In addition, meetings may be required with the
utility companies as needed.
(2) The developer or his/her representative shall provide a minimum of
three business days' prior notice to the Township Engineer or his/
her designee (such as an inspector) prior to beginning each facet of
construction, in order to allow the scheduling of inspections. See
also § 192-63A(2)(e) which requires five business days' advance
notice for street construction.
(3) See § 192-49A(1)(b) concerning improvements completed without
proper Township inspection.
B. Request for release of security. When an improvement has been
completed, the party posting the financial security shall notify the
Township Engineer and submit a written request to the Board of
Commissioners to release related financial security.
C. Engineer's report.
(1) Within 30 days of a receipt under § 192-48B the Township Engineer
shall submit a written report certifying which improvements have
been completed in accordance with the approved plan to the Board
of Commissioners and send a copy of such report to the developer
or his/her representative at his/her last known address.
(2) This report shall be based on the inspections made according to the
approved inspection schedule included in the development
agreement and shall recommend approval or rejection of the
improvements, either in whole or in part.
(3) If the Township Engineer finds any or all of the improvements to be
not as required, he/she shall include a statement of the reasons for
recommending their rejection in the report.
§ 192-47 SOLID WASTE § 192-48
180:441
D. Decision by Board of Commissioners.
(1) At its first regularly scheduled meeting after receiving the
engineer's report, but not later than 45 days of the receipt of the
request, the Board of Commissioners shall review the Township
Engineer's report and shall authorize release of an amount as
estimated by the Township Engineer fairly representing the value
of the improvements completed.
(2) The Board of Commissioners shall be deemed to have approved the
release of funds as requested if the Board of Commissioners fails to
act within 45 days of receipt of the developer's request.
(3) Until final release (completion of all improvements), the Board of
Commissioners may require retention of a maximum of 10% of the
cost of each completed improvement.
(4) The Board of Commissioners shall notify the developer, in writing,
of the decision.
E. Completion of unaccepted improvements. The developer shall complete
any required improvements that the Board of Commissioners
determines are not satisfactory or complete. Upon completion, the
applicant may request approval in conformance with the procedures
specified in § 192-48.
F. Final release.
(1) When the developer has completed all of the required and
necessary improvements, the developer shall request final release
in conformance with the procedures specified in § 192-48. See time
limitations and procedures in Section 510 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.150
(2) Such final release shall include all moneys retained under
§ 192-48D(3).
(3) If the approved plan includes improvements to be dedicated to the
Township, then all documentation and procedures necessary to
finalize the dedication must be completed by the developer before
final release.
(4) If the approved plan includes utility or other facilities within rightsof-
way that are to be dedicated to the Township, and occupancy or
other permits are required for such facilities within Township
rights-of-way as provided for in this chapter or other Township
ordinances, then those permits must be obtained before final
release.
G. Appeal. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the developer's right
to contest or question by legal proceedings or otherwise any
150. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10510.
§ 192-48 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-48
180:442
§ 192-49. Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
determination of the Board of Commissioners or the Township
Engineer.
H. Certificates of occupancy and completion of improvements.
(1) A temporary or final certificate of occupancy shall not be issued
and a structure shall not be occupied unless said structure has
access to a street with at least a complete paving base course and
any required curbing installed.
(2) In addition to Subsection H(1) above, no final certificate of
occupancy shall be issued until the structure is completed as
approved with service by all required utilities and with all access
onto a street completed to required standards and all required fire
hydrants are fully operational, if applicable.
A. Enforcement of security.
(1) In the event that any improvements that were required have not
been installed as provided in this chapter or the approved final plan
or the development agreement, or in the event of the bankruptcy of
the owner or developer, or in the event the performance security
lapses or will lapse in time before the required improvements are
completed, then the Board of Commissioners is hereby granted the
power to elect to enforce any security posted under this chapter by
appropriate legal and equitable remedies.
(a) Such remedies may include taking all actions necessary to
ensure improvements are completed without cost to the
Township, including but not limited to:
[1] Seizure of undeveloped lots;
[2] Seizure of escrow funds;
[3] Revocation or suspension of building permits or
suspension of issuance of new building permits;
[4] Nonrelease of performance securities;
[5] Nonapproval of occupancy certificates;
[6] Request for additional performance security;
[7] Nonacceptance of improvements;
[8] Removal, reconstruction or replacement of substandard
improvements at the cost of the developer; and
[9] Civil prosecution of a violation of this chapter.
§ 192-48 SOLID WASTE § 192-49
180:443
§ 192-50. Maintenance guaranty.
(b) Construction without inspection. If required improvements
have been completed without providing the Township Engineer
or his/her representatives with proper opportunity for
inspection, and as a result the Township Engineer cannot
determine whether the improvements were properly
constructed, then the Board of Commissioners may require
that the developer, at the developer's expense, remove,
replace, sample, test or reconstruct such improvements as
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter and other
applicable Township standards.
(2) Rate of construction. Failure of a developer to construct streets and
other public improvements reasonably at the same time or prior to
the construction of the buildings served by those streets or public
improvements, and at the same rate in time at which buildings are
completed, shall be a violation of this chapter and a cause for
default of the security.
B. Completion by Township. If the proceeds of such security are
insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections
to all the improvements covered by said security, the Board of
Commissioners may, at its option, install or replace part of such
improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land development and
may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the
moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the improvements.
C. Proceeds for installation of improvements. The proceeds from use of the
security and/or from any legal or equitable action brought against the
developer shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements
covered by such security and directly related administrative costs.
A. Maintenance guaranty required. All applicants proposing any
subdivision or land development which provides for dedication of
improvements shall be required to provide a legally binding
maintenance guaranty to the Township prior to acceptance of
dedication of the improvements by the Township. This guaranty may be
part of the security agreement. The Township may also require a
developer to provide a maintenance guaranty for required
improvements that are not dedicated to the Township that are
necessary for the proper functioning of the development.
B. Terms of maintenance guaranty. The maintenance guaranty shall be
acceptable in legal form to the Township Solicitor and in content to the
Board of Commissioners and shall include all of the following:
(1) That the applicant make any repair or reconstruction of any
improvement stipulated in the maintenance agreement which is
specified by the Board of Commissioners, if needed because of
§ 192-49 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-50
180:444
faulty construction, workmanship or materials that occurred prior
to acceptance of such improvement by the Township;
(2) That the applicant guarantee at his/her own cost the proper
operation of the improvements stipulated in the maintenance
agreement, up to a maximum period of 18 months from the date of
dedication; and
(3) That the applicant post financial security to secure structural
integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning of said
improvements in accordance with the design and specifications as
depicted on the final plan, for a maximum term of 18 months from
the date of completion.
C. Public utilities and authorities. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines,
or other utility facilities and related apparatus or facilities, are to be
installed under the jurisdiction and under the rules and regulations of a
public utility or municipal authority, financial security to assure proper
completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with
the regulations of the controlling public utility or municipal authority.
This amount of financial security shall not also be required by the
Township if it is required by such utility or authority.
D. Type of security. The maintenance guaranty shall be secured by the
same form of security as is permitted for the improvements guaranties.
E. Terms. Such maintenance guaranty shall be in the form approved by the
Township Solicitor and Board of Commissioners, payable to the
Township, to guarantee the proper operation and repair of the streets
and other dedicated improvements in the subdivision or land
development for 18 months from the date of completion.
F. Amount. The amount of the maintenance guaranty shall be 15% of the
actual cost of installation of such improvements.
G. Release.
(1) Eighteen months after the date of acceptance of dedication of said
improvements, the Township shall release the maintenance
guaranty to the developer (or party that posted the guaranty if all
improvements are in satisfactory condition, as determined by the
Township Engineer.
(2) If said improvements are not in satisfactory condition, the
maintenance guaranty shall be extended until such time as
improvements are in a satisfactory condition, as determined by the
Township Engineer.
§ 192-50 SOLID WASTE § 192-50
180:445

ARTICLE IX
Final Plan; Record Plan
§ 192-51. Recording of final plan.
§ 192-52. Record plan.
The applicant shall provide to the Township reproducible and paper clear
and legible copies of the record plan, the number of plans to be set by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners. Such record plan shall be a size
of 18 inches by 24 inches, or other size as required by the County Recorder
of Deeds, and shall, at a minimum, include all of the following:
A. Deadline.
(1) The applicant is responsible to ensure that the final plan for any
subdivision or land development, as approved by the Board of
Commissioners, is delivered to the Township for signatures. The
applicant is then responsible to ensure that the Township records
the record plan in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of the County
within 90 days after such final approval.
(2) If the final plan approval included official conditions that must be
met prior to recording, then the plan shall be recorded within 90
days following the compliance with such conditions, up to a
maximum total of one year following the final plan approval.
(3) Specific extensions of these time periods may be granted, in
writing, by the Board of Commissioners if the applicant proves
good cause.
B. At its option, the Township may direct the applicant to record a final
plan. If the Township records the plan, the applicant shall compensate
the Township for such costs.
C. The final plan shall not be recorded unless the applicant demonstrates
that he or she has met all required conditions that the Township
Engineer determines would impact the recorded final plan, including,
but not limited to, issuance of any required PennDOT highway
occupancy permit.
D. Failure to record the final plan within the specified time periods shall
cause the approval to become null and void.
A. Street rights-of-way;
B. Any common open spaces and/or recreation land;
C. Easements and any covenants that the Township required to be placed
on the final plan;
D. Lot lines and lot dimensions;
§ 192-51 SOLID WASTE § 192-52
180:447
§ 192-53. Effect of recording.
E. Waterlines, sanitary and storm sewer lines and stormwater drainage
facilities;
F. The required signatures of Township officials and the County Planning
Department and the date of approvals;
G. Notations stating whether the streets, any common open space and
other proposed improvements are to be offered or not offered for
dedication to the Township; and
H. Additional information from the complete final plan that the Township
or the County Recorder of Deeds may require be shown.
A. Private improvements. Every street, park or other improvement shown
on a subdivision or land development plan that is recorded, as provided
herein, shall be deemed to be a private street, open space or
improvement until such time it may be offered and officially accepted
for dedication to the Township or is duly condemned.
B. Dedication of improvements. The record plan shall state by formal
notation whether the streets, any common open space and other
proposed improvements are proposed to be offered or not offered for
dedication to the Township.
§ 192-52 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-53
180:448
ARTICLE X
Design Standards and Required Improvements
§ 192-54. Applicability.
§ 192-55. Required improvements.
This article sets forth the design and construction standards for required
improvements, regardless of whether the improvement will be dedicated to
the Township.
§ 192-56. Overall requirements.
A. Minimum requirements. The design standards and improvements
required in this article are the minimum requirements for approval of a
subdivision or land development. Additional or higher-type
improvements may be required in specific cases where the Board of
Commissioners determines such improvements are clearly necessary to
protect the public health and safety.
B. Modifications, waivers and exceptions. See § 192-7 of this chapter.
A. Land shall be suitable for the purpose for which it is to be subdivided or
developed.
B. Hazardous conditions. Subdivisions or land developments subject to
hazardous conditions (such as open quarries, hazardous or toxic site
pollution, limestone solution channels, unconsolidated fill, floods,
excessive erosion or unsafe water supply) shall not be approved until
the developer has provided or has legally committed to provide
adequate measures to overcome or eliminate the hazards, in the
determination of the Board of Commissioners, to the best of their
knowledge. See also the Township's floodplain requirements. However,
the Township accepts no responsibility to identify hazards or to
guarantee their resolution. See the liability section in Article I.
C. Zoning. All aspects of a proposed subdivision or land development shall
conform to the Township Zoning Ordinance151 and all other Township
ordinances and specifications.
D. Nearby development. A subdivision or land development and its street
pattern shall be coordinated with existing or approved nearby
developments or neighborhoods to help develop the area harmoniously
and to help prevent conflicts between neighboring development.
E. Safety. No subdivision or land development shall occur in such a way
that would significantly threaten the public health and safety, including
hazards of toxic substances, traffic hazards, explosive hazards and fire
hazards.
151. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 192-54 SOLID WASTE § 192-56
180:449
§ 192-57. Streets and driveways.
F. Low-impact development. Use of low-impact development (LID)
concepts in design of public and private facilities in all subdivisions and
land developments is encouraged.
A. Street (or road) functional classifications. The terms "street" and "road"
shall have the same meaning. See the classifications in the Township
Comprehensive Plan.
(1) Principal arterial highway or street: a highway/street that provides
the main method of access between the Township and adjacent
municipalities. An arterial highway is typically owned and
maintained by the state and typically has an average daily traffic
exceeding 25,000 vehicles.
(2) Minor arterial street: a street that provides the main method of
access between different portions of the Township. A minor arterial
street is typically owned and maintained by the state and typically
has average daily traffic of between 3,500 and 25,000 vehicles.
(3) Collector street: a street that collects traffic from minor streets and
directs that traffic to arterial streets. A collector street typically is
designed to eventually serve 1,500 to 3,500 vehicles per day.
(4) Local street: This street primarily is designed for local traffic, to
collect traffic from individual lots and minor Township streets and
to carry it to collector streets. A local street typically is designed to
ultimately serve between 400 and 1,500 vehicles per day.
(5) Minor Township street: This street primarily is designed for local
traffic, to collect traffic from individual lots and to carry it to local
and collector streets. A minor Township street typically is designed
to ultimately serve less than 400 vehicles per day.
(6) Alley: An alley is not considered to be a street. An alley is a vehicle
cartway that is located to the rear of a lot that is adjacent to a street
and which has a right-of-way width of 20 feet or less.
B. Right-of-way access management and design.
(1) General. Streets shall be designed so that all motorists, bicyclists,
pedestrians and transit users of all ages and abilities can safely
move along and across the streets.
(2) Access to streets.
(a) All proposed subdivisions and land developments shall have
adequate and safe access to the public street system.
(b) Frontage. Any lot created under this chapter shall have
frontage and access onto either:
§ 192-56 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-57
180:450
[1] A public street (which may be required to be improved as
necessary under § 192-57B(2)(h)[2]); or
[2] A private street constructed to the same standards as a
public street and that has a permanent system to ensure
adequate maintenance, except as provided in Subsection
B(2)(e) and (f) below.
(c) Private streets and an existing lot. A preexisting lawful lot of
record that abuts an existing private street that does not meet
Township standards may have access for a single principal use
onto such private street, but no new lot shall be created with
access onto such street, except as provided in Subsection
B(2)(e) and (f) below.
(d) Emergency access. Suitable access for emergency vehicles
shall be provided within all subdivisions and land
developments, including adequate clear width and height, and
including access to reach all principal buildings. Driveways
shall be designed to be accessible to emergency vehicles.
Driveways shall have a ten-foot minimum horizontal clearance,
a twelve-foot minimum vertical clearance and be designed to
support the weight of aerial fire apparatus. A driveway serving
an individual single-family residence and that is less than 100
feet in length is exempt from this subsection.
(e) Existing private street and new lots. An existing private street
may be upgraded to allow the creation of up to two new lots, if
approved by the Board of Commissioners and if the following
conditions are met:
[1] The applicant shall grant a sufficient width of easement
along the street to affected property owners to result in a
total fifty-foot minimum easement width along all street
frontage that is owned by the applicant.
[2] The applicant shall agree to ensure that the private street
will be upgraded prior to occupancy of the new lot(s) with
appropriate stone, tar and chip or bituminous paving to
result in a minimum cartway width of 18 feet from the
driveways of the new lots to a public street.
[3] The owners of the parent lot and any new lots shall be
bound by an agreement to annually contribute towards the
maintenance of the street.
[4] That the street will be suitable for access by emergency
vehicles after any improvements that the applicant may
agree to make.
[5] That the private street is the only reasonable method of
providing access to the property.
§ 192-57 SOLID WASTE § 192-57
180:451
(f) Parking courts. If individual units of an office park, townhouse,
apartment or mobile home park development have vehicular
access onto a private parking court, that parking court is not
required to meet Township construction standards for streets,
provided that:
[1] The parking court and related accessways have vehicular
access onto a public street; and
[2] There is a system to ensure maintenance of the parking
court; and
[3] Parking courts and related accessways shall provide
access for emergency vehicles.
(g) Arterial and collector street frontage. Where a subdivision or
land development abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial or collector street, one or more of the following
methods of layout and site design shall be required:
[1] The use of a service or frontage street, or access only onto
side or interior streets, to collect traffic from numerous
driveways and direct it to a select few number of entrances
to the arterial or collector street; and/or
[2] The minimization of the number and length of driveway
cuts or street intersections onto an arterial or collector
street, which may include requiring the use of shared
driveways between adjacent uses or lots; and/or
[3] The restriction of ingress and egress involving left-hand
turns onto or off of the arterial or collector street; and/or
[4] The prohibition of driveways from individual dwellings
entering directly onto an arterial or collector street. If
there is no alternative to this, each driveway entering onto
an arterial or collector street shall have adequate turnaround
space for vehicles provided within the lot so that
vehicles do not back onto the street.
(h) Street continuations.
[1] Stub streets. Where a subdivision or land development
abuts undeveloped land, a subdivision or land
development shall include one or more extensions of
proposed streets with right-of-way to the boundary line of
the tract to provide for an eventual extension into the
adjacent tract for efficient circulation of traffic throughout
the area.
[2] Widening. Where a subdivision or land development abuts
or contains an existing street, additional right-of-way and
§ 192-57 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-57
180:452
pavement width and curb construction shall be required
conforming with Table 10.1, Design Standards for Streets.
[3] The Board of Commissioners may approve a fee in lieu of
right-of-way and pavement widening and curb
construction, if proposed by the applicant.
(3) Access drives and driveways.
(a) Construction standards. See § 192-63.
(b) Access; state and Township roads. A state highway occupancy
permit is required for all access onto or work within the rightof-
way of a state road. A Township right-of-way permit shall be
obtained before any vehicle access is allowed from a Township
street.
(c) Driveway slopes. Each lot shall be accessed from a street by a
driveway with a maximum grade of 15% for a single-family
detached dwelling driveway and 10% for any other driveway,
except that:
[1] For a driveway that enters onto an arterial street, the first
20 feet from such right-of-way shall have a maximum slope
of 4%, and the next 80 feet shall have a maximum slope of
7%.
[2] For a driveway that enters onto any other street, the first
20 feet shall have a maximum slope of 7%.
(d) Drainage. The developer shall make adequate provisions to
maintain uninterrupted parallel drainage along a street where
intersected by an access drive or driveway. Access drives and
aisles within parking lots shall be graded and drained to keep
the primary travel lane free of stormwater.
(e) At a minimum, the first 50 feet of a driveway adjacent to a
street cartway shall be hard-surfaced in asphalt, concrete,
paving block or similar surface, not including stones or soil.
(f) The grade of the shoulder of a road shall be maintained along
its length and shall not be filled in to allow the construction of a
driveway at a higher grade.
(g) Shared driveways. Unless otherwise approved, a driveway
shall serve a maximum of two single-family residential lots. A
driveway serving more than one residential lot shall only be
approved if the applicant demonstrates to the Board of
Commissioners that it is needed because of a sight distance
concern or to minimize disturbance of natural features. The
deed of each lot shall include a proper system to ensure proper
maintenance of the driveway. A copy of a recorded joint use
§ 192-57 SOLID WASTE § 192-57
180:453
agreement between affected property owners shall be
provided.
(h) The number of driveways is limited to a maximum of one per
100 feet of public street lot frontage, except for circular
driveways for single-family residential use.
(i) Driveways shall not cross the street right-of-way line:
[1] Within 40 feet of the right-of-way line of an intersecting
street.
[2] Within five feet of a fire hydrant or drainage inlet.
[3] Within five feet of a property line.
(j) Width. Driveway width shall be limited as follows:
[1] Minimum 22 feet at the right-of-way line for
nonresidential, multifamily residential and mobile home
park uses.
[2] Minimum 10 feet and maximum 24 feet at the right-of-way
line for single-family residential uses.
(4) Right-of-way occupancy.
(a) Structures, facilities or improvements that are placed within a
state road right-of-way shall require a highway occupancy
permit from PennDOT.
(b) Structures, facilities or improvements that are placed within a
Township road right-of-way shall comply with the Township
Right-of-Way ordinance and the Streets and Sidewalk
Ordinance.152
(c) Installation of structures, facilities or improvements within an
area that is planned to be dedicated to the Township as a public
street right-of-way shall follow the same procedures as for
streets that are currently dedicated as public streets.
(5) Work within the right-of-way. Construction within a state road
right-of-way shall require a highway occupancy permit from
PennDOT. Construction within a Township road right-of-way shall
comply with the Township Right-of-Way Ordinance.
C. Street design standards.
(1) Right-of-way, cartway width and other standards. Minimum street
design standards shall be as shown in Table 10.1, unless PennDOT
establishes a more restrictive requirement along a state road.
152. Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 192-57 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-57
180:454
Table 10.1
Design Standards For Streets
Minimum
Street
Design
Requirements
Minor
Township
Road
Local
Road Collector
Minor
Arterial
Principal
Arterial
Right-ofway
width
(feet)
50 50 50 60 80
Pavement
width
(feet)
22 to
30(1)
22 to
30(1)
30
(11-foot
lanes,
4-foot
shoulders,
no
parking)
36
(12-foot
lanes,
6-foot
shoulders,
no
parking)
(3)
Design
AADT
(vehicles)
Less than
400
400 to
1,500
1,500 to
3,500
Greater
than
3,500
(4)
Planned
posted
speed
limit
(mph)
25 25 25 to 35 35 to 45 Greater
than or
equal to
45
Design
speed
(2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
Minimum
center
line radius
(feet)
260 260 260 to
510
(3) (3)
Superelevation0% 0% 0% to 2% 2% to 4% (3)
Maximum
vertical
grade
10% 10% 8% 6% 6%
Minimum
stopping
sight
distance
(feet)
200 200 200 to
305
(3) (3)
Minimum
center
line
vertical
grade
1% 1% 1% 1% 1%
§ 192-57 SOLID WASTE § 192-57
180:455
NOTES:
(1) Varies depending on typical section selected.
(2) Five miles per hour greater than planned posted speed limit.
(3) Specific project design, in accordance with PennDOT design
criteria.
(4) Specific project design, in accordance with transportation
impact study recommendations.
(a) For one-way loop streets, see under culs-de-sac in
§ 192-57C(5).
(b) Rear or side alleys, where approved, shall have a minimum
cartway width of 14 feet for two-way traffic and 10 feet for oneway
traffic.
(c) All approaches to an intersection of two or more streets shall
have a leveling area not greater than 4% grade for a minimum
distance of 60 feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way
line of the intersecting street.
(d) The minimum grade of any street center line or gutter shall be
1%.
(e) Any development of 25 or more dwelling units shall have at
least two means of vehicle access into the development. The
second means of access may be limited to emergency vehicles,
provided the applicant demonstrates the access will be
properly designed and maintained for its intended purpose.
(f) Adjacent to fire hydrants, the minimum pavement width shall
be 26 feet, without parking, for a minimum length of 40 feet.
(g) Streets may be designed with parking spaces located in lay-by
or cut-out lanes that reduce the width of the cartway along
portions of a street where on-street parking is prohibited.
Portions of streets near intersections may be designed with
bump-outs that reduce the width of street that needs to be
crossed by pedestrians. In such cases, adequate width for
bicycle traffic shall be continued through the intersection.
(2) Street construction standards. Section 192-63 shall apply.
(a) Streets and alleys shall be graded, improved and surfaced to
the grades and dimensions shown on plans, profiles and crosssections
submitted by the developer and as approved by the
Board of Commissioners and shall meet applicable Township
standards.
(b) Street pavement type and depth shall be determined for each
plan according to a pavement design prepared by a
professional engineer in accordance with PennDOT
§ 192-57 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-57
180:456
procedures. In no case shall the pavement type or depth be
less than the minimum in the Township's street construction
standards.
(3) Horizontal geometry. Horizontal curves shall connect all tangent
street lines. A minimum tangent of 100 feet, measured from edge of
cartway, shall be required between a curve and a street
intersection where one of the intersecting streets is a collector or
an arterial street.
(4) Vertical geometry. The provisions of Table 10.1 above shall apply,
including sight distance requirements along the street and
maximum grades for streets. Vertical curves shall be used at all
changes of grade. The length of the vertical curve shall be
determined by the required site distance specified in Table 10.1.
(5) Cul-de-sac streets. A maximum of 10% of street length in any
subdivision may be cul-de-sac streets. Culs-de-sac will only be
permitted in locations where the applicant demonstrates that it is
not feasible to develop the parcel without culs-de-sac.
(a) Cul-de-sac streets shall be permitted with a maximum length of
800 feet. This distance may be extended to a maximum length
of 1,500 feet if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of
the Board of Commissioners that an acceptable emergency
access drive will be provided at a Township-approved location
to provide a second access point to the end of the cul-de-sac
street. A cul-de-sac street shall have a minimum length of 250
feet. Cul-de-sac streets must be provided with a turnaround
with a minimum paved radius of 40 feet to the face of the
outside curb and a minimum radius of 50 feet to the legal rightof-
way.
(b) The circular right-of-way of the cul-de-sac shall maintain a
minimum ten-foot width between the edge of paving and the
edge of the right-of-way. The circular paving of the cul-de-sac
shall be connected to the approach paving by an arc having a
radius of not less than 50 feet.
(c) The Board of Commissioners may permit acceptable
alternative turnaround designs, including turnarounds of
acceptable radii incorporated into a parking court or a
landscaped island within a cul-de-sac or a one-way loop street.
[1] The turnaround shall have a sufficient radius to allow
movement by school buses, snow plows and emergency
vehicles, even if a vehicle is legally parked along the side
of the cartway.
[2] If a landscaped island is used, it shall be planted in a
manner that will require minimal maintenance and shall
include a system to provide maintenance that is acceptable
§ 192-57 SOLID WASTE § 192-57
180:457
to the Township. The island should be designed to collect
stormwater runoff from the pavement. This includes
design as a rain garden, including well-drained rain
garden soils, and plantings that are tolerant of rain garden
conditions and road salt.
[3] If a one-way loop street is used, it shall not require one
way traffic for more than 500 feet of road length, and shall
have a minimum paved width of 14 feet.
[4] If the street will be dedicated to the Township, the
alternative turnaround must be approved by PennDOT as
qualifying for disbursement of liquid fuels allocation to the
Township.
(d) No street shall dead-end without an approved turnaround at
the end of the street. Temporary stub streets shall be required
to include at least a temporary cul-de-sac if the stub would be
longer than 150 feet or serve more than three dwellings or lots.
(e) The maximum cross slope on the circular part of a cul-de-sac
shall be 5%. The minimum slope of any pavement within the
cul-de-sac shall be 2%.
(f) A cul-de-sac street shall serve a maximum of 20 dwelling units,
except that 30 dwelling units shall be allowed for a
conservation subdivision development.
(g) A snow storage easement shall be established at the end of the
cul-de-sac, which shall provide for proper drainage as the snow
melts. This easement shall be located so that a snow plow can
push snow relatively straight from the street to the far end of
the cul-de-sac. This snow storage easement shall be located
clear of any driveways.
(h) For a temporary cul-de-sac, see § 192-63A(4).
(i) No more than 25% of the outer edge of paving of the circular
portion of a cul-de-sac shall include driveway entrances.
(6) Intersections.
(a) The center lines of streets shall intersect at right angles except
where the developer demonstrates to the Board of
Commissioners that a right angle intersection is not feasible. In
such case, the intersection shall be at as nearly a right angle as
possible, with an absolute minimum angle of 75°. This
requirement for right angles shall not apply for one-way
streets, where the angle of the intersection is conducive for
one-way traffic.
(b) Alignment of street intersections.
§ 192-57 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-57
180:458
[1] No more than two streets shall intersect at one point.
[2] Where a proposed street or business driveway intersects
an existing cross street, such proposed street or business
driveway shall be aligned with any street intersecting on
the other side of the cross street, unless the Board of
Commissioners or PennDOT determines that such
alignment is not reasonable or feasible.
[3] Offsetting of streets.
[a] If a proposed street cannot intersect at the same
location as a street on the other side of the cross
street, then the proposed street shall be offset by the
following minimum distances from the nearest
intersection of streets:
[i] One hundred fifty feet along a local street;
[ii] Four hundred feet along a collector street; and
[iii] One thousand feet along an arterial street.
[b] Measurement. The minimum distances of this
subsection shall be measured between the points
where the center lines of the rights-of-way of the
intersecting streets intersect with the center line of
the cross street.
(c) At street intersections, lot lines shall be rounded by arcs with
the radii listed below. For arterial streets, the Board of
Commissioners may require a larger radius than stated below,
if recommended by the Township Engineer. A smaller radius
may also be approved under § 192-7.
Type of
Street
Minimum Radius of
Arc at Intersection of
Cartway Edge or
Curbline
(feet)
Minimum Radius of
Arc at Intersection of
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Arterial 40 30
Collector 35 25
Local 25 15
(7) Boulevard entrance. A new street may utilize a boulevard style of
entrance to another street. In such case, the cartway width of the
travel lane on each side of a median shall be a minimum of 14 feet if
no parking is allowed and 20 feet if on-street parking is allowed.
Each side shall handle one-way traffic and include one-way signs.
The center median shall be landscaped with trees and other
attractive vegetation that will not inhibit sight distances. An
§ 192-57 SOLID WASTE § 192-57
180:459
appropriate method for maintenance of the median shall be
established.
(8) Curbs. Curbs built to Township specifications shall be required on
each side of all streets. Proposed curbs shall be extended to
connect to existing sidewalks if existing curbs are within 150 feet of
the proposed development.
(9) Sidewalks. Sidewalks built to Township specifications shall be
required along all street frontages.
(a) Proposed sidewalks shall be extended to connect to existing
sidewalks if existing sidewalks are within 150 feet of the
proposed development.
(b) The Board of Commissioners may approve a fee in lieu of
sidewalk construction, if proposed by the applicant.
(c) Where the longitudinal slope of sidewalk meets or exceeds 5%,
a level landing area five feet by five feet shall be provided at
intervals of 100 feet.
(10) Guide rails. Streets shall be designed with geometric features that
minimize the need for guide rails. Guide rails shall only be installed
where the result of striking an object or leaving the roadway would
be more severe than the consequence of striking the guide rail.
Guide rails shall be installed by the developer, where necessary, to
meet the guide rail standards in the PennDOT Design Manual, Part
2. Guide rails shall meet the construction standards of PennDOT
Publication 408 and PennDOT Standards for Roadway
Construction.
(11) Streets and topography. Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the
contour of the land to produce usable lots and reasonably sloped
streets. See the steep slope regulations in the Zoning Ordinance.153
(12) Drainage. Chapter 184, the Stormwater Management Ordinance,
shall apply.
(a) Street drainage shall not be permitted to cross intersections or
the center line of a road.
(b) Pavement base drains are required on all streets and shall be
provided with a suitable outlet.
(13) Required traffic improvements.
(a) Purpose. In recognition of Sections 503(2)(ii) and 503(3) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,154 this section is
primarily intended to ensure that streets bordering a
153. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
154. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 192-57 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-57
180:460
subdivision or land development are coordinated and of such
widths and grades and in such locations as deemed necessary
to accommodate future traffic and to facilitate fire protection
and to ensure that the access into and out of subdivisions and
land developments is sufficiently safe.
(b) Process. This subsection shall be carried out through
determinations of the Board of Commissioners, after
considering any recommendations of the Planning
Commission, the Township Engineer, the applicant, the
applicant's professional representatives, any comments from
PennDOT that may be provided regarding a state road and any
professional traffic studies that may have been submitted.
(c) On-site/abutting traffic improvements.
[1] Widening of abutting roads. An applicant for any land
development or subdivision shall be required to pave any
existing unpaved street and widen the cartway and any
shoulders, and construct curb and fill-in paving of abutting
streets to Township standards in accordance with Table
10.1. A wider width may be required where needed along a
collector or arterial street.
[2] Such improvements and right-of-way shall be required
unless PennDOT specifically refuses, in writing, to allow
such improvement to a state road, in which case the
Township may still require that abutting right-of-way be
dedicated to the Township or reserved for future
dedication.
[3] Any improvement to a state road shall meet all PennDOT
standards.
(d) Types of required traffic improvements.
[1] The following shall be the definition of "on-site
improvement" (unless this definition is amended by state
law): all street improvements constructed on the
applicant's property, or the improvements constructed on
the property abutting the applicant's property necessary
for the ingress or egress to the applicant's property.
[2] On-site improvements may include, but are not limited to,
new or upgraded traffic signals, land dedication to
improve abutting intersections, realignment of abutting
curves in a road or the widening of the abutting cartway
and right-of-way.
(e) Funding. In place of completing a required street improvement
as a condition of final approval, an applicant may enter into a
legally binding development agreement with the Township for
§ 192-57 SOLID WASTE § 192-57
180:461
the applicant to fund the improvement, or his/her fair share
of such improvement, as determined by the Board of
Commissioners.
(f) Accounting. Any such funds shall be placed in escrow until
such time as sufficient funds are available for a more
comprehensive improvement, with interest being used towards
the cost of the improvement. Any such funds received under
this subsection shall be accounted for separately.
(g) Phasing. Any completion or funding of a required improvement
may occur in phases in relationship to the phases of the
development, if so stated in a legally binding development
agreement and/or as a condition of final plan approval.
(14) Minimum sight distance.
(a) Sight distances.
[1] An applicant for access for a new street, accessway or
driveway onto a Township street shall demonstrate that
the new access would meet the same PennDOT sight
distance requirements as if the street was a state road.
See Section 441.8 of PennDOT highway occupancy
regulations, or its successor sections.
[2] If the applicant demonstrates to the Township that it is not
possible to meet the desirable sight distances that are
stated in PennDOT regulations, then the intersection shall
be located at the point of maximum sight distances that
are achievable within the street length of the property and
shall meet the minimum required safe sight distances set
forth in such PennDOT regulations.
[3] In the event that the applicant demonstrates to the
Township that the minimum required safe sight distances
cannot be met, then the Board of Commissioners may
require one or more of the following:
[a] That the intersection be located at the point where
maximum sight distance can be achieved;
[b] Restricting turning movements into or out of the
intersection (such as no left turns into or out of the
intersection);
[c] The installation of a right turn acceleration or
deceleration lane;
[d] The installation of a left turn standby lane;
[e] That the horizontal or vertical alignment of the street
be altered;
§ 192-57 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-57
180:462
[f] An alternative form of access, such as a shared
driveway with another lot, or access onto a different
street; and/or
[g] Denying approval of the plan on the grounds that the
minimum safe distance requirement cannot be met
and that therefore public safety cannot be adequately
protected, and/or that any restrictions on turning
movements would not be practical or would have
adverse impacts upon other properties and streets
that may be used for turnarounds.
[4] In the event that turning movements from an intersection
are to be restricted, the applicant shall provide a detailed
design of the proposed intersection and an engineering
analysis of the anticipated impacts resulting from such
restricted turning movements. The design and analysis
shall be prepared by a professional engineer with
expertise in traffic engineering and shall address the
following:
[a] The impacts on other lots and streets within the
vicinity that may be used by motorists for
turnarounds.
[b] The impacts on public safety, considering sight
distance and types of vehicles.
[c] The provision of appropriate methods to ensure
compliance with the turning restrictions, such as
channelization, alignment, and signage. Such methods
should be certified as complying with applicable
standards of PennDOT or AASHTO.
(15) Maintenance. As a condition for final plan approval, the developer
must enter into a legally binding agreement which shall state who
is to be responsible for the improvement and maintenance of any
street not offered for dedication. If an association of lot owners is to
be made responsible, such association must be legally organized
prior to plan approval by an agreement approved by the Township.
The Board of Commissioners shall have the authority to decide
whether to accept an existing or proposed street as a Townshipmaintained
public street.
D. Traffic design standards.
(1) Transportation impact studies.
(a) Purposes: to enable the Township to assess the impact of a
proposed development on the transportation system; to ensure
that proposed developments do not adversely affect the
transportation network; to identify any transportation
§ 192-57 SOLID WASTE § 192-57
180:463
problems associated with access from the site to the existing
transportation network; to delineate solutions to potential
problems and propose improvements to be incorporated into
the proposed development.
(b) Applicability.
[1] A transportation impact study shall be required for any
subdivision or land development that at build-out after
completion of all phases is projected to generate 500 or
more average daily trip ends. "Trip ends" shall mean the
total number of trips both entering and exiting the
proposed development. These projected trip ends shall be
based on the latest edition of the publication titled "Trip
Generation," published by the Institute of Transportation
Engineers, or upon traffic studies conducted within the
last five years at comparable developments.
[2] If a development is proposed to be submitted in phases,
the initial study shall consider a reasonable estimate of the
likely development in later phases, in addition to the
current phase.
[3] The boundaries of the study area to be analyzed shall
include those existing and proposed streets and
intersections which may be affected by the proposed
subdivision or land development. If there is any dispute as
to whether existing and proposed streets and intersections
may be affected or not, the final discretion shall rest with
the Township Engineer or Traffic Engineer designated by
the Township.
[4] In lieu of submitting a transportation impact study, under
the provisions of § 192-7, the Board of Commissioners may
approve a modification to accept a fee from an applicant to
be put towards the cost of a larger, more comprehensive
traffic study.
[5] Where the word "traffic" is used in this section, it shall
include vehicles, pedestrians, bicycles and transit.
(c) Transportation impact study contents. In addition to the
following, a transportation impact study shall generally follow
PennDOT Publication 46, Chapter 11, "Traffic Studies,"
PennDOT Publication 282, "Highway Occupancy Permit
Handbook," and PennDOT Policies and Procedures for
Transportation Impact Studies, 1-28-2009, as amended:
[1] Site description. This section shall include the location,
proposed land uses, acreage, construction staging and
completion date of the proposed land development. Types
of dwelling units and number of bedrooms shall be
§ 192-57 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-57
180:464
included for residential developments, and gross and
usable floor area for nonresidential developments. A brief
description of surrounding land uses and other proposed
land developments within the study area shall be provided.
A study area map should also be included.
[2] Transportation facilities description.
[a] The study shall describe the proposed internal
transportation system, including vehicular, bicycle,
bus and pedestrian circulation, all internal roadway
widths and rights-of-way, parking conditions, traffic
channelizations and any traffic controls within the
site.
[b] The study shall describe location and design of
proposed access for vehicles, pedestrians and
bicycles, including sight distance limitations and
distance from adjacent driveways and intersections.
[c] The report shall describe the external roadway system
within the study area. Major intersections in the study
area shall be identified and mapped. Any proposal for
bus or van service shall be described. Pedestrian and
bicycle facilities on abutting properties and roads
shall also be documented. All proposed or approved
roadway improvements within the study area shall be
noted.
[3] Existing traffic conditions. Existing traffic conditions shall
be documented for all streets and intersections in the
study area. Traffic volumes shall be recorded for existing
average daily traffic, existing peak hour traffic and for
traffic during the development's peak hour. Complete
traffic counts at all intersections in the study area shall be
conducted, encompassing the peak hours of the
development and roadway. A volume capacity analysis
using the procedures of the current Highway Capacity
Manual and based upon existing volumes shall be
performed during the peak hour(s) of the development for
the peak hour(s) of all roadways and major intersections in
the study area. Levels of service shall be determined for
each location.
[4] Traffic impact of the development. Estimation of traffic
trips to result from the proposal shall be completed for the
peak hour(s) of both the street system and the
development. Acceptable source(s) and methodology shall
be followed. These generated volumes shall be distributed
to the study area and assigned to the existing streets and
intersections throughout the study area. Documentation of
§ 192-57 SOLID WASTE § 192-57
180:465
all assumptions used in the distribution and assignment
phase shall be provided. Traffic volumes shall be assigned
to all access points. Safety issues for any pedestrian
crossings shall be described. Any characteristics of the site
that will cause unusual trip generation rates and/or traffic
flows shall be noted.
[5] Analysis of traffic impact. The total future traffic demand
based on full occupancy of the proposed subdivision or
land development shall be calculated for the existing and
proposed streets and intersections. This demand shall
consist of the combination of the existing traffic expanded
to the completion year through the use of an accepted
background growth rate, the development-generated
traffic and the traffic generated by other proposed
developments in the study area. A volume/capacity
analysis shall also be conducted using the total future
demand and the future roadway capacity. This analysis
shall be performed using the peak hour(s) for all streets
and major intersections in the study area and for the peak
hour(s) of the development. Volume capacity calculations
shall be completed for all movements at major
intersections. Levels of service for all streets and
intersections shall be listed.
[6] Conclusions and recommended improvements.
[a] Any movements on streets and intersections within
the study area showing a Level of Service D, or worse,
based on the latest edition of the Highway Capacity
Manual, shall be considered deficient. Specific
recommendations for the elimination of these
problems shall be listed. For unsignalized
intersections where the traffic impact of the
development causes the side street approach to
degrade to a Level of Service D or lower, the
intersection shall be evaluated for a signal warrant.
Highway capacity evaluations shall consider not only
the overall intersection level of service, but also each
approach and movement to identify any substandard
values which need to be improved.
[b] For all locations where the level of service for the
completion year of the development is deficient
without the proposed development, the study shall
determine improvements which would provide a level
of service and delay no worse than conditions without
the subject development. These improvements may
include street and intersection design and
improvements, traffic signal installation and
operation, traffic signal timing and other
§ 192-57 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-57
180:466
improvements. The study shall also provide an
analysis to determine improvements which would
eliminate all deficient levels of service.
[c] Actions to facilitate use of bus or van service shall be
included, if applicable.
[d] The listing of recommended improvements for both
streets and transit shall include, for each
improvement, the party responsible for the
improvement, a preliminary cost estimate and funding
of the improvement and the phase of development
during which the improvement is proposed to be
completed. Any roadway improvement which requires
increased right-of-way shall be identified.
Recommended improvements shall address all modes
of traffic.
[e] The transportation impact study may be used as a
basis for a Township requirement under § 192-63 or
another section of this chapter.
[f] Improvement plans shall not be submitted to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT) before they are submitted to the Township.
Approval of a site access plan by PennDOT does not
guarantee approval by the Township.
[7] Preparation and review. The preparer of the transportation
impact study shall be a professional engineer or
transportation planner. The developer shall reimburse the
Township for reasonable fees and expenses incurred by
the Township Engineer or Traffic Engineer for the review
of the developer's transportation impact study and plans.
(2) Traffic control devices. See § 192-63B. Traffic control devices
warranted by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD) or PennDOT Publication 212, "Official Traffic Control
Devices," must be incorporated in the plan. This includes but is not
limited to signs, pavement markings, traffic signals and
delineators.
(3) Work zone traffic control. See the right-of-way provisions of the
Lower Allen Township Code.155
(4) Street names and street signs.
(a) Street names are subject to the approval of the Township and
the U.S. Postal Service and shall:
155. Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 192-57 SOLID WASTE § 192-57
180:467
§ 192-58. Landscape design standards.
[1] Continue the name of any street with the same or similar
alignment; and
[2] Not duplicate or be closely similar to the name of another
street within the Township, the same fire company or
ambulance service district or the same five digit zip code
area.
(b) The subdivider shall provide and install street signs meeting
Township requirements or reimburse the costs to the Township
of providing and installing such signs.
(5) Traffic calming. Traffic-calming features may be incorporated in
subdivisions and land developments, in accordance with PennDOTrecommended
procedures and recognized industry standards.
A. Where landscaping is required, a landscape plan for the entire
development shall be prepared by a registered professional competent
in landscape design.
B. See § 192-63D for landscape construction standards.
C. Street trees. Within and abutting all land developments and major
subdivisions, along any existing or proposed street or any access drive
serving more than one nonresidential use or any access drive serving
five or more dwelling units, street trees are required to be planted.
However, street trees shall not be required where the Township
determines that existing healthy trees proposed to be preserved will
serve the same function.
(1) The Board of Commissioners may approve other species of trees
than those listed below if the applicant demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Commissioners that the trees would be sturdy,
attractive, resistant to disease and road salt, and appropriate for
the proposed planting location.
(2) Trees required by this section shall be selected from the following
species. In areas with overhead utility lines, only trees that will not
interfere with overhead lines shall be planted. Street trees shall be
selected according to the following conditions:
(a) Small, compact trees – Condition A: tree lawn between
pavement and sidewalk less than five feet.
Common Name Scientific Name Variety
Canadian
Serviceberry
Amelanchier
canadensis
Autumn Sunset
(single-trunk tree
form)
Canadian
Serviceberry
Amelanchier
canadensis
Cumulus (singletrunk
tree form)
§ 192-57 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-58
180:468
Common Name Scientific Name Variety
Canadian
Serviceberry
Amelanchier
canadensis
White Pillar (singletrunk
tree form)
Allegheny
Serviceberry
Amelanchier laevis Cumulus (singletrunk
tree form)
Serviceberry Amelanchier x
grandiflora
Autumn Brilliance
(single-trunk tree
form)
Serviceberry Amelanchier x
grandiflora
Trazam (singletrunk
tree form)
Serviceberry Amelanchier x
grandiflora
Cole's Select
(single-trunk tree
form)
Galaxy Magnolia Magnolia sp. Galaxy Tree Form
Crabapple Malus sp. Adirondack
Crabapple Malus sp. Ballerina
Crabapple Malus sp. Donald Wyman
Crabapple Malus sp. Pink Dawn
Sargent Cherry Prunus sargentii Columnaris
Japanese Flowering
Cherry
Prunus serrulata Amanogawa (singletrunk
tree form)
Japanese Flowering
Cherry
Prunus serrulata Accolade
Japanese Flowering
Cherry
Prunus serrulata Autumnalis
Japanese Flowering
Cherry
Prunus serrulata Kwanzan
Japanese Flowering
Cherry
Prunus serrulata Okame
Common
Chokecherry
Prunus virginiana Schubert
Snow Goose Cherry Prunus sp. Snow Goose
(b) Medium-sized trees – Condition B: tree lawn between
pavement and sidewalk five feet to 10 feet.
Common Name Scientific Name Variety
Hedge Maple Acer campestre Evelyn
Hedge Maple Acer campestre Miyabe
Red Horsechestnut Aesculus x carnea Briotti
Red Horsechestnut Aesculus x carnea Fort McNair
§ 192-58 SOLID WASTE § 192-58
180:469
Common Name Scientific Name Variety
Heritage River
Birch
Betula nigra Heritage (singletrunk
tree form)
Upright European
Hornbeam
Carpinus betulus Fastigiata
American
Hornbeam,
Musclewood
Carpinus
caroliniana
Carolina Silverbell Halesia carolina
Sweetbay Magnolia Magnolia
virginiana
Sourwood Oxydendrum
arboreum
Hophornbeam Ostrya virginiana
Japanese Tree Lilac Syringa reticulata Ivory Silk
(c) Large trees – Condition C: tree lawn between pavement and
sidewalk more than 10 feet.
Common Name Scientific Name Variety
Black Maple Acer nigrum
Sugar Maple Acer saccharum Gold Mountain
Sugar Maple Acer saccharum Goldspire
American Chestnut Castanea dentata Only blight-resistant
hybrids
Common
Hackberry
Celtis occidentalis
Katsura-tree Cercidiphyllum
japonicum
Thornless
Honeylocust
Gleditsia
triacanthos var.
inermis
Only thornless
cultivars like
Shademaster or
Majestic
Kentucky
Coffeetree
Gymnocladus
dioicus
Tuliptree, Yellow
poplar
Liriodendron
tulipifera
Sweetgum Liquidambar
styraciflua
Cucumber
Magnolia
Magnolia
acuminata
Black Tupelo, Black
Gum
Nyssa sylvatica
§ 192-58 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-58
180:470
Common Name Scientific Name Variety
London Plane-tree Platanus x
acerifolia
Bloodgood
American
Sycamore
Platanus
Occidentalls
White Oak Quercus alba
Swamp White Oak Quercus bicolor
Scarlet Oak Quercus coccinea
Shingle Oak Quercus imbricaria
Bur Oak Quercus
macrocarpa
Willow Oak Quercus phellos
English Oak Quercus robur Attention
English Oak Quercus robur Skymaster
English Oak Quercus robur Skyrocket
Red Oak Quercus rubra
Shumard Oak Quercus shumardii
American Linden,
Basswood
Tilia americana
Littleleaf Linden Tilia cordata Corinthian
Littleleaf Linden Tilia cordata Chancellor
American Elm Ulmus americana Only cultivars
resistant to Dutch
Elm Disease
Japanese Zelkova Zelkova serrata Green Vase
Japanese Zelkova Zelkova serrata Village Green
(d) Planting conditions are considered hierarchical. If a tree is
acceptable to plant within Condition A, it is also acceptable for
planting within Condition B or C. However, consideration
should be given for the creation of canopy and shade.
(3) In certain cases where evergreen trees would provide a buffer
between a street and dwellings, or be more consistent with native
vegetation, then the Township may permit the planting of
evergreen trees instead of deciduous trees. In such case, the trees
are intended to be planted immediately outside of the right-of-way.
(4) Quality of trees.
(a) Trees shall be of symmetrical growth, free of insect pests and
disease and durable under the maintenance contemplated.
§ 192-58 SOLID WASTE § 192-58
180:471
(b) Trees which have died or have become diseased or pest-ridden
within 18 months from the time of planting shall be replaced by
the developer.
(c) Trees shall generally meet the quality standards of the
American Nursery and Landscape Association's American
Standard for Nursery Stock ANSI, Z60.1, as amended.
(5) Required number and spacing of street trees.
(a) Along streets and access drives where street trees are
required, an average of one street tree shall be required for
every 50 feet of distance along the street right-of-way line on
each affected side of the street. Where a right-of-way does not
exist, an average of one street tree shall be required for every
50 feet of length of cartway on each side of the cartway.
(b) Spacing. The trees required under this section shall be spaced
throughout the development along the street, but are not
required to be planted at exact intervals and may be clustered
following an approved plan. Trees shall be located so that they
do not restrict sight distance at driveway and street
intersections.
(c) If more than 10 trees are required to be planted, then no more
than 50% shall be of one species.
(6) Location of street trees. The trunks of required street trees shall be
planted within a street right-of-way, unless an alternative location
is specifically approved by the Township or required by PennDOT.
Where trees are not allowed within the right-of-way, they shall be
planted on the immediate outside of the right-of-way. Where trees
are not allowed because of a sight distance issue, the trees shall be
planted at other locations on the tract. Street trees, when planted,
shall be, at a minimum, three feet from any established curbline or
eight feet from the cartway if there will be no curbing.
(7) Other requirements. The street trees required under this section
shall be in addition to any trees required under other Township
regulations.
D. Buffer yards. See the requirements for buffer yards in the Township
Zoning Ordinance.156
(1) Rear yard buffers along major streets.
(a) Any residential lot of less than two acres with a rear yard
directly abutting a collector or arterial street or limited access
highway shall, along such rear yard, include a ten-foot-wide
planting strip along the back of the lot, in addition to the
156. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 192-58 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-58
180:472
minimum yard requirement, with vehicle access across this
strip clearly prohibited on notes on any approved plan.
(b) In addition to any street trees required by § 192-58C of this
chapter, this planting strip shall include evergreen plantings
meeting the buffer yard requirements of the Township Zoning
Ordinance or alternative landscaping approved by the Board of
Commissioners. American Arborvitae and similar weak-stem
plants shall not be used.
(c) Any fencing in the rear of such lots shall be placed on the
inside of such plantings. Such plantings shall be placed so that
they do not obstruct safe sight distance.
E. Parking lot landscaping. See the requirements in the Township Zoning
Ordinance.157
(1) Landscaping in parking lots shall be installed in accordance with
landscape construction standards, § 192-63D.
(2) Parking lot landscaping shall be designed with consideration to the
principles of Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design
(CPTED). See Appendix C.158
(3) Plants shall be located to allow for clear movement of emergency
vehicles when full maturity of plants is reached.
(4) Trees in parking lots shall be of a noncolumnar, shade-tree variety.
(5) No more than 20 parking spaces shall be placed in a continuous
row without an intervening planting island.
(6) A planting island shall be placed at each end of each row of
parking.
(7) Planting islands shall have a minimum width of nine feet and a
minimum length of 18 feet.
(8) Longitudinal planting beds, with a minimum width of 10 feet, shall
run perpendicular to parking spaces.
(9) Maximum spacing between longitudinal planting beds shall be 175
feet.
(10) Planting islands and longitudinal planting beds shall be designed to
collect stormwater runoff from adjacent paved parking areas.
F. Preservation of existing trees.
(1) Purposes. To protect wildlife and bird habitats, encourage
groundwater recharge, reduce air pollution, avoid pollution of
157. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
158. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 192-58 SOLID WASTE § 192-58
180:473
§ 192-59. Site design standards.
creeks by high temperature runoff, maintain the attractive
character of residential areas and conserve energy.
(2) See definition of "forestry" and the standards for forestry and
woodland preservation in the Zoning Ordinance.159
(3) Tree cutting. The number of trees with a trunk diameter of 2 1/2
inches or more measured at a height of 4.5 feet above the average
surrounding ground height that are cut down or effectively killed as
part of a subdivision or land development in preparation to or as a
result of such activity shall only be:
(a) As approved under the Township Zoning Ordinance as a
forestry operation or under the woodland preservation
provisions; and/or
(b) For the routine thinning of woods.
(4) Protection of trees during construction.
(a) Reasonable efforts shall be taken during any construction to
ensure the protection of trees protected by this section to
ensure that the trees are not accidentally injured or killed.
These efforts shall ensure that equipment does not damage
tree trunks, that roots are not compacted by vehicles and that
the grade level around trees is not changed by more than two
inches. Protective fences must be placed around the outside of
the drip line of protected trees during construction.
(b) If an approved subdivision or land development plan states
that certain trees are to be preserved, and if those trees are
killed, then the developer shall be required to replace those
trees with new mature trees at a ratio of three new trees to one
removed tree, in addition to any other penalties provided in
this chapter.
A. Lots.
(1) Zoning. All lots shall conform to all requirements of the Township
Zoning Ordinance,160 as were in effect at the time such subdivision
plan was duly submitted.
(2) Street frontage. All lots shall front on a public street or on a private
street within the requirements of § 192-63 of this chapter.
(3) The average depth-to-width ratio of a lot shall generally not be
greater than two to one.
159. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
160. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 192-58 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-59
180:474
(4) Side lot lines shall abut and be approximately at right angles to
straight streets and on radial lines to curved streets. Pointed or
very irregularly shaped lots shall be avoided.
(5) Lots abutting two streets on two noncontiguous sides shall
ordinarily not be created except as needed to avoid direct vehicular
access onto an arterial or collector street by individual driveways.
This shall not apply to a lot abutting a limited access highway.
(6) A lot, other than preserved common open space, that would not be
suitable for uses permitted in that zoning district shall not be
created as part of a subdivision, but instead shall be incorporated
into another lot.
B. Blocks.
(1) Maximum length. Residential blocks shall not exceed 1,200 feet in
length in subdivisions using an average lot size of one acre or
larger and shall not exceed 800 feet in length in subdivisions
having an average lot size less than one acre.
(a) Pedestrian and bicycle crossings. Pedestrian and bicycle
access easements shall be provided to allow pedestrian and
bicycle access where street connections are not available to
serve the same purpose. Any block exceeding 600 feet in
length shall have a midblock pedestrian and bicycle access
between streets.
(b) Future street. Blocks shall be considered to be separated by
the reservation as part of an approved subdivision plan of a
fifty-foot minimum right-of-way reserved for a future crossstreet,
such as a street intended to serve future interior lots.
Such future street is not required to be constructed until such
time as the lots fronting on it are subdivided. Such right-of-way
shall be retained in the same ownership as the abutting
interior lot(s) until a street may be developed.
(2) Minimum length. Residential blocks shall have a minimum length
of 250 feet.
(3) Blocks shall be of sufficient width to permit two tiers of lots, except
where access is limited by virtue of an adjoining arterial street or
by virtue of topographic limitations.
C. Off-street parking, access and loading. See also the Township Zoning
Ordinance.161
(1) Interconnected parking lots. The following provisions shall apply
adjacent to a collector or arterial street where two lots that are
161. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 192-59 SOLID WASTE § 192-59
180:475
each intended for current or future uses other than single-family
residences will be contiguous to each other.
(a) When two contiguous uses or lots are in common ownership at
the time of subdivision or land development application, the
parking lots shall include an interconnection to allow vehicles
and pedestrians to travel from one use or lot to another use or
lot without needing to re-enter a public street.
(b) Where two contiguous lots involving current or future uses
other than single-family residences are not in common
ownership, the applicant for a subdivision or land development
shall seek permission from the abutting lot owner to allow a
vehicle interconnection between the parking lots. Unless the
abutting property owner refuses to permit the interconnection,
the subdivision or land development shall include the
construction of a vehicle and pedestrian interconnection
between the parking areas. If the abutting property owner
refuses to permit the interconnection or the interconnection is
currently not feasible, the Board of Commissioners may
require that the subdivision or land development include an
easement allowing a future interconnection and/or construct
the interconnection as a stub up to the applicant's property
line.
(c) Where an interconnection is required or planned between two
uses or lots, the subdivision or land development shall include
a suitable cross-easement that permits vehicles and
pedestrians from one use or lot to have access through the
parking lot and driveway of the adjacent use or lot.
(2) Each parking space adjacent to an island at the end of a parking
row shall have an additional two feet of paving provided in addition
to the required parking space width to allow access to the vehicle.
(3) Developments other than single-family residential shall comply
with the applicable sections of the International Fire Code
regarding access.
D. Trail design standards. See also trail construction standards.
(1) If deemed necessary for the convenient and safe circulation of
bicycles and pedestrians, subdivisions and land developments shall
include the construction of paved trails.
(2) A paved trail shall have a minimum width of five feet and a
maximum width of 12 feet and shall be paved to Township
standards. It may be required to be placed within a street right-ofway
in place of a sidewalk or may be placed elsewhere on a lot
within an easement or other right-of-way.
§ 192-59 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-59
180:476
(3) A trail shall be required from the end of any cul-de-sac street to the
nearest cul-de-sac street or other street in each direction. A trail
shall also be required from the end of any cul-de-sac street or any
other street to provide a connection with adjacent undeveloped
land that can be extended onto that land when it is developed in the
future.
(4) Appropriate signs shall be included at locations where trails
intersect with streets, driveways, sidewalks or other trails.
(5) Trails shall generally be designed in accordance with Designing
Sidewalks and Trails, U.S. Department of Transportation,
September 2001, or as revised.
E. Natural and historic feature preservation and maintenance.
(1) Substantial and sensitive natural features and historic structures
and important archeological sites worthy of protection shall be
respected, incorporated into the design of and reasonably
protected in any subdivision or land development.
(2) These features include, but are not limited to, natural drainage
channels, waterways and falls, large trees, mature groves of trees,
highly scenic views and important community landmarks.
(3) Stream maintenance and access easements.
(a) A stream maintenance easement with a minimum width of 25
feet from the top of bank shall be provided along the Yellow
Breeches Creek and Cedar Run.
(b) An access easement connecting public street right-of-way to
the stream maintenance easement shall be provided, with a
minimum width of 20 feet.
F. Refuse facilities. All multifamily developments shall include
conveniently located refuse collection facilities for the residents. All
uses within nonresidential land developments and subdivisions shall
include appropriate refuse collection facilities. All bulk refuse collection
refuse facilities shall be screened by walls or evergreen landscaping
from view of existing dwellings, adjacent undeveloped residentially
zoned lots and public streets.
G. Lot width modifications; flag lot within a conservation subdivision.
(1) Lot width modifications. The minimum lot width requirement as
measured at the minimum building setback line for a lot may be
reduced by the following amounts in the following situations:
(a) Along the curve of a cul-de-sac bulb, the minimum lot width
may be 60% of what would otherwise be required.
§ 192-59 SOLID WASTE § 192-59
180:477
(b) Along the outside of a curve in a street, the minimum lot width
may be 80% of what would otherwise be required.
(c) Where a minimum front yard building setback is less than 50
feet, the minimum lot width may be measured at the proposed
building setback or at a fifty-foot yard setback, whichever is
less.
(2) Flag lot definition. See the Zoning Ordinance.162
(3) Flag lot standards. A flag lot shall only be approved if it will be
within a conservation subdivision development and meets all of the
following standards:
(a) A flag lot shall only be approved as a condition of the
preliminary or final subdivision approval.
(b) A flag lot shall only be approved if the applicant demonstrates
that the flag lot:
[1] Is necessary to minimize the environmental impacts such
as grading and removal of woods that would otherwise
occur; and
[2] Would not result in a greater number of lots on the tract
than would otherwise be feasible and allowed.
(c) A flag lot shall meet the minimum lot width requirement stated
in the Zoning Ordinance as measured at the proposed front
yard building setback line, as opposed to the minimum front
yard building setback line.
(d) The pole portion of the lot shall not exceed 300 feet in length,
as measured from the street right-of-way.
(e) The lot shall have an absolute minimum lot width in all
locations of 25 feet, including but not limited to the minimum
lot width as measured along the street right-of-way.
(f) A flag lot shall only be approved for a lot that is protected by a
deed restriction from future subdivision.
(g) Every flag lot shall have a driveway on the lot that provides
access to a street, unless a shared driveway is approved.
(h) A maximum of 10% of the lots within a subdivision may be
approved as flag lots.
(i) The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Township that the proposed driveway would provide adequate
access for emergency vehicles.
162. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 192-59 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-59
180:478
§ 192-60. Recreation area design standards and fees.
(j) This section shall not relieve a property of any zoning
requirements other than the minimum lot width.
(k) The minimum front yard requirement shall be met by being
measured back from the location on the lot where the
minimum lot width is met.
(l) A flag lot may be approved behind an existing lot, but a flag lot
shall not be placed behind another flag lot. Therefore, no more
than one tier of flag lots shall be permitted.
H. Drainage.
(1) Existing points of natural drainage discharge onto adjacent
properties shall not be altered without the written approval of the
affected landowners.
(2) Stormwater roof drains shall not discharge runoff directly over a
sidewalk.
A. Purposes: to provide adequate open spaces, recreational lands and
recreational facilities to serve Township residents for both active and
passive recreation; to recognize and work to carry out the recreation
plan portion of the Comprehensive Plan for Lower Allen Township.
B. Applicability.
(1) This section shall apply to any subdivision or land development for
which a preliminary plan or a combined preliminary/final plan is
submitted after the enactment date of this amendment. This
section shall only apply to a subdivision or land development that
could result in the construction of one or more new dwelling units.
(2) This § 192-60 shall not apply to plans that only involve adjustments
or corrections to an approved preliminary plan or a preliminary
plan that was actively before the Township for consideration as of
the date of the adoption of this section, provided the adjustments
do not increase the number of proposed dwelling units.
C. Limitations on use of fees.
(1) Any fees collected under this section shall be placed in an interestbearing
account and shall be accounted for separately from other
Township funds.
(2) Such fees shall only be used for the following: acquisition of public
open space and related debt payments, development of public
recreational facilities, landscaping of public open space and closely
related engineering and design work.
§ 192-59 SOLID WASTE § 192-60
180:479
D. Land to be preserved. Any subdivision or land development regulated
under this § 192-60 shall be required to preserve the specified amount
of recreation land, unless the Board of Commissioners determines that
recreation fees shall be required in lieu of land.
(1) As a general nonbinding guideline, it is the intent of this section
that smaller developments (such as 10 or fewer dwelling units) that
do not include land that is adjacent to existing publicly owned land
shall be required to pay a recreation land fee in lieu of dedicating
land.
(2) The land and fee requirements of this section shall be based upon
the number of proposed new dwelling units.
(3) Prime recreation land. For the purposes of this section, the term
"prime recreation land" shall mean land proposed to be established
as public recreation land that would meet all of the following
standards:
(a) Slope of less than 6%;
(b) Not a wetland under federal and/or state regulations;
(c) Be part of a contiguous tract of at least two acres (which may
include existing adjacent public recreation land or part of a
Township trail route); and
(d) Not be within the one-hundred-year floodplain, as defined by
official floodplain maps of the Township.
(4) Amount of public recreation land. If a subdivision or land
development is required to include public recreation land, the
following amounts for each permitted new dwelling unit shall
apply:
Percentage of the Total
Required Public Recreation
Land that Would Meet the
Definition of "Prime
Recreation Land"
Minimum Required Public
Recreation Land Per
Permitted Dwelling Unit
(square feet)
0% to 25.0% 6,000
25.1% to 75.0% 3,000
75.1% to 100% 1,500
E. Fees. If the Board of Commissioners determines that a proposed
subdivision or land development is required to pay fees in lieu of
dedicating recreation land, this fee shall be as established by the
Township Fee Schedule, which may be updated by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners.
F. Decision on land vs. fees. The Board of Commissioners shall determine
whether a land dedication would be in the public interest or whether
§ 192-60 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-60
180:480
the payment of fees is required. This determination should, but is not
required to, be made at the time of sketch plan review. The Township
should, at a minimum, consider the following in this decision:
(1) Whether the land in that location would serve a valid public
purpose.
(2) Whether there is potential to make a desirable addition to an
existing public recreation area or to create a greenway along a
creek.
(3) Whether the proposed land would meet the objectives and
requirements of this section and any relevant policies of the
Township Comprehensive Plan and any recreation, open space or
trail plan.
(4) Whether the area surrounding the proposed development has
sufficient existing recreation and open space land and whether it is
accessible for pedestrians and bicyclists.
(5) Any recommendations that may be received from the Planning
Commission, the Township Engineer and the Township Parks and
Recreation Board.
G. Recreation land and common open space requirements. The following
provisions shall apply to both required recreation land and to common
open space that may be required under other Township requirements:
(1) Suitability. Recreation land and common open space shall be
suitable for its intended purpose. The applicant shall state, in
writing, what improvements, if any, he/she will commit to make to
the land to make it suitable for its intended purpose, such as
grading, landscaping or development of trails.
(2) Ownership. Required recreation land shall be dedicated to the
Township, unless the Board of Commissioners agree to accept a
dedication to any of the following: the school district, the county,
the Pennsylvania Bureau of State Parks, the Pennsylvania Fish and
Boat Commission, the Pennsylvania Game Commission, a similar
governmental agency, an incorporated property owner association
(such as a homeowners' or condominium association) or an
established environmental organization acceptable to the Board of
Commissioners. In the case of a rental development, the Township
may permit the recreation land or common open space to be
retained by the owner of the adjacent principal buildings.
(a) If recreation land or common open space is to be owned by a
property owner association, the developer shall be required to
establish such association in a form that requires all property
owners within the development to annually contribute to the
maintenance of the common open space.
§ 192-60 SOLID WASTE § 192-60
180:481
[1] Any property owner association agreements regarding
required common open space shall be subject to
acceptance by the Board of Commissioners, based upon
review by the Township Solicitor.
[2] Prior to the sale of any dwelling unit or lot, all deeds shall
require each property owner to pay fees on a regular basis
for the maintenance and other expenses of owning such
land. The property owners shall be incorporated with
covenants and bylaws providing for the filing of
assessments. After providing notice to affected owners,
the Township shall have the authority to establish
municipal liens upon all properties in the association to
fund maintenance of the land and Township legal costs if
the property owners' association does not fulfill its
responsibilities.
[3] An orderly process shall be established for the transfer of
the land to the association. The Township may delay a
transfer of maintenance responsibilities by a developer to
a property owners' association until such association is
incorporated and able to maintain such land.
[4] The property owners' association shall be established in
full compliance with applicable state law, including the
Uniform Planned Community Act.163
(b) Transfer to another entity. If the approved plan states that
ownership of and/or responsibilities to maintain the recreation
land or common open space are limited to a particular entity,
then any transfer of ownership or responsibilities to another
entity shall require pre-approval by the Board of
Commissioners. Where land is to be owned by a conservation
organization, a process should be established for the land to
transfer to a different organization if the first organization is
not able to fulfill its obligations.
(c) The Board of Commissioners shall have the authority to refuse
to accept an offer of dedication of common open space to the
Township.
(3) Easements/deed restrictions. Any required recreation land or
common open space dedication shall include deed restrictions or
conservation easements to permanently prevent its development
for buildings, except buildings for approved types of
noncommercial recreation or to support maintenance of the land.
Such deed restrictions or conservation easements shall, at a
minimum, be enforceable by the Township. The Board of
163. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq.
§ 192-60 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-60
180:482
Commissioners may require that the restrictions or easements also
authorize enforcement by a suitable third party.
(4) Priorities. Priority shall be given to dedication of land that would be
suitable for:
(a) Additions to existing public parks; or
(b) Additions to or extensions of trails; or
(c) Preservation of woods, steep slopes or other important natural
features or land along a creek; or
(d) Centralized active recreation.
(5) Suitability. Land that is not suitable for active or passive recreation
shall not be permitted to meet the requirements of this section.
Portions intended for active recreation shall be well-drained, of an
average slope of less than 6% and not require filling in of a wetland
for use.
(6) Access and contiguousness. Required recreation land and common
open space within a subdivision or land development shall be
contiguous, except as may be specifically exempted by the Board of
Commissioners, and shall have adequate access for maintenance
and by pedestrians and bicycles.
(7) Other ordinances. Any required land dedication or fees under this
section shall be in addition to any land dedication or improvement
requirements of any other Township ordinance.
(8) Residual lands. If only a portion of a larger tract of land is currently
proposed to be subdivided, or the applicant owns one or more
adjacent tracts that are not currently proposed to be subdivided,
the applicant shall provide a sketch of a possible future land
dedication on these adjacent lands. The intent is to coordinate
current plans with any future development, even in the long term.
(9) Coordination with future adjacent dedication. The Board of
Commissioners may require that a required land dedication within
a property currently being subdivided be placed along an edge of
the property so that it may, in the future, be combined with an open
space or public recreation land dedication on the edge of an
adjoining property when that adjoining property is subdivided or
developed.
H. Combination of Land and Fees. Upon mutual agreement of the Board of
Commissioners and the applicant, the Township may accept a
combination of public recreation land and fees in lieu of land to meet
the requirements of this section for a subdivision or land development.
This combination shall be based upon the public recreation land
requirement applying for a certain number of dwelling units and the fee
in lieu of land requirement applying for the remaining development. For
§ 192-60 SOLID WASTE § 192-60
180:483
§ 192-61. Utilities and services.
example, if a development included 25 dwelling units, public recreation
land could be required for 15 dwelling units and fees could be required
for 10 dwelling units.
I. Timing of residential fees. Fees required by this section for all of the
dwelling units shall be paid prior to the recording of the final plan.
J. Facilities in place of land or fees. An applicant may submit a written
request for a modification of the requirements of this section by offering
to construct substantial permanent recreation facilities within the
proposed subdivision or land development or on land dedicated for a
public trail. Such modification shall only be approved if the applicant
clearly demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Board of Commissioners
that the facilities will serve a valid public purpose, will be designed
following modern standards in a durable manner and will have a higher
market value than the land or fees that would otherwise be required.
(1) A modification of these requirements may also be approved by the
Board of Commissioners if the applicant donates or sells
appropriate public recreation land to the Township. In such case,
the applicant shall provide a written appraisal from a qualified
professional that the market value of the donation or price
reduction is greater than the value of the fee or land requirement
that is waived. In such case, the land shall be determined to be
suitable for public recreation by the Board of Commissioners.
A. Sanitary sewage disposal systems.
(1) In general.
(a) All subdivisions and land developments shall be served with an
approved and adequate sewage disposal system (either on-lot
or public) that will meet state and Township regulations.
(b) Where a public sanitary sewage system is available within
1,000 feet of, or where plans approved by the Board of
Commissioners or Authority provide for the installation of
public sanitary sewage facilities to within 1,000 feet of, a
proposed subdivision of land development, the applicant shall
provide a complete sanitary sewer system. Such system shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with state,
Township and Authority requirements and shall connect to the
existing public sanitary sewer system.
(c) Public sewage connections. Any principal building or use
within a subdivision or land development that generates
wastewater and that could connect into a public sewage
system shall be required to connect into that system. The
applicant shall be responsible to pay such reasonable capital
expenses that are necessary for such connection.
§ 192-60 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-61
180:484
(2) Central sewage service. See also the Sewers chapter of the Lower
Allen Township Code.164
(a) Lower Allen Township Authority shall have the authority to
approve or reject the proposed sewage collection system for
just cause.
(b) Nonpublic sewage service. If nonpublic central sewage service
is proposed, the Board of Commissioners shall have the
authority to permit or not permit such service to meet the
sewage requirements of this section based upon:
[1] Whether public sewage service is expected to be available
within five years of the date of preliminary plan approval;
[2] Whether the proposed system would be consistent with the
Township's official Sewage Facilities Plan; and
[3] Whether the system would include an appropriate
permanent system for professional operation and
maintenance.
(3) On-lot sewage disposal system.
(a) If connection to a public sewage system is not required at the
time of occupancy, and if a nonpublic central sewage system is
not approved by the Township under the Township Sewage
Facilities Plan, then each lot shall be required to be served by
an on-lot sewage disposal system that will meet all applicable
state regulations. Each such proposed location shall be tested
and approved by the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer
prior to approval of the final plan.
(b) Portable chemical toilets allowed as per DEP regulation or
other approved privies shall not be used as a primary method
of sewage service for a subdivision or land development that
operates more than 10 days in any calendar year, other than
publicly owned outdoor recreation uses and construction sites.
(c) See the Township Zoning Ordinance,165 which requires a tested
alternate septic system location meeting all DEP regulations.
(d) The applicant shall submit results or a summary of the tests of
required on-lot septic tests and shall show approved test
locations on the preliminary plans in accordance with DEP
planning module requirements.
(4) Laterals. Each lot with central sewage service shall be served by a
separate sewage lateral.
164. Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Sewers.
165. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 192-61 SOLID WASTE § 192-61
180:485
B. Water supply systems, fire hydrants and fire protection.
(1) In general.
(a) All subdivisions and land developments shall be served with an
adequate on-lot or central water supply system that will meet
DEP and Township requirements.
(b) Where a public water main supply system is available within
1,000 feet of, or where plans approved by the Board of
Commissioners or public water utility provide for the
installation of public water facilities to within 1,000 feet of, a
proposed subdivision of land development, the applicant shall
provide a complete public water main supply system. Such
system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
state, Township and public water utility requirements and shall
connect to the existing public water main supply system.
(c) Required connections to central water systems.
[1] The Board of Commissioners, after requesting any
recommendations of the Planning Commission, the
Township Engineer and the appropriate water supplier,
shall require all lots and principal uses within a
subdivision or land development to be connected to an
existing public or Township-approved central water
system where the Board of Commissioners determines
that such connection would be feasible, cost-effective and
reasonable, considering the distances that the lines would
need to be extended and the average cost per dwelling or
lot.
(2) Central water supply system.
(a) Water supplier approval. Proposed extensions of central water
systems shall meet all applicable procedures, reviews and
requirements of any appropriate municipal authority or water
company. Such extension shall be approved by such agency
prior to final plan approval, although specific detailed service
agreements are not required to be signed until prior to
recording.
(b) Nonpublic supplier. Any new central water system that is not
owned by a public authority or municipality shall be found to
be acceptable in capacity, pressure, design and construction.
The Board of Commissioners may deny permission for a
subdivision or land development to be served by a nonpublic
central water system if such system cannot guarantee
sufficient water pressure and capacity and would not include a
suitable process for long-term operation and maintenance.
(3) On-lot water system (wells).
§ 192-61 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-61
180:486
(a) Well locations. When a subdivision or land development is not
required to connect to a central water system, acceptable
locations for on-lot water systems shall be shown on plans and
shall be constructed in accordance with regulations of DEP.
(b) Setback. Wells shall be located no closer than 25 feet from any
existing or future street right-of-way. Wells shall also be
located to meet minimum requirements of the Federal Housing
Administration.
(4) Fire hydrants. All subdivisions and land developments that will be
served by central water service shall provide fire hydrants as
needed with appropriate water pressure so that all dwelling units
are within 600 feet of an active fire hydrant. All nonresidential
principal buildings shall be located within 400 feet of an active fire
hydrant.
(a) All hydrants shall be placed with the steamer nozzle facing
toward the street or parking lot and shall be located so that
they are accessible to within five feet by fire apparatus.
(b) All hydrants shall provide one five-inch Storz connection.
(c) Fire flows shall not be less than 500 gallons per minute in
single-family residential areas and 1,000 gallons per minute in
other development areas at 20 psi residual pressure.
(d) The water system supplying the hydrants shall be capable of
meeting maximum domestic consumption at all times, plus
required fire flow for a minimum duration of two hours.
(e) The Board of Commissioners may grant a modification of these
requirements based upon a written recommendation by a
professional engineer with expertise in fire protection.
(5) Water studies.
(a) Purposes. To provide the Township with information to
properly evaluate the impact a proposed development will have
upon groundwater resources. To make sure that adequate
water supplies will be available to service a proposed
development without negatively impacting adjacent uses
dependent upon the same water sources.
(b) A hydrogeologic study shall be required to be submitted by the
applicant whenever a proposed use, subdivision or land
development will be served by noncentral water supplies.
Note: Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection may also require the submission of a
hydrogeological study as part of the sewage facility planning
process.
§ 192-61 SOLID WASTE § 192-61
180:487
(c) This Subsection B(5) shall not apply to a development that will
be served by a public central water system.
(d) Credentials. The study shall be prepared by a professional
geologist or professional engineer with substantial experience
in preparing similar studies. Before any person or entity is
engaged to prepare the study, the applicant shall submit
written credentials of the individual who will direct the study.
The Township shall then have a maximum of 45 days from the
date of receipt to the Township to determine whether the
individual's credentials are acceptable. The Township may also
pre-approve a written list of individuals who are known to be
qualified to complete these types of studies.
(e) The hydrogeologic study, at a minimum, shall include the
following:
[1] A location map for the proposed development showing
proximity to waterways, lakes and major roads.
[2] Existing water supply wells within 1/2 mile of the proposed
development (may be appropriate locations).
[3] A proposed thirty-day average rate and maximum daily
rate of groundwater or springwater withdrawal from each
water source.
[4] A map showing water withdrawal points.
[5] An analysis of the impacts of the water withdrawal upon
the groundwater supply and upon uses and creek levels
within a 1/2 mile radius of the project, including
agricultural activities.
[6] The analysis shall consider impacts during both normal
conditions and drought conditions. Drought conditions
shall be documented.
[7] The Board of Commissioners may require that the study
include the construction of test wells to determine the
impacts. The level, rates, dates and times of water
measurements shall be provided, and weather conditions
shall be documented. The impacts upon a reasonable
sampling of existing wells shall be recorded, provided that
the owners of such wells grant permission for such studies.
(f) If the Township determines that the water withdrawal could
have a significant negative impact upon existing water users,
then as a condition of any development approval, the Township
may require that the applicant commit in a legally binding
manner to appropriate mitigation of the negative impacts. This
mitigation may include, but is not limited to:
§ 192-61 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-61
180:488
[1] A financial guarantee to fund a deeper well or a connection
to a central water system for properties that experience
negative impacts after the water withdrawal occurs;
[2] A permanent conservation easement placed on sufficient
land areas to result in amounts of groundwater recharge
that is equivalent to the amount of groundwater that is
being withdrawn; or
[3] A legally binding commitment to reduce the amount of the
water withdrawal during drought conditions.
C. Utilities and easements.
(1) Utilities.
(a) All electric power, telephone, data, cable television and natural
gas service lines within a new subdivision or land development
shall be placed underground, and be installed in accordance
with the current standards of the utility serving the subdivision
or land development.
(b) All nonmetallic underground utility installations, mains and
laterals shall be installed with metallic tape above the pipe that
is detectable from above the finished surface by a standard
metal detector.
(2) Easements. Easements shall be provided as follows:
(a) Drainage, sanitary sewage, central water, emergency access
and other types of easements shall be provided as determined
to be needed by the Township and as indicated on the plans.
(b) Width. The standard minimum width of an easement shall be
20 feet, which may be reduced to 10 feet for each lot if a tenfoot
minimum easement exists on the abutting side of the
abutting lot.
(c) See also drainage easement provisions in the Stormwater
Management Ordinance, Chapter 184.
(d) Additional width of easements shall be provided for additional
utilities if required by the water or sanitary sewage supplier.
(e) Separation. Minimum separation distances between utility
lines shall be as required by the applicable utility.
(f) Pipelines. If any activity is proposed within the right-of-way of
an underground fuel or gas pipeline, the applicant shall
provide written evidence from the operator of such pipeline
that such activity is acceptable under his or her safety
standards and the terms of that right-of-way.
§ 192-61 SOLID WASTE § 192-61
180:489
§ 192-62. Stormwater management.
(g) Locations. Easements shall be placed along lot lines or street
rights-of-way to the maximum extent possible, as opposed to
the center of a lot.
(h) Maintenance and obstructions. The owner of the lot shall
properly maintain an easement or right-of-way in such a
condition that does not inhibit its intended purpose(s). Fill or
structures shall not be placed in an easement or right-of-way in
a way that inhibits its intended purpose(s). Specifically,
structures or grading that could alter or obstruct stormwater
flows in violation of the approved final plan shall be prohibited
within stormwater easements.
(i) Township entry. The Township, at its option, shall have the
right to enter a stormwater easement or any municipal
easement or right-of-way to maintain it or improve it for its
intended purpose(s), although the Township does not accept
the responsibility to complete such work.
D. Streetlighting.
(1) Streetlights shall be placed at street intersections. Streetlights may
be placed at additional locations along streets.
(2) Such lights shall meet lamp and wiring standards established by
the applicable electric company. Pole types shall be acceptable to
the Township.
(3) Where streetlights are required on a public street, the developer is
responsible to complete all excavation and other work that is not
the responsibility of the utility and to fund all reasonable costs that
may be levied by the public utility for such work.
(4) Private lighting. On all private streets, parking areas and other
areas requiring lighting, the developer shall provide materials,
installation, energizing and power for all lighting systems
necessary for security and public safety. A system acceptable to the
Board of Commissioners shall be established for the maintenance
and funding of such lights.
A. General provisions. See the provisions of the Township Stormwater
Management Ordinance, Chapter 184, and the Floodplain Ordinance,
Chapter 110.
B. Consistency with stormwater ordinance. The provisions of this § 192-62
shall apply except where a specific provision of the Township
Stormwater Ordinance supercedes this chapter. In case of any
differences between the Stormwater Ordinance and this section, where
the Stormwater Ordinance does not supercede, then the more
restrictive requirement shall apply.
§ 192-61 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-63
180:490
§ 192-63. Construction standards.
A. Street construction standards.
(1) Grading.
(a) Right-of-way grading.
[1] The right-of-way shall be graded according to the
approved cross-section. The excavation shall be backfilled
and suitably compacted to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer.
[2] The finished street surface shall be sloped in conformance
with the Township specifications.
[3] A proper superelevation shall be provided on arterial and
collector streets when required by the design criteria.
(b) Grading beyond right-of-way.
[1] The subdivider or developer may be required to grade
beyond the right-of-way line in order to provide continuous
slope from the right-of-way line to the proposed elevation
of the abutting property.
[2] Such grading beyond the right-of-way shall generally
maintain the original directions of slope except where
stormwater runoff designs dictate changes.
[3] Approved plans, either preliminary or final, showing
proposed grading, shall be a covenant running with the
land.
[4] In areas of earth excavation or earth fill, such grading shall
be done to a maximum slope of four feet horizontal to onefoot
vertical. In areas of rock excavation, such grading
shall be done to a maximum slope of one-foot horizontal to
two feet vertical.
[5] In no case shall the required street grading extend onto an
adjoining property with a different landowner, unless the
other adjoining property owner gives a written agreement
to the developer to accomplish such work.
(c) Trench excavation. All trenches excavated within the cartway
of an existing or proposed public street or right-of-way shall be
restored in accordance with Township standards.
(2) Street construction. See also § 192-57.
(a) Drainage of streets shall comply with § 192-62 of this chapter.
§ 192-63 SOLID WASTE § 192-63
180:491
[1] All street inlets shall be combination inlet and hood-type in
compliance with PennDOT standards for Type C Special
Inlet, with ten-inch curb reveal. Road surface shall be
sloped into the inlet to facilitate drainage.
[2] Minimum pipe size in public rights-of-way shall be
eighteen-inch interior diameter.
[3] All springs and sump pump discharges shall be collected
and conveyed by pipes so as not to flow into streets or over
sidewalks.
[4] Pipes shall not be placed through street curbs.
(b) All street pavements shall comply with the provisions of this
section, unless a specific different standard is required by
PennDOT for a state road.
[1] All materials, construction procedures and other
specifications shall be in conformance with the latest
edition of the PennDOT Publication 408, Specifications,
and Publication 72, Roadway Construction Standards.
[2] The subgrade shall be properly compacted and sloped.
[a] The Township may require a greater depth of subbase
where necessary considering the conditions of the
subgrade and subbase. Materials that are unsuitable,
wet soils and soils subject to frost heave shall be
removed and replaced, drained or otherwise stabilized
to handle anticipated loads.
[b] The Township may require field and/or laboratory
testing of the subgrade, particularly if on-site material
is proposed to be used.
[c] The Township may require compaction tests, with the
Township's costs reimbursed by the developer.
[d] The subbase depth shall be in accordance with an
approved pavement design.
[3] The base course shall be in accordance with an approved
pavement design.
[4] Shoulders and parking lanes shall be constructed with a
full depth of pavement matching the adjacent travel lane.
[5] All street construction materials shall be certified, in
writing, by the supplier as meeting PennDOT
specifications.
§ 192-63 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-63
180:492
(c) Pavement base drains. Pavement base drains are required on
all streets. Pavement base drains shall conform to PennDOT
Publication 408 and shall be provided with a suitable outlet.
(d) Alleys and shared driveways. Alleys and shared driveways
serving more than one lot shall be constructed with a five-inch
minimum compacted depth stone subbase, three-inch
minimum compacted depth bituminous base course, and a oneand-
one-half-inch minimum compacted depth surface course.
(e) Street inspections. The entity constructing a street shall
provide the Township Engineer or his/her designee with a
minimum of five business days' advance notice before the start
of initial construction of improvements and a minimum of two
business days' advance notice before the following street
construction is accomplished so that an inspection may be
scheduled:
[1] Excavation of the road site.
[2] Preparation of the road subgrade.
[3] Construction of the road subbase.
[4] Construction of the base course.
[5] Construction of the binder and/or wearing course.
[6] Construction of all stormwater drainage facilities.
(f) Tree stumps shall not be buried within the right-of-way.
(g) The developer shall ensure that pavement markings are
applied on streets in conformance with PennDOT
specifications, if required on the approved plan. The Township
may require the installation of delineators.
§ 192-63 SOLID WASTE § 192-63
180:493
§ 192-63 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-63
180:494
(3) Curb. Where required, curbing along streets shall meet
requirements of PennDOT Publication 408, as last revised. See also
the curbs section of the Streets and Sidewalks chapter of the Lower
Allen Township Code.166 Gutter design shall be subject to the
approval of the Township Engineer based upon standard
engineering practices.
(4) Temporary cul-de-sac.
(a) The Township may require the construction of a temporary culde-
sac turnaround where a street is approved to be extended in
the future. The dimensions of a temporary cul-de-sac
turnaround shall be the same as any other other cul-de-sac. If
the temporary cul-de-sac is approved to be removed, the
excess right-of-way shall revert to the adjacent lot owners.
(b) The temporary cul-de-sac is not required to be constructed to
Township pavement standards if the applicant provides
financial security to complete the segment of street and install
any necessary permanent turnaround. In such case, the
temporary cul-de-sac may be constructed of six-inches of wellcompacted
aggregate. If the street is not extended within twoyears,
the Township may require the developer to improve the
cul-de-sac to meet all Township requirements.
B. Traffic control standards.
(1) Street signs, traffic signals, pavement markings and other traffic
control devices shall meet standards of PennDOT.
(2) Signs.
(a) The developer shall supply and install traffic control signs and
street name identification signs on public and private streets.
(b) All traffic control signs shall meet current standards of
PennDOT. Materials and methods of installation must be preapproved
by the Township.
(3) Pavement markings.
(a) The developer shall supply and install pavement markings on
public and private streets.
(b) All pavement markings shall meet current standards of
PennDOT. Materials and methods of installation must be preapproved
by the Township.
(c) All pavement markings shall be hot inlaid thermoplastic.
(4) Traffic signals.
166. Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 192-63 SOLID WASTE § 192-63
180:495
(a) The developer shall supply and install traffic signal systems
where warranted.
(b) All traffic signals shall meet current standards of PennDOT and
be installed in accordance with the traffic signal permit issued
by PennDOT. Materials and methods of installation must be
pre-approved by the Township.
(c) All traffic signal control equipment shall be compatible with
the Township's existing signal systems. Controllers shall be
Econolite brand.
(d) All light sources in signal systems shall be LED type, unless
specifically approved otherwise by the Township.
(e) All signal systems shall include emergency vehicle preemption
devices compatible with the Township's system.
(f) All traffic signals shall be connected to the existing signal
system and the Township Municipal Services Center by
suitable means for communication.
(g) All vehicle detection devices in signal systems shall be video
type, unless specifically approved otherwise by the Township.
(h) All new traffic signal installations shall be equipped with a
battery backup uninterruptable power supply.
C. Pedestrian and bicycle facility construction standards.
(1) Sidewalks. See § 192-57C(9).
(a) Sidewalks, where required or provided, shall be located within
the street right-of-way and no closer than five feet from the
curbline. A grass planting strip shall be planted between the
curb and sidewalk. This strip shall only be paved at driveway
entrances.
(b) Any required sidewalks shall have a minimum width of:
[1] Five feet along arterial and collector streets.
[2] Four feet along minor or local streets.
[3] Five feet along school access routes or routes connecting
residential areas to commercial areas.
[4] Five feet in nonresidential or multifamily residential
developments.
(c) Where required, sidewalks shall meet requirements of
PennDOT standards as last revised. See also the sidewalks
section of the Streets and Sidewalks chapter of the Lower Allen
Township Code.167
§ 192-63 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-63
180:496
(d) Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of adjacent
landowners to maintain, clear snow and ice from and repair
sidewalks.
(2) Access for persons with disabilities. All sidewalks and curbs at the
intersection of two or more public streets shall include a sloped
section and curb cut in accordance with U.S. Access Board
requirements and PennDOT standards.
(3) Paved trails.
(a) Trails shall generally be constructed in accordance with
Designing Sidewalks and Trails, U.S. Department of
Transportation, September 2001, or as revised.
(b) Trail standards:
Neighborhood
and Minimal-
Use or Short-
Length Trail
Collector
Trails
Serving or
Connecting
More Than
One
Neighborhood
or
Destination
Multiuse
Trail Planned
for
Significant
Use By
Multiple
Modes
Minimum
pavement
width (feet)
5 8 12
Minimum
easement or
right-of-way
width(1)
(feet)
10 15 20
Maximum
grade(2)
7.00% 5.00% 5.00%
Maximum
cross slope
2.00% 2.00% 2.00%
Minimum
vertical
clearance
(feet)
10 10 10
167. Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 192-63 SOLID WASTE § 192-63
180:497
Neighborhood
and Minimal-
Use or Short-
Length Trail
Collector
Trails
Serving or
Connecting
More Than
One
Neighborhood
or
Destination
Multiuse
Trail Planned
for
Significant
Use By
Multiple
Modes
Minimum
horizontal
clearance,
from each
side of
pavement
(feet)
2 3 4
NOTES:
(1) Minimum two-foot-wide graded shoulder on each
side.
(2) Short sections of steeper grades may be permitted
to allow design compatible with surrounding
topography.
D. Landscape construction standards.
(1) Street trees.
(a) Minimum sizes and standards. The trunk diameter (measured
at a height of 3.5 feet above the finished grade level) of
deciduous shade trees required by this chapter shall be a
minimum of 2.5 inches. The minimum height above the ground
level at the time of planting of trees required by this chapter
shall be six feet.
(b) Planting and maintenance.
[1] Trees shall be planted in conformance with good
landscaping practices.
[2] Trees adjacent to or within parking areas shall be properly
protected from damage by vehicles by raised curbs, raised
earth, similar devices and/or sufficient setback.
[3] Required trees shall be properly maintained and shall not
be removed without being replaced by another tree that
meets the requirements of this section.
(c) Required street trees shall be planted in accordance with the
Township's landscape construction standards.
§ 192-63 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-63
180:498
(d) Street trees shall be planted in a planting bed of structural soil,
sized to provide two cubic feet of structural soil volume per
square foot of tree crown projection. Mix design of the
structural soil shall be prepared by the design professional and
approved by the Township.
(2) Stormwater basins and facilities.
(a) The planting plan shall address all areas of stormwater
facilities, including specific plants and seeding.
(b) Basin bottoms and areas where stormwater will be stored shall
be planted and/or seeded with appropriate plants and seed
mixtures for that condition.
(3) Open space and meadows. Areas identified as open space or
meadow shall be planted with specific wildflower seed mixtures
designed for that purpose. The planting plan may include other
seed mixtures for specific areas such as walking and recreational
areas.
(4) Riparian buffers.
(a) Planting plans shall be prepared for all areas identified as
riparian buffers in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance.168
Plans shall include removal of existing detrimental species and
replanting with appropriate plants and/or seed mixtures.
(b) Planting plans shall generally follow industry guidelines for
riparian buffer plantings, such as USDA NA-TP-02-97 and the
Chesapeake Bay Riparian Handbook.
E. Monuments and lot pins.
(1) Monuments.
(a) Location. Permanent reference monuments shall be located at
exterior corners of the subdivision or land development. A
minimum of two permanent monuments shall be required at
the street right-of-way line for each 500 feet of street length.
These monument requirements may be modified by the
Township Engineer if an alternate arrangement still permits a
surveyor to stake out accurately any building lot shown on the
record plan.
(b) Type. Reference monuments shall be constructed of steelreinforced
portland cement concrete or other materials preapproved
by the Township Engineer and should have a
minimum size of four inches at the ground level and shall have
the top flush with the grade level.
168. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 192-63 SOLID WASTE § 192-63
180:499
(2) Lot pins. All lot corner markers shall be permanently located and
shall be at least a three-quarter-inch metal pin or pipe with a
minimum length of 20 inches, located in the ground to existing
grade.
F. Erosion control and grading.
(1) Ground cover and topsoil. After completion of construction on a lot,
all exposed ground surfaces that are not paved and that are not
covered by approved gravel areas or decorative stones or similar
material shall be covered by a minimum of four inches of topsoil
and an attractive nonpoisonous vegetative ground cover that will
prevent soil erosion and the raising of dust.
(2) Erosion control.
(a) Any earth disturbance shall be controlled by proper measures
to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation, following PaDEP
and Township regulations and standards of the County
Conservation District.
[1] A soil erosion and sedimentation pollution control plan is
required for most types of earth disturbance.
[2] Compliance with such plan shall be an automatic condition
of any approval or permit under this chapter.
[3] Township permits may be suspended if earth disturbance
does not comply with such approved plan.
(b) Both the owner of the property at the time of any earth
disturbance and the person(s)/company accomplishing the
work shall be responsible to ensure that adequate erosion
control measures are used.
(c) The Township may require the submittal of and compliance
with a suitable erosion control and grading plan for an
individual lot prior to construction of a principal building.
§ 192-63 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-63
180:500
ARTICLE XI
Additional Standards for Mobile/Manufactured Home Parks
§ 192-64. Applicability; terms.
§ 192-65. Exemptions.
The following shall not be considered to be a mobile/manufactured home
park, but instead shall be ruled by the applicable sections of this chapter
and the Zoning Ordinance.170
§ 192-66. Exceptions; land development and subdivision
requirements.
§ 192-67. General standards and requirements.
A. The requirements in this article shall apply to any mobile/manufactured
home park as defined by the Zoning Ordinance.169
B. The terms "mobile home" and "manufactured home" shall have the
same meaning.
A. Offering of more than one mobile/manufactured home for sale for
relocation to another tract, other than routine sale of previously
occupied homes within a mobile home park.
B. Any development of mobile/manufactured homes involving only one
dwelling unit per fee-simple lot, which shall meet all of the
requirements for a single-family dwelling residential development.
C. A mobile home that is used only as a field office or work or tool house
during a construction project and not for residential purposes.
A. All provisions of this chapter shall apply to a mobile/manufactured
home park, except for provisions that are specifically amended by this
article. See also the Zoning Ordinance171 concerning mobile/
manufactured home parks.
B. Every proposed manufactured/mobile home park shall be submitted,
reviewed, approved and recorded as a land development. The
requirements for a subdivision may also need to be met if one or more
new lots are created or lot lines are changed.
A. If the mobile home park has an average density of higher than one
dwelling unit per acre, all dwelling units shall be served by both central
water and central sewer service.
169. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
170. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
171. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 192-64 SOLID WASTE § 192-67
180:501
B. All mobile home sites within a mobile home park shall be located on
land with an average natural slope of less than 15%.
C. Any street, not including an approved parking court, shall meet
Township requirements for construction of a public street, except as
specifically modified by this article.
D. The mobile home park shall have adequate access by emergency
vehicles and shall include measures to provide adequate water supply
for firefighting. If the water supply cannot feasibly be provided on-site,
the requirement may be met by the applicant constructing a hydrant to
access an available nearby water supply.
E. All mobile home parks of more than 25 dwelling units shall include a
qualified resident manager.
F. Access.
(1) Vehicle access to individual mobile home spaces shall be from
interior parking courts, access drives or private streets and shall
not be from public streets exterior to the development. Streets
within the development providing access to 20 or more dwellings
shall have a paved cartway width of at least 26 feet, and other
streets shall have a paved cartway width of at least 22 feet.
(2) All streets within the mobile home park shall be private and be
maintained as part of the mobile home park.
G. Parking.
(1) In addition to the off-street parking required by the Zoning
Ordinance,172 an average of 0.5 off-street parking space per
dwelling unit shall be provided in convenient locations for visitor
parking. Parking courts are encouraged to be used for off-street
parking.
(2) An appropriate area shall be set aside for the parking of
recreational vehicles and boats of residents.
H. Other design standards and improvements.
(1) Every mobile home space shall be graded to provide a level, stable
and well-drained stand for the mobile home.
(2) Every space shall be provided with underground electric, telephone
and TV cable (if available) connections.
(3) All fuel storage and supply systems shall be constructed and
maintained in conformity with the regulations of all authorities
having jurisdiction. No aboveground fuel tanks shall be allowed
within a required setback.
172. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 192-67 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-67
180:502
(4) An average of one deciduous street tree shall be provided for each
50 feet of frontage along any street. These trees shall meet the
requirements of Article X of this chapter.
§ 192-67 SOLID WASTE § 192-67
180:503

ARTICLE XII
Traditional Neighborhood Development
§ 192-68. Development standards.
A. Applicability. This section recognizes that a Traditional Neighborhood
Development (TND) may be developed with differing improvement
standards than apply to other types of development. A TND shall meet
all of the requirements of this chapter, except provisions that are
specifically modified by this Article XII. This Article XII shall only apply
to a project that has been approved under the Zoning Ordinance173 as a
TND.
B. Street and alley standards for a TND.
(1) A street in a TND may include parallel on-street parking, provided
that a paved, eight-foot wide width is available on that side in
addition to the width of the travel lanes.
(2) A street in a TND may include diagonal head-in or back-in on-street
parking along a proposed street if the applicant demonstrates that
the design will operate safely.
(3) For a minor Township or local road within a TND with a design
speed of 25 miles per hour or less, the minimum center line radius
may be reduced to 165 feet.
(4) For a minor Township or local road within a TND with a design
speed of 25 miles per hour or less, the minimum radius of the arc at
the intersection of the curbline may be reduced to 15 feet.
(5) Alleys are permitted within a TND. Additional width shall be
required if any parallel parking is provided. The right-of-way for an
alley shall be equal to or greater in width than the cartway.
(a) An alley shall have adequate sight distance at all corners and
intersections of alleys. Any alleys shall be designed to
discourage through traffic.
(b) Any alleys shall be maintained by a legally binding property
owners' association or an owner of adjacent rental properties,
at no expense to the Township.
(6) The Township may require that a new street be sufficient in width
to allow on-street parking along at least one side of each street and
to provide room for bicycle riding, unless a separate bicycle
pathway is provided. The Township may require a prohibition of
parking on one side or both sides of a street if the street does not
have sufficient width for parking on both sides.
173. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 192-68 SOLID WASTE § 192-68
180:505
(7) Collector street. There shall be at least one collector street
providing access within a TND. The TND shall be designed with a
hierarchy of streets to control the volume of through traffic in front
of residential units, other than residential units proposed as part of
the core neighborhood.
(8) In all cases, streets shall be designed to provide adequate access by
emergency vehicles.
C. Other improvement requirements within a TND.
(1) The width of sidewalks shall be increased to a minimum of eight
feet adjacent to nonresidential and mixed uses within the core
neighborhood. Such width may include street tree wells. These
sidewalks shall include use of decorative brick, concrete pavers,
patterned concrete or similar material that has the appearance of
decorative masonry. Such materials may be used as accents, with
the majority of the sidewalk being concrete.
(2) Pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided in the core neighborhood
using materials and colors that visually distinguish the crosswalk
from the street surface and that include some texture. This may
include use of pavers, patterned concrete or stamped textured
asphalt. Bulb-out curbs, raised textured crosswalks and similar
traffic-calming measures are encouraged to be used in the core
neighborhood.
(3) The materials, depths and cross-sections of the sidewalks and
crosswalks shall be subject to approval by the Township.
(4) In addition to the requirements of § 192-61D for streetlights, the
following shall apply to a TND: Where provided streetlight supports
shall be dark in color, have a maximum total height of 22 feet and
shall have a decorative design.
(5) Deed restrictions/covenants. The applicant shall submit a written
statement of the proposed substance of deed restrictions or similar
controls that would affect matters addressed in this chapter.
(6) Outside of the core neighborhood, a maximum of 50% of the offstreet
parking space requirements of adjacent uses may be met by
counting on-street spaces along the curb on a minor Township or
local road or along an alley. This provision shall be permitted only:
(a) For spaces along the same side of a street along a curb that is
directly contiguous to the lots being served, or a new alley
within a TND, and provided the spaces are within 200 feet of
each building they serve; and
(b) If the applicant demonstrates that the street or alley would be
sufficiently wide to allow the parking and that there are no
§ 192-68 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-68
180:506
safety hazards involved, compared to typical on-street parking
at other locations; and
(c) If the applicant demonstrates that such number of parking
spaces could be legally accommodated along the street,
considering the locations of driveways, fire hydrants and street
corners.
D. Additional modifications.
(1) As authorized by the Traditional Neighborhood Development
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (as
amended) (MPC),174 at any time, the Board of Commissioners shall
have the authority to approve modifications, in writing, at a legally
advertised meeting open to the public, to a specific street,
improvement and other requirements of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance. Such modifications shall not require proof
of hardship and shall be intended to result in a development that is
pedestrian-oriented or promotes low-speed traffic and that meets
the purposes of a TND.
(2) The applicant shall submit a request for modifications in writing,
which shall state the reasons why the modification would be
consistent with the purposes for a TND as stated in this chapter
and the MPC and would be in the public interest while protecting
public safety.
E. Phasing of a TND.
(1) A phasing plan shall be submitted for the TND. The applicant shall
show that each phase of the TND would be able to function
properly, and at the completion of a phase, the TND would meet
Township requirements for public recreation land, open space and
density if later phases of the TND are not completed. The phasing
plan shall address the timing of improvements that are required.
The phasing plan shall address the timing of construction of
through streets and access points necessary for emergency
vehicles and routine traffic circulation.
(2) Compliance shall be determined at the completion of each phase,
so that each individual phase does not need to meet every
requirement. For example, if Phase 1 includes more common open
space than is required, then Phase 2 may include less common
open space than is required, provided the requirement is met at the
completion of Phase 2.
174. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 192-68 SOLID WASTE § 192-68
180:507
Chapter 197
TAXATION
§ 192-68 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 192-68
180:508
ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-22-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-08175]
§ 197-1. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act176 shall have the meanings
set forth therein. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth
herein:
COLLECTOR — The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the tax.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2011.
ENACTMENT — This article.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen
Township.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth
in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., while such numbering and provisions remain in
effect under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.,
when such numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as
amended in the future.
TAX — The tax imposed by this article.
TAXING AUTHORITY — Lower Allen Township.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the Collector for reporting the
amount of tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted or
reported under this article or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TCD — Any tax collection district to which the taxing authority or any part
of the taxing authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TCC — The tax collection committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
§ 197-2. Imposition of tax.
A. General purpose resident tax. The taxing authority hereby imposes a
tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 0.60% on earned income
and net profits of individual residents of the taxing authority.
[Amended 11-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-09]
175. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Earned Income Tax, adopted
6-18-1985 as Art. 321 of the 1985 Code of Ordinances, as amended.
176. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 197-1 SOLID WASTE § 197-2
180:509
§ 197-3. Exemption from tax.
Although credits and deductions against the tax are permitted under certain
circumstances as provided in applicable law and regulations, no individuals
are exempt from the tax based on age, income or other factors.
§ 197-4. Declaration and payment of tax by individuals.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay the tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
§ 197-5. Employer withholding, remittance and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold, and remit the tax and file tax
returns in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 197-6. Tax Collector.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the Collector.
B. Ongoing tax. The Tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year, and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this article is repealed or the rate is changed.
C. Combined tax rate applicable to residents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to residents of the taxing authority, including the tax
imposed by the school district and municipality in which the individual
resides, is 1.55%. [Amended 11-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-09]
D. Municipal tax rate applicable to nonresidents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to nonresidents working within the taxing authority based on
the municipal nonresident tax rate is 0.0%.
E. Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this article.
Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that are required
to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will automatically
become part of this article upon the effective date of such amendment,
without the need for formal amendment of this article, to the maximum
extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
F. Applicable laws, regulations, policies and procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations and policies and procedures adopted by the TCC or by the
Collector. This includes any regulations, policies and procedures
adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 1937.
§ 197-2 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-7
180:510
§ 197-7. Interest, penalties, costs and fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by
the Collector in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 197-8. through § 197-13. (Reserved)
§ 197-7 SOLID WASTE § 197-8
180:511

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)177
§ 197-14. through § 197-27. (Reserved)
177. Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Per Capita Tax, adopted 6-10-1985 as Art. 325 of the 1985
Code of Ordinances, as amended, was repealed 11-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-09.
§ 197-14 SOLID WASTE § 197-14
180:513

ARTICLE III
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-15178]
§ 197-28. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Lower Allen Township
local services tax Ordinance."
§ 197-29. Authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act,179
as amended by Act No. 7 of 2007.
§ 197-30. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide revenue for police, fire and
emergency services; road construction and maintenance; the reduction of
property taxes; and for such other purposes as may be specified for such tax
from time to time by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 197-31. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The governing body of Lower Allen
Township.
COLLECTOR — The person or firm, from time to time, designated by motion
of the Board of Commissioners of Lower Allen Township to collect and
administer the provision of this article and collect the tax levied by this
article. Until changed by subsequent motion, the collector shall be the
same person or firm last designated to collect the emergency and municipal
services tax for Lower Allen Township.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as determined under Section 303 of
the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code
of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. I, Subpt. B, Art. V (relating
to personal income tax), not including, however, wages or compensation
paid to individuals on active military service. Employee business expenses
are allowable deductions as determined under Article III of the Tax Reform
Code of 1971. Any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy
shall not be taxable as earned income.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons
178. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Emergency and Municipal
Services Tax, adopted 12-27-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-14.
179. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 197-28 SOLID WASTE § 197-31
180:515
on a salary, wage, commission, fee or other compensation basis, including a
self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Includes singular and plural number and male, female
and neuter gender.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person engaged in any occupation, trade or profession
within the jurisdiction limits of Lower Allen Township whose total earned
income and net profits within Lower Allen Township are greater than
$12,000 per calendar year.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, (except from corporations), determined under
section 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax
Reform Code of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. I, Subpt. B, Art. V
(relating to personal income tax). The term does not include income which
is not paid for services provided and which is in the nature of earnings from
an investment. For taxpayers engaged in the business, profession or activity
of farming, the term shall not include:
§ 197-32. Levy.
Lower Allen Township hereby levies and imposes on every individual
engaging in an occupation within the jurisdictional limits of Lower Allen
Township a tax in the amount of $52 per annum, beginning the first day
of January, 2008, and continuing on a calendar basis annually thereafter,
until modified or repealed by subsequent ordinance. This tax is in addition
to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by Lower Allen
Township.
A. Any interest generated from monetary accounts or investment
instruments of the farming business;
B. Any gain on the sale of farming machinery;
C. Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
D. Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried
on or performed within the jurisdiction limits of Lower Allen Township
for which compensation is charged and/or received, whether by salary,
wages, commissions, fees or net profits for services rendered.
RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE ARMED FORCES — The United
States Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States
Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United
States Air Force Reserve, The Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
TAX — The local services tax levied in the article.
YEAR — A calendar year.
§ 197-31 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-33
180:516
§ 197-33. Restricted use.
§ 197-34. Duty of employer.
§ 197-35. Returns.
Employers are required to make and file a local services tax quarterly
return 30 days after the end of each quarter of a calendar year. The local
services tax quarterly return shall list the name, address and social security
A. Lower Allen Township shall use the revenue derived from this tax for
the following purposes:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services.
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance.
(3) Reduction of property taxes.
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85,
Subchapter F (relating to homestead property exclusion).
B. Lower Allen Township shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived
from the local services tax for emergency services.
A. Each employer within Lower Allen Township and each employer situate
outside Lower Allen Township who engages in business within Lower
Allen Township is hereby charged with the duty of collecting the tax
from each of the employees engaged by the employer and performing
work for the employer within Lower Allen Township. Each person
subject to the tax shall be assessed a pro rata share of the tax for each
payroll period in which the person is engaged in an occupation.
B. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person for a payroll-period
shall be determined by dividing the combined rate of the local services
tax levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest onehundredth
of a dollar.
C. Employer collection of the local services tax shall be made on a payroll
period basis for each payroll period, beginning with the first payroll
period in which the person is engaging in an occupation.
D. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the local
services tax or for the payment of the withheld tax money to a political
subdivision if the failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect
information submitted by the employee as to the employee's place or
places of employment, the employee's principal office or where the
employee is principally employed.
§ 197-33 SOLID WASTE § 197-35
180:517
number of the employee; the physical address of the employee's place of
employment; the number of payroll periods for which the local services tax
was withheld; and the amount of local services tax being remitted for each
employee.
§ 197-36. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
Each employer shall use his employment and payroll records from the
first day of January to March 31 each year for determining the number
of employees from whom said tax shall be deducted and paid over to the
collector on or before April 30 of the same calendar year. Supplemental
reports shall be made by each employer on July 30, October 30 and January
31 for new employees as reflected on his employment and payroll records
from April 1 to June 30, July 1 to September 30 and October 1 to December
31, and payments on these supplemental reports shall be made on July 30,
October 30 and January 30, respectively.
§ 197-37. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation.
A. In the event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, this is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which required the person
working in more than one political subdivision during the payroll
period, the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in
the following order:
(1) The political subdivision in which a person maintains his or her
principal office or is principally employed;
(2) The political subdivision in which the person resides and works, if
the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) The political subdivision in which a person is employed and which
imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the local services tax if the employee provided:
(1) A recent pay statement from a principal employer that includes the
name of the employer, the length of the payroll period and the
amount of local services tax withheld; and
(2) A statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence.
C. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. It is the
intent of this section that no person shall be subject to the payment of
the local services tax by more than one political subdivision during each
payroll period.
§ 197-35 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-38
180:518
§ 197-38. Exemptions to local services tax.
A. The local services tax shall be no more that $52 on each person for each
calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions
within which a person may be employed.
B. The law requires municipalities and school districts who levy the local
services tax at a combined rate exceeding $10 to exempt any person
from the local services tax whose total earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for
the calendar year in which the local services tax is levied.
C. Each political subdivision levying the local services tax shall exempt the
following persons from the local services tax:
(1) Any person who served in any war or armed conflict in which the
United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent-permanent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. A "reserve component of the armed forces" shall mean
the United States Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve,
United States Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast Guard
Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, The Pennsylvania Army
National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
D. A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax may
annually file an exemption certificate with the collector of the tax for
the political subdivision levying the tax and file a copy of the certificate
with the person's employer affirming that the person reasonably
expects to receive earned income and net profits from all sources within
the political subdivision of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for
which the exemption certificate is filed.
E. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of all of the
employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment within the
political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year for which the
employee is requesting to be exempted from the local services tax.
F. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise instructed
by the collector of the tax for the political subdivision levying the tax,
the employer shall not withhold the tax from the person during the
calendar year or remainder of the calendar year for which the
exemption certificate applies. With respect to a person who claimed an
exemption from the local services tax, upon notification to an employer
by the person or by the collector of the tax for the political subdivision
that the person has received earned income and net profits from all
§ 197-38 SOLID WASTE § 197-38
180:519
§ 197-39. Self-employed individuals.
All self-employed individuals and individuals whose employer is not
required to withhold local taxes (certain state and federal agencies) will be
billed quarterly for the local services tax. The full amount of tax must be
paid by the date indicated on such billing. If such taxpayer qualifies for a
low-income exemption, the taxpayer may complete the required exemption
certificate or make application for a refund of the tax paid.
sources within that political subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000
in that calendar year or that the person is otherwise ineligible for the
tax exemption for that calendar year, or upon an employer's payment
to the person of earned income within that political subdivision in
an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year,
an employer shall withhold the local services tax from the person as
follows:
(1) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the local services tax becomes subject to the tax for the
calendar year, the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year.
(2) The employer shall withhold from the person, for the first payroll
period after receipt of the notification under the above paragraph,
a lump sum equal to the amount of the tax that was not withheld
from the person due to the exemption certificate filed by the
person, plus the per-payroll amount due for that first payroll
period.
(3) The amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining
payroll periods in that calendar year shall be the same amount
withheld for other employees.
(4) In the event the employment of a person subject to withholding of
the local services tax under this exemption is severed in that
calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding
balance of tax due and the political subdivision levying the tax may
pursue collection under this article.
G. Employers shall not be investigating exemption certificates, monitoring
tax exemption eligibility or exempting any employee from a local
services tax.
H. Employers shall be responsible for retaining a copy of all exemption
certificates filed by employees within a given calendar year for a
minimum of three years. Employers who have failed to withhold the
local services tax from an employee or employees and do not have
copies of the employee exemption certificate or certificates will be held
responsible for the payment of the local services tax as if the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 197-38 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-40
180:520
§ 197-40. Employees and self-employed individuals residing beyond
limits of Lower Allen Township.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their place of
business outside Lower Allen Township but who engage in any occupation
within Lower Allen Township do by virtue thereof agree to be bound by and
subject themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated
under this article with the same force and effect as though they were
residents of Lower Allen Township. Further, any individual engaged in an
occupation within Lower Allen Township and an employee of a nonresident
employer may for the purpose of this article be considered a self-employed
person and, in the event this tax is not paid, the collector shall have the
option of proceeding against either the employer or employee for collection
of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 197-41. Administration of tax.
§ 197-41.1. Suit for collection.
A. It shall be the duty of the collector to accept and receive payments of
this tax and keep a record thereof showing the amount received by him
from each employer or self-employed person, together with the date the
tax was received. It shall be the duty of the collector to accept and keep
a record of the information submitted by employers relating to the
number of employees subject to the tax, the number of employees
exempt from the tax, the employee exemption certificates and refunds
of the tax paid to individuals and employers.
B. The collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby empowered to prescribe,
adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any
matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the examination of the payroll records of any
employer subject to this article; the examination and correction of any
return made in compliance with this article; and any payment alleged or
found to be incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to
have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector
shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of
Cumberland County as in other cases provided.
C. The collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event any of the tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due date set forth above, the collector may sue for the
recovery of such tax due or unpaid together with interest and penalty.
§ 197-40 SOLID WASTE § 197-41.1
180:521
§ 197-41.2. Fine and penalty.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or who refuses inspection of his books, records or accounts
in his custody and control in order to determine the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his employment, or who fails or refuses to
file any return required by this article, or fails or refuses to pay the tax
herein levied shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fines and costs, be
sentenced to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. It is further
provided that the action to enforce the fine and penalty herein provided may
be instituted against any person in charge of the business of any employer
who has failed or refused to file a return required by this article.
§ 197-41.3. Repealer and severability.
The provisions of this article shall be severable. If any of its provisions shall
be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid, that decision
shall not affect the remaining provisions of this article or of the Lower Allen
Township Code of Ordinances.
§ 197-41.4. Effective date.
This article shall become effective in accordance with applicable law, with
the repeal of previous occupational privilege tax and emergency and
municipal services tax ordinances, effective January 1, 2008.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional penalty of 10%
shall be added to the flat rate of said tax for nonpayment thereof. Where
suit is brought for the recovery of this tax, the individual liable therefor
shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of collection,
including, but not limited to, attorney's fees.
§ 197-41.1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-41.4
180:522
ARTICLE IV
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 12-30-1986 by Ord. No. 86-13 (Art. 329 of the 1985 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 197-42. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Lower Allen Township Realty Transfer
Tax Ordinance."
§ 197-43. Authority for tax.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act,
being Article 511 of 1965, approved December 31, 1986, as amended, and
the Tax Reform Code of 1986, being Act No. 1986-77, approved July 2,
1986.180
§ 197-44. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons,
other than a private trust or decedent's estate. 181
CORPORATION — A corporation joint-stock association business trust or
banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory or foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
devises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or devise of title to real
estate within the township, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of
trust or other instruments of like character given as security for a debt and
deeds of release thereof to the debtor; land contracts whereby the legal title
does not pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the
contract has been paid or any cancellation thereof, unless the consideration
is payable over a period of time exceeding 30 years; or instruments which
solely grant, vest or confirm a public utility easement. Document shall also
include a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording
under § 197-49 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
180. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq., respectively.
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 197-42 SOLID WASTE § 197-44
180:523
FAMILY FARM PARTNERSHIP — 182 A partnership of which at least 75%
of its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of
the interests in the partnership are continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing and a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, corporation or entity of
any kind. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine
or imprisonment or both, the term "person," as applied to associations,
shall include the responsible members or general partners thereof and, as
applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE — Includes:
Recreational activities, such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
Recreational activities, such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
Any lands, tenements or hereditaments within this township, including,
without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees
and other improvements, immovables or interests which, by custom,
usage or law, pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding
permanently attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
182. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 197-44 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-44
180:524
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE — Includes:
TOWNSHIP — Lower Allen Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE — Includes:
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings, exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
B.
§ 197-44 SOLID WASTE § 197-44
180:525
§ 197-45. Imposition of tax.
A tax is hereby levied and imposed, for general township purposes, on every
real estate transaction, at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate
represented by the document involved in the real estate transaction.
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio of assessed values
to market values of the taxing district as established by the State Tax
Equalization Board or a commensurate part of the assessment where
the assessment includes other real estate;
In the case of an easement or other interest real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor or a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
A. The tax shall be payable at the earlier of the times the document is
presented for recording, within 30 days of acceptance of the document
or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. If the real estate is located partially within and partially outside the
township, the tax shall be calculated on the value of the portion within
the township.
C. The tax imposed hereunder shall be due and payable to the Recorder of
Deeds, as a joint and several liability, by every person who makes,
executes, delivers, accepts or presents for recording any document or
in whose behalf any document is made, executed and delivered,
accepted or presented for recording. In the case of an acquired
company, the company shall also have liability for payment of the tax.
All such persons shall also be liable for any penalties imposed under
this article.
D. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
on a real estate transaction by the township and school district shall not
exceed the limitations prescribed in Section 8 of the Local Tax Enabling
Act, 53 P.S. § 6908, so that if the school district imposes a tax on real
estate transactions taxed under this article, the provisions of said
Section 8 shall apply.
§ 197-44 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-46
180:526
§ 197-46. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 197-47. Excluded transaction.
A. The tax imposed by § 197-45 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the commonwealth is prohibited from taxing
under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax-delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
§ 197-46 SOLID WASTE § 197-47
180:527
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) Agent or straw party.
(a) A transfer:
[1] For no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or
[2] From or to an agent or straw party where, if the agent or
straw party were his principal, no tax would be imposed
under this article.
(b) Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee or
statement of value fails to set forth that the property was
acquired by the grantee from or for the benefit of his principal,
there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is the
property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee
claims an exemption from taxation under this clause.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Board of Commissioners reasonably determines
that the primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
§ 197-47 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-47
180:528
agency or authority as security or a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or transfer pursuant to a judicial sale
in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open-space opportunities or a transfer from such a
conservancy to the United States, the commonwealth or to any of
their instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions.183
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm partnership by a member of the same family, which
family directly owns at least 75% of the interests in the
partnership.184
(21) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company, family farm corporation or family
farm partnership which owns real estate.185
(22) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
184. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
185. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 197-47 SOLID WASTE § 197-47
180:529
§ 197-48. Documents relating to title of real estate.
Except as otherwise provided in § 197-47, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or devise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 197-49. Acquired company.
(23) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement of
value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such document is
not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change:
(1) Does not affect the continuity of the company; and
(2) Of itself or together with prior changes, has the effect of
transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or more of the total
ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. A family farm partnership is an acquired company when, because of
voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm
partnership or when, because of transfer of partnership interests or
because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to the
business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a
family farm partnership under this article.186
D. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of Deeds of
Cumberland County for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in Cumberland County.
186. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 197-47 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-50
180:530
§ 197-50. Credits against tax.
§ 197-51. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 197-52. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority, out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate, before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, and the sheriff or other officer conducting said sale shall
pay the tax herein imposed out of the first moneys paid to him in connection
therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax
herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for the remaining tax.
§ 197-53. Documentary stamps.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
building shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is devised by the grantor,
a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the devise shall be
given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
A. The payment of the tax imposed by this article shall be evidenced by the
affixing of a documentary stamp or stamps to every document by the
person making, executing, delivering or presenting for recording such
§ 197-50 SOLID WASTE § 197-53
180:531
§ 197-54. Furnishing stamps.
§ 197-55. Failure to affix stamps.
No document upon which tax is imposed by this article shall at any time
be made the basis of any action or other legal proceeding, nor shall proof
thereof be offered or received in evidence in any court of this
commonwealth or recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Cumberland County unless a documentary stamp or stamps, as provided in
this article, have been affixed thereto.
§ 197-56. Statement of value; penalty.
document. Such stamps shall be affixed in such manner that their
removal will require the continued application of steam or water, and
the person using or affixing such stamps shall write or stamp or cause
to be written or stamped thereon the initials of his name and the date
upon which such stamps are affixed or used so that such stamps may
not again be used, provided that the Board of Commissioners may
prescribe such other method of cancellation as it may deem expedient.
B. The use of documentary license meter impressions or similar indicia of
payment in lieu of stamps as required by this article may be permitted
in the discretion of the Board of Commissioners.
A. The Board of Commissioners shall prescribe, prepare and furnish
stamps to the Recorder of Deeds, of such denominations and quantities
as may be necessary, for the payment of the tax imposed and assessed
by this article.
B. The Recorder of Deeds of Cumberland County shall be the collection
agent for the tax levied by this article. On or before the 10th day of each
month, the Recorder of Deeds shall pay over to the township all realty
transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the county, together with a
report containing the information as is required by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania in reporting collection of the Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax.
A. Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds of
Cumberland County for recording shall set forth therein and as a part of
such document the true, full and complete value thereof or shall be
accompanied by a statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction, showing such connection and setting
forth the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why
such document is not subject to tax under this article. The provisions of
this subsection shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers
which are exempt from taxation based on family relationship, provided
that the relationship is specified in the document. Other documents
presented for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a
certified copy of the document and statement of value executed by a
responsible person connected with the transaction showing such
§ 197-53 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-56
180:532
§ 197-57. Civil penalties.
§ 197-58. Determination and notice of tax; review.
connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof
or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under this
article.
B. The Recorder of Deeds who shall record any document upon which tax
is imposed by this article without the proper documentary stamp or
stamps affixed thereto as required by this article as is indicated in such
document or accompanying statement of value shall, upon summary
conviction be sentenced to pay a fine of $50, plus costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment thereof shall be imprisoned for not more than
30 days.
A. If any tax owing under the terms of this article shall not be paid when
due, 10% of the amount of the tax shall be added and collected as an
initial penalty for nonpayment or underpayment of the tax.
B. In addition, if any tax owing under the terms of this article shall not be
paid when due, a penalty shall accrue on the amount of the unpaid tax
at the rate of 1% per month or fractional part of a month, on the amount
of the unpaid tax, from the due date until the amount of the tax is paid
in full.
C. In addition, in the case of failure of any acquired company to record a
declaration of acquisition, as required by this article, unless it is shown
to the satisfaction of the Board of Commissioners that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, a penalty shall accrue on the amount of the
unpaid tax at the rate of 5% per month or fractional part of a month, on
the amount of the unpaid tax, from the due date until the amount of the
tax is paid in full. This penalty shall be in addition to all other penalties
but shall not, in aggregate, exceed 50% of the amount of the unpaid tax.
D. In addition, if any part of any underpayment of tax is due to fraud, there
shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the underpayment.
E. In addition, if the township files suit in order to collect the amount of
any tax not paid when due under this article, at the discretion of the
court, any person liable for payment of the tax shall also be liable for
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the township in prosecution of
the suit.
F. In the event that any tax is not paid when due, the township may
enforce payment of the tax, together with all penalties, by suit in
assumpsit or any other appropriate means.
A. If any person shall fail to pay any tax imposed by this article for which
he is liable, the Board of Commissioners is hereby authorized and
empowered to make a determination of additional tax and interest due
by such person based upon any information within its possession or that
§ 197-56 SOLID WASTE § 197-58
180:533
§ 197-59. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article, together with all penalties, shall be a lien
against the real estate to which the document relates and, in the case of an
acquired company, the real estate owned by the acquired company. The lien
shall date from the time when the tax is due and payable and shall continue
until discharged by payment in full of the tax, together with all penalties. In
order to enforce the lien, the Board of Commissioners may proceed under
the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., or in any
other appropriate manner.
§ 197-60. Refunds.
shall come into its possession. In order to determine whether the
property amount of tax has been paid, without limiting any other rights
of the Board of Commissioners, the Board of Commissioners shall have
the right to review all documents or records relating to any real estate
transaction or any related transactions and to take such other steps
as the Board of Commissioners shall deem necessary or appropriate,
including a review or audit of any documents or records of any party
to a real estate transaction to determine the fair market value of the
real estate or any other relevant matter as determined by the Board
of Commissioners. Upon request of the Board of Commissioners and
at such place and time as specified by the Board of Commissioners,
any party shall make available to the Board of Commissioners any
documents or records requested by the Board of Commissioners. All of
such determinations shall be made within three years after the date of
the recording of the document.
B. Promptly after the date of such determination, the Board of
Commissioners shall send, by mail, a copy thereof to the person against
whom it was made. Within 90 days after the date upon which the copy
of any such determination was mailed, such person may file with the
Board of Commissioners a petition for redetermination of such taxes.
Every petition for redetermination shall state specifically the reasons
which the petitioner believes entitled him to such redetermination, and
it shall be supported by affirmation that it is not made for the purpose of
delay and that the facts set forth therein are true. It shall be the duty of
the Board of Commissioners, within six months after the date of filing of
any petition for redetermination, to dispose of the petition. Notice of
the action taken upon any petition for redetermination shall be given to
the petitioner promptly after the date of redetermination by the Board
of Commissioners.
A. Whenever the amount due upon determination, redetermination or
review is less than the amount paid to the township on account thereof,
the township shall enter a credit in the amount of such difference to the
account of the person who paid the tax.
§ 197-58 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-60
180:534
§ 197-61. Continuation.
This article and the tax imposed hereby shall become effective on January
1, 1987, shall continue in force during the calendar year 1987 and shall
continue in force during each calendar year thereafter.
§ 197-62. Unlawful acts; violations and penalties.
B. Where there has been no determination of unpaid tax, the Board of
Commissioners shall have the power and its duty shall be to hear and
decide any application for refund and, upon the allowance of such
application, to enter a credit in the amount of the overpayment to the
account of the person who paid the tax. Such application must be filed
within two years after the date of payment.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Make, execute, deliver, accept to present for recording or cause to
be made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording
any document without the full amount of tax thereon being duly
paid;
(2) Make use of any documentary stamp to denote payment of any tax
imposed by this article without canceling such stamp as required
by this article or as prescribed by the Board of Commissioners; or
(3) Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or violate other provisions of
this article or any rules and regulations prescribed, adopted and
promulgated by the Board of Commissioners under the provisions
of this article.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of Subsection A shall be
guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not less than $100 nor more then $600 and costs of prosecution and, in
default of the payment thereof, shall be imprisoned for not more than
30 days.187
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Fraudulently cut, tear or remove from a document any
documentary stamp;
(2) Fraudulently affix to any document upon which tax is imposed by
this article any documentary stamp or documentary license meter
impression or similar indicia of payment in lieu of documentary
stamp which as been cut, torn or removed from any other
document upon which tax is imposed by this article or any
documentary stamp of insufficient value or any forged or
counterfeited stamp, die, plate or other article;
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 197-60 SOLID WASTE § 197-62
180:535
§ 197-63. Interpretation and applicability of provisions.
(3) Willfully remove or alter the cancellation marks of any
documentary stamp document or documentary license meter
impression or similar indicia of payment in lieu of documentary
stamp or restore any such documentary stamp or documentary
license meter impression or similar indicia of payment in lieu of
documentary stamp with intent to use or cause the same to be used
after it has already been used or knowingly buy, sell, offer for sale
or give away any such altered or restored stamp to any person for
use or knowingly use the same;
(4) Knowingly have in his possession any altered or restored
documentary stamp or documentary license meter impression or
similar indicia of payment in lieu of documentary stamp which has
been removed from any document upon which tax is imposed by
this article, provided that the possession of such stamps shall be
prima facie evidence of an intent to violate the provisions of this
clause; or
(5) Knowingly or willfully prepare, keep, sell, offer for sale or have in
his possession any forged or counterfeited documentary stamp or
documentary license meter impression or similar indicia of
payment in lieu of documentary stamp.
D. Any person violating any of the provisions of Subsection C shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor of a summary offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $600 and costs
of prosecution and, in default of the payment thereof, shall be
imprisoned for not more than 30 days. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-16]
E. A person who makes a false statement of value or declaration of
acquisition when he does not believe the statement or declaration to be
true is guilty of a misdemeanor of a summary offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $600
and costs of prosecution and, in default of the payment thereof, shall be
imprisoned for not more than 30 days. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-16]
A. To the extent that this article imposes a tax on a real estate transaction
which is subject to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania realty transfer
tax imposed by Act 77-1986,188 and to the extent not inconsistent
herewith or with rules or regulations adopted by the Board of
Commissioners, this article shall be interpreted in the same manner as
Act 77-1986 and in accordance with the regulations promulgated
thereunder.
188. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 197-62 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-63
180:536
B. The provisions of this article, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances in force immediately prior to adoption of this article, are
intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as new
enactments.
C. This article is intended to supplement the realty transfer tax in effect
prior to adoption of this article imposing a tax on real estate
transactions not covered by prior ordinances and now taxable under
Act 77-1986.189 This article shall impose a tax on all transactions
taxable under ordinances levying a realty transfer tax in force
immediately prior to adoption of this article, and also on all transactions
which the township is permitted to tax under Act 77-1986 to the fullest
extent permissible.
D. To the extent that the provisions of this article tax real estate
transactions taxable under ordinances levying a realty transfer tax in
force immediately prior to adoption of this article, this article shall
supersede said prior ordinance.
E. In the event that this article is declared invalid, the prior ordinance or
ordinances of the township levying a realty transfer tax shall remain in
full force and effect and shall not be affected in any way by adoption of
this article.
F. The provisions of this article shall not affect any act done or liability
incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense,
under the authority of any ordinance in force prior to the adoption of
this article.
189. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 197-63 SOLID WASTE § 197-63
180:537

ARTICLE V
Tax Discounts and Penalties
[Adopted 1-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1 (Art. 334 of the 1985 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 197-64. Tax discounts; penalties.
The following discounts and penalties shall be applicable to the payment of
all taxes levied by the Board of Commissioners, except those levied under
Articles I and IV.
§ 197-65. Effective date.
The rates herein established shall be applicable to taxes levied by the Board
of Commissioners and to which this article applies for the calendar year
1992, beginning January 1, 1992, and to all taxes levied except as herein
provided, in all subsequent years without annual reenactment of this article.
A. All taxpayers subject to the payment of taxes which are the subject of
this article shall be entitled to a discount of 2% from the amount of such
tax upon making payment of the whole amount thereof within two
months after the date of the tax notice.
B. All taxpayers who fail to make payment of such taxes charged against
them for a period of four months after the date of the tax notice shall be
charged a penalty. The penalty shall be 10% of the amount of such tax,
which penalty shall be added to the tax by the Treasurer and shall be
collected by the Treasurer.
§ 197-64 SOLID WASTE § 197-65
180:539

ARTICLE VI
(Reserved)190
§ 197-66. through § 197-77. (Reserved)
190. Editor's Note: Former Art. VI, Occupation Tax, adopted 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 92-7 (Art.
335 of the 1985 Code of Ordinances), as amended, was repealed 11-26-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-09.
§ 197-66 SOLID WASTE § 197-66
180:541

ARTICLE VII
Video Programming Tax
[Adopted 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 95-7 (Art. 336 of the 1985 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 197-78. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Video Programming
Municipal Tax Authorization Ordinance." The purpose of this article is to
impose a video programming tax as authorized by Act 1995-37, effective
September 6, 1995.191
§ 197-79. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings given to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
CABLE TELEVISION OPERATOR — Any person or group of persons who
provides cable service over a cable system and, directly or through one or
more affiliates, owns an interest in such cable system or who otherwise
controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management
and operation of a cable system. The term does not include a provider of
wireless or direct-to-home satellite transmission service.
DIRECT-TO-HOME SATELLITE TRANSMISSION — The transmission,
distribution or broadcasting of video programming or services by satellite
directly to subscribers' premises without the use of ground receiving or
distribution equipment, except at the site of the subscribers or in the uplink
process to the satellite.
GROSS RECEIPTS — The amount charged for or received by video
programmers from sales of video programming and related charges for
bad check and late payment charges, installation, connection, additional
outlets, repair services, digital audio services, radio services, programming
guides and equipment rental services upon which the local cable television
operator pays a franchise fee; the amount charged for or received by
common carriers from sales of access to video programming and related
charges for bad check and late payment charges, installation, connection,
additional outlets, repair services, digital audio services, radio services,
programming guides and equipment rental services upon which the local
cable television operator pays a franchise fee; and the amount charged
for or received by persons from sales of access to video programming by
any means of transmission, other than wireless or direct-to-home satellite
transmission, directly to subscribers with service addresses in the township.
Gross receipts shall not include:
Amounts charged for or received by persons from sales of telephone
access or service that entitles the subscriber to the privilege of
A.
191. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 6171 et seq.
§ 197-78 SOLID WASTE § 197-79
180:543
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, joint-stock company,
trust, corporation, government entity, limited liability company or any other
entity.
SUBSCRIBER — The ultimate consumer of the video programming provided
by video programmers over any means of transmission, other than wireless
or direct-to-home satellite transmission. The term does not include a video
programmer that purchases a common carrier's video dial-tone transport
service to provide video programming over the common carrier's video dialtone
system.
TOWNSHIP — Lower Allen Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
interactive telephonic quality telecommunications with substantially all
persons having telephone or radio telephone stations constituting a
part of a particular system or in a specified area;
Any revenues received by common carrier persons providing access to
video programming from video programmers for the transport of video
programming to a subscriber's premises or access to the video dial-tone
network;
B.
The tax imposed under this article if the tax is shown as a separate line
charge to subscribers;
C.
Any other taxes, fees or surcharges on services furnished by persons
providing access to video programming or video programmers which
are imposed on subscribers by the commonwealth pursuant to statute
or regulation and which are collected on behalf of the governmental
unit by the provider of the services;
D.
Any portion of a debt related to the sale of video programming or
the sale of access to a video network, the gross charges for which
are not otherwise deductible or excludable, that has become worthless
or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax
standards. If the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently
paid, the video programmers or person shall report and pay the excise
tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is
made;
E.
Amounts received from retail sales of tangible personal property that
provides access to video programming;
F.
Amounts charged for or received by persons from sales of video
programming which is delivered to subscribers through a Satellite
Master Antenna Television (SMATV) System; or
G.
Amounts received by a common carrier from persons for related
charges for bad check and late payment charges, installation,
connection, additional outlets, repair services, digital audio services,
radio services, programming guides and equipment rental services that
are resold by such persons to the ultimate consumer.
H.
§ 197-79 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-79
180:544
VIDEO DIAL-TONE SERVICE — A common carrier service for the transport
of video programming to subscribers.
VIDEO PROGRAMMER — An individual, partnership, association, jointstock
company, trust, corporation, governmental entity, limited liability
company or any other entity that provides video programming to
subscribers.
VIDEO PROGRAMMING — Video or information programming, whether in
digital or analog format, that is provided by a cable operator or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by a cable television
operator and upon which such cable television operator pays a franchise
fee. Video programming does not include on-line, interactive information
services to the extent that access to such services is accomplished via a
dial-up or private telephone line or via wireless or direct-to-home satellite
transmission.
WIRELESS TRANSMISSION — The distribution of video programming
using radio communications, including but not limited to terrestrial-based
radio systems.
§ 197-80. Imposition of tax on gross receipts of video programming
providers.
A. There is a video programming tax on and from, respectively, any person
who sells video programming to subscribers who are located within this
township by any means of transmission, other than wireless or directto-
home satellite transmission, or who provides such subscribers with
access to video programming by any means of transmission, other than
wireless or direct-to-home satellite transmission, and who is not
otherwise subject to federally authorized or permitted local fees or
taxes on the gross receipts received from the provision of cable
television service or video programming services to customers in the
township. This tax shall be imposed on persons engaging in any
commercial activity in this township or employing capital in this
township or owning, leasing or utilizing property in this township or
maintaining an office in this township or having employees in this
township for all or any part of any calendar year to the full extent
permitted by the Constitution of the United States. The tax imposed is
imposed only on the gross receipts of such persons from sales of video
programming or sales of access to video programming directly to
subscribers who are located within this township.
B. Tax rate. The tax rate under this article shall be the franchise fee rate
imposed by the local cable ordinance of the township or, if no local
cable ordinance exists, the rate set in the agreement between the local
cable television operator and the township. In no event shall the rate
imposed under this article exceed 5%.
C. Calculation of tax. The tax authorized in this article shall be determined
by multiplying the tax rate as set forth in either Subsection B or
Subsection G, as applicable, by the gross receipts of video
§ 197-79 SOLID WASTE § 197-80
180:545
§ 197-81. Exemption from certain taxes.
Gross receipts as defined in this article and subject to the tax imposed by
this article, as well as any revenues received by a common carrier person
providing access to video programming from video programmers for the
transport of video programming to a subscriber's premises or from video
programmers for access to the video dial-tone network, shall not be subject
to any tax under:
programmers from sales of video programming or of persons from sales
of access to video programming or of common carriers from sales of
access to video programming, by any means of transmission, other than
wireless or direct-to-home satellite transmission, directly to subscribers
who are located in the township.
D. Election. Any person subject to tax under this article may elect at any
time to pass through to subscribers as a separate itemized line charge
on the subscriber's bill the tax imposed under this article.
E. Penalty. A penalty of an amount equal to 10% of the taxes due, including
all delinquent taxes due under this article, shall be added to the tax
levied under this article for failure to pay the tax by the quarterly due
dates set forth in this section.
F. Alternate rate. If no cable television operator provides cable service
within the limits of this township, the tax to be collected from persons
subject to tax under this article shall be an amount not to exceed 5%. In
the event that a cable operator shall thereafter provide cable service
within the limits of this township, the tax rate set under this article shall
be adjusted under Subsection B.
G. Due dates. The tax imposed under this article shall be paid to the taxing
township by each person quarterly on or before April 30, July 31,
October 31 and January 31 and shall be calculated based on the gross
receipts of each person during the three months prior to the month of
payment. Any payment of tax shall be considered as timely made if the
payment received by the township is postmarked by the United States
Postal Service on or prior to the final day on which payment is to be
received.
A. Article XI of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax
Reform Code of 1971."192
B. The act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), known as the "Local
Tax Enabling Act,"193 or any other local tax or fee imposed on the
receipts of persons providing video programming or access to video
programming to subscribers who are located within the township,
except that the gross receipts of video programmers shall be subject to
192. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
193. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 197-80 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-81
180:546
§ 197-82. Tax credits.
§ 197-83. Procedures and regulations.
tax under the local business privilege tax in this township where the
local cable television operator pays a local business privilege tax
pursuant to the Local Tax Enabling Act.
A. Credit for interstate transactions. Any person subject to the tax
imposed under this article shall be entitled to a credit against the tax
imposed by this article equal in amount to any similar tax on gross
receipts, other than a generally applicable sales or use tax or corporate
income tax, that the person has paid to another state or government
entity thereof under a lawful requirement of such state or government
entity on sales by the person of the same video programming or sales of
access to such video programming to subscribers located within this
township.
B. Credit for taxes paid under any franchise or similar fees. Any person
subject to the tax imposed under this article shall be entitled to a credit
against the tax imposed by this article equal in amount to any fees on
gross receipts that the person has paid under any franchise fee or
similar fee authorized or permitted by federal, state or local law or
imposed by ordinance in this township or agreed to pursuant to a
written franchise agreement between the person and this township,
with respect to any revenues received by a person or video programmer
from subscribers for access to the person's video network or for video
programming or from video programmers for the transport of video
programming to a subscriber's premises or for the transport of video
programming to a subscriber's premises or for access to a video
network.
A. Procedures. A person may be audited by this township; provided,
however, that any dispute or controversy that results from such audit or
imposition of tax under this article shall be contested and resolved in
accordance with a uniform set of procedures, rules and regulations that
shall be promulgated by the Department of Revenue. This township
shall provide the video programmers and persons providing access to
video programming with:
(1) The rate that is lawfully imposed by this township under this
article.
(2) A list of the "zip plus 4's" or a comparable list of addresses located
in this township which will enable the person to identify the
subscribers located in this township.
(3) A copy of this article and any amendments thereto within 30 days
after enactment.
§ 197-81 SOLID WASTE § 197-83
180:547
§ 197-84. Effective date.
This article and the tax imposed hereof shall become effective on the first
day of the month 60 days after it is enacted.
B. Enforcement. The township shall enforce this article in accordance with
the provisions of Act 1995-37, the Video Programming Municipal Tax
Authorization Act.194
194. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 6171 et seq.
§ 197-83 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-84
180:548
ARTICLE VIII
Amusement Tax
[Adopted 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 96-8 (Art. 337 of the 1985 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 197-85. Title.
This article shall be know as the "Lower Allen Township Amusement Tax
Ordinance."
§ 197-86. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings given to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates
a different meaning:
ADMISSION — Monetary charge of any character whatever, including
donations, contributions and dues or membership fees (periodical or
otherwise) charged or paid for the privilege of attending or engaging in
amusements, as hereinafter defined; provided, however, that in the case
of persons (except bona fide employees of the person conducting the
amusement) admitted free or at reduced rates at a time when and under
circumstances under which an established price is charged to other
persons, the term "admission" shall mean the established price as charged
to other persons.
AMUSEMENT — All manner and form of entertainment, including, among
others, the following: theatrical performance, operatic performance,
carnivals, circuses, shows, concerts, lectures, sports events, vaudeville
shows, side shows, amusement parks and all forms of entertaining therein,
dancing, golf, bowling, billiards or pool, athletic contests, including
wrestling matches, boxing and sparring exhibitions, football, basketball
and baseball games, ice-skating, roller-skating, tennis, hockey, bathing,
swimming, archery, shooting, riding, racing, arcade and any other form
of diversion, sport, pastime or recreation, shows, exhibitions, contests,
displays and games; provided, however, that the term "amusement" shall
not include any form of entertainment, the proceeds of which, after payment
of reasonable expenses, inure exclusively to the benefit of religious,
educational or exclusively charitable institutions, societies or organizations,
volunteer firemen's organizations or civic activities supported by tax funds;
and provided, further, that the term "amusement" shall not include motionpicture
exhibitions nor sound motion-picture exhibitions, camping or any
activities the predominate purpose or nature of which is exercise, fitness,
health maintenance, improvement or rehabilitation, health or nutrition
education or weight control.[Amended 5-14-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-06]
ARCADE — A retail establishment that derives at least half of its revenues
from video or other electronic games, pinball machines or other amusement
devices.[Added 5-14-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-06]
BOARD — The Board of Commissioners in and for this township.
§ 197-85 SOLID WASTE § 197-86
180:549
MANAGER — The Township Manager as duly appointed by the Board.
PERSON — Includes natural person, firm, association, unincorporated
association, partnership, corporation or other entity. Whenever the term
"person" is applied to a partnership, association or joint venture, it shall
mean the parties or members thereof, and as applied to a corporation it
shall mean the officers thereof.
PRODUCER — Any person, as herein defined, conducting any place of
amusement, as herein defined, where the general public or a limited or
selected number thereof may, upon the payment of an established price,
attend or engage in any amusement.
TOWNSHIP — Lower Allen Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
VALUE OF AMUSEMENT — The admission price or other valuation of the
cost of participating in an amusement or privilege within the township,
whether or not any fees for admission or participation are collected within
the township. For any amusement that is subject to the tax imposed under
§ 197-87 by virtue of having a separate and distinct subpart of that
amusement within the township for which a separate price of amusement
or participation is not paid, its value shall be determined by prorating the
price of admission or participation with respect to the percentage of the
overall activity that is conducted in or upon the subpart located within the
township.[Added 5-14-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-06]
WITHIN THE TOWNSHIP [Added 5-14-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-06] —
An amusement shall be within the township for the purpose of tax imposed
under § 197-87 if that amusement:
§ 197-87. Imposition of tax. [Amended 5-14-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-06]
A tax is hereby imposed for general revenue purposes at the rate of 10% of
the value of each and every amusement or privilege within the township for
which the value of individual participation is $0.10 or more.
§ 197-88. Rate of tax.
A. Is wholly confined within the geographic boundaries of the township;
Has either its place of origin or place of termination within the
geographic boundaries of the township; or
B.
Has a separate and distinct subpart wholly located within the
geographic boundaries of the township.
C.
A. Where the price is fixed or established, the tax shall be collected on
each admission of $0.10 or more according to the following table:
(1) Under $1.
(a) If the price is $0.10 to $0.19, the tax shall be $0.01.
§ 197-86 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-88
180:550
§ 197-89. Exemptions.
(b) If the price is $0.20 to $0.29, the tax shall be $0.02.
(c) If the price is $0.30 to $0.39, the tax shall be $0.03.
(d) If the price is $0.40 to $0.49, the tax shall be $0.04.
(e) If the price is $0.50 to $0.59, the tax shall be $0.05.
(f) If the price is $0.60 to $0.69, the tax shall be $0.06.
(g) If the price is $0.70 to $0.79, the tax shall be $0.07.
(h) If the price is $0.80 to $0.89, the tax shall be $0.08.
(i) If the price is $0.90 to $0.99, the tax shall be $0.09.
(2) If the price is $1 or more, the tax shall be collected on each
admission at the rate of 10% of each dollar of price, plus the
following bracket charges upon any fractional part of a dollar in
excess of even dollar amounts:
Fractional Part of Dollar Amount of Tax
$0.00 to $0.09 None
$0.10 to $0.19 $0.01
$0.20 to $0.29 $0.02
$0.30 to $0.39 $0.03
$0.40 to $0.49 $0.04
$0.50 to $0.59 $0.05
$0.60 to $0.69 $0.06
$0.70 to $0.79 $0.07
$0.80 to $0.89 $0.08
$0.90 to $0.99 $0.09
B. Where the price is not fixed or established, the tax shall be collected
based upon the gross admission fee or fees collected.
C. Where the price of admission is wholly or in part included in the price
paid for refreshment, service and/or merchandise, where purchase of
such refreshment, service or merchandise is required as a condition for
admission, the taxable price shall be deemed to be 50% of the price
paid for refreshment, service and/or merchandise.
A. The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to admission to any form
of amusement which involves participation of students and which is
sponsored, organized and promoted by, and whose benefits inure to a
public school(s), public school district(s) or parochial school(s) within
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or a nonprofit organization created
§ 197-88 SOLID WASTE § 197-89
180:551
§ 197-90. Permit requirements.
and operated to coordinate such events, such as the Pennsylvania
Interscholastic Athletic Association, or organization(s) or association(s)
comprised of public or parochial school officials or public or parochial
school educators, if a majority of the members of such nonprofit
organizations consists of public or parochial schools or public or
parochial school districts, public or parochial school officials or public
or parochial school educators.
B. In order to obtain an exemption from payment of this tax, the public or
parochial school(s), public or parochial school district(s) or the
nonprofit organization described as aforesaid must request the
exemption from the Board of Commissioners, in writing, no later than
30 days prior to the scheduled event. Where the activity consists of
more than one event, the exemption permit shall apply to all events of
such activity. A failure to strictly follow this requirement and/or a
failure to fully and accurately provide any relevant information
requested by the Board of Commissioners to verify the basis for the
exemption shall be cause for the township to deny the exemption.
A. After the effective date of this article, any person desiring to conduct or
to continue to conduct any amusement, the price of admission to which
is subject to tax under this article, shall file with the Township Manager
or his designee an application for either a permanent amusement
permit or a temporary amusement permit, as the case may be. If the
owner of the facility in which the amusement is to be held or is to take
place is different from the person desiring to conduct or continue to
conduct the amusement, the application shall be jointly filed by the
owner of the facility and the party conducting the amusement. In the
case of any amusement that is to continue for longer than 10 days, a
permanent amusement permit shall be issued. In the case of any
amusement that is to continue for 10 days or less, a temporary permit
shall be issued.
B. The application shall be in such form as the Treasurer or designated Tax
Collector of the township shall prescribe and shall include the following
requests for information:
(1) The proper legal name and address of the person conducting the
amusement.
(2) The proper legal name and address of the person owning the
facility in which the amusement is to be conducted.
(3) The type of permit being applied for.
(4) The location of the amusement covered by the permit.
(5) The admission price or prices charged or to be charged.
(6) The approximate total receipts anticipated.
§ 197-89 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-90
180:552
§ 197-91. Permit expiration.
A permanent permit shall remain in effect until terminated by the holder
or upon 10 days' written notice from the township or its designated Tax
Collector. A temporary permit shall be valid until the last day the
amusement is conducted.
§ 197-92. Payment of tax due; report to be submitted by permit
holders.
(7) The names and addresses of partners, members and/or officers of
the person conducting the amusement.
(8) The type/description of the amusement.
(9) The period for which the permit is to be issued.
C. If the application is filed by a corporation, it shall be signed by two
officers. If the application is filed by a partnership, association or joint
venture, the application shall be signed by all partners and members.
D. Upon receipt of a properly completed and executed application, the Tax
Collector shall issue the applicable permit, which shall be in such form
as the Board of Commissioners shall determine.
A. Every holder of a temporary permit, which shall include the owner of
the facility and the party conducting the amusement, shall, within 10
days after the close of the amusement, pay over to the Tax Collector the
amount of tax due from such person under this article upon the
admission for such amusement and, at the same time, shall submit to
the Tax Collector a report of the total admissions charged and/or
collected for the amusement and the total amount of tax due on such
admissions.
B. Every holder of a permanent permit, which shall include the owner of
the facility and the party conducting the amusement, shall, on or before
the 15th day of each month and on or before the 30th day of each
month, unless special arrangements are approved by the township, pay
over to the Tax Collector the amount of tax due from each person, under
this article, upon admission for the preceding collection period (16th
through month-end: due on 15th of the following month; and first
through 15th: due on the 30th of the same month) and, at the same
time, shall submit to the Tax Collector, under oath or affirmation, a
report of the total taxable admissions charged or collected during such
collection period and the total amount of the tax due on such
admissions. If the 15th or 30th falls on a holiday or weekend day, that
tax shall be paid on the following business day.
C. In the event that the owner of the facility is not identical to the party
conducting the amusement, each party shall be fully responsible for
proper reporting of the tax due and payment of the tax due.
§ 197-90 SOLID WASTE § 197-93
180:553
§ 197-93. Election and duties of Tax Collector.
§ 197-94. Unauthorized disclosure.
Any information gained by the Tax Collector of the township or any other
official or agent of the township as a result of any returns, investigations
or verifications required or authorized by this article shall be confidential,
except for official purposes and except in accordance with proper judicial
order or as otherwise provided by law, and any person unlawfully divulging
such information shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $300, and the costs
of prosecution, or to undergo imprisonment, as provided by law.
§ 197-95. Violations and penalties; interest.
A. The Tax Collector is charged with the duties of collecting and receiving
taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall be her duty to
keep a record showing the amount received by it, from whom received
and the date of such receipt.
B. The Board of Commissioners shall prescribe, adopt and promulgate
rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this article. The Tax Collector is
charged with enforcing the provisions of this article and any rules and/
or relations promulgated pursuant hereto.
C. If any person required to secure a permit under this article shall fail to
file a report at the time specified herein or shall file a report which, on
her face, appears incorrect or insufficient, the Tax Collector or its duly
appointed agents shall assess said person or persons an amount of tax
which said Tax Collector or its agents deem reasonable and
appropriate. In all cases of assessment, the Tax Collector or her duly
appointed agents shall give the parties assessed a notice in which shall
be stated the amount of the tax imposed or levied.
D. Every holder of an amusement permit shall keep and maintain complete
records showing the daily admission charged or collected, the amount
of tax due and any other information necessary to determine the
amount of tax due. Said records shall be retained by the holder of the
amusement permit for a three-year period following the payment of the
tax.
E. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Collector shall have the
right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas, as in all other cases.
A. If any person shall fail to pay, when due, tax due under this article, a
penalty of 10% of the amount of tax due and unpaid shall be added
thereto.
B. If any person shall fail to obtain a permit or shall fail to collect and/or
remit any tax due or shall fail to file complete and correct reports or
returns when due or shall knowingly make a false or fraudulent report
§ 197-93 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-95
180:554
§ 197-96. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to any person or property as to which or which
it is beyond the legal power of the township to impose this tax or the duties
herein provided for.
§ 197-97. Effective date.
This article shall become effective on January 1, 1997, and shall continue on
a calendar-year basis thereafter without annual reenactment.
or shall violate or attempt to violate any provision of this article, such
person shall be liable, upon conviction in a summary proceeding before
any District Justice, to a fine not not less than $100 and not exceeding
$600 for each and every offense, and the costs of prosecution, and in
default thereof, to undergo imprisonment in the county prison for a
period not exceeding 30 days, and upon such conviction, any permanent
permit or temporary permit shall be automatically revoked. Each day
that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense
punishable by like fine or penalty. Any fine or penalty hereunder shall
be in addition to the 10% penalty, unpaid tax and any other fine or
penalty levied hereunder or under any other applicable law.195
C. If any person shall fail to pay the tax when due, interest shall accrue
thereon at the rate of 1% per month or any portion thereof for which
said tax remains due and unpaid.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due and suit is brought for
recovery of the tax, the person liable therefor, in addition, shall be liable
for the cost of collection, interest and penalties herein imposed.
195. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 197-95 SOLID WASTE § 197-97
180:555

ARTICLE IX
Volunteer Service Tax Credit
[Adopted 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-08]
§ 197-98. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
ACTIVE VOLUNTEER — A volunteer for a volunteer fire company listed
under § 197-99C who has complied with, and is certified under, the
Volunteer Service Credit Program.
EARNED INCOME TAX — A tax on earned income and net profits levied
under Chapter 3 of the act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511),
known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act."196
ELIGIBILITY PERIOD — The timeframe when volunteers may earn credit
under the Volunteer Service Credit Program.
EMERGENCY RESPONDER — A volunteer who responds to an emergency
call with one of the entities listed under § 197-99C.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE CALL — Any emergency call to which a volunteer
responds, including travel directly from and to a volunteer's home, place
of business or other place where he/she shall have been when the call was
received.
QUALIFIED REAL PROPERTY — A residential real property owned and
occupied as the domicile of an active volunteer.
VOLUNTEER — A member of a volunteer fire company.
§ 197-99. Volunteer Service Credit Program.
A. Establishment. Lower Allen Township hereby establishes a Volunteer
Service Credit Program. The goal of the program is to encourage
membership and service in the community's volunteer fire companies.
B. Program criteria. The Board of Commissioners shall establish, by
resolution, the annual criteria that must be met to qualify for credits
under the program based on the following:
(1) The number of emergency response calls to which a volunteer
responds.
(2) The level of training and participation in formal training and drills
for a volunteer.
(3) The total number of company meetings attended by the volunteer.
196. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 197-98 SOLID WASTE § 197-99
180:557
(4) The total amount of time expended by a volunteer on public
relations activities, including but not limited to:
(a) Fire prevention.
(b) Special events.
(c) Scheduled stand-bys.
(d) Public fundraiser attendance.
(5) The total amount of time expended by a volunteer on support
activities, including, but not limited to:
(a) Maintenance of apparatus, buildings and grounds.
(b) Work details.
(c) After-call cleanup.
(d) Rig checks.
(e) Fundraiser work.
(f) Committee work.
(g) Administrative work, including social media, websites,
communication, advertising, and rental management.
(6) The total credits earned by serving as an officer of the company or
as a member of a committee doing work on behalf of the company.
C. Eligible entities. The Volunteer Service Credit Program is available to
residents of the Township volunteers of the following volunteer fire
companies that provide service to Lower Allen Township:
(1) Lower Allen Fire Company #1.
(2) Lisburn Community Fire Company.
D. Eligibility period. A volunteer must meet the minimum criteria, set by
resolution under this section, during the eligibility period to qualify for
the tax credits established under § 197-100. For 2018 and each
subsequent year thereafter, the eligibility period shall run from January
1 until December 31.
E. Recordkeeping. The Chief of each volunteer fire company listed under
§ 197-99C shall keep specific records of each volunteer's activities in a
service log to establish credits under the Volunteer Service Credit
Program. Service logs shall be subject to review by the Board of
Commissioners, the State Fire Commissioner and the State Auditor
General. The Chief shall annually transmit to the Township a notarized
eligibility list of all volunteers that have met the minimum criteria for
the Volunteer Service Credit Program. The notarized eligibility list shall
be transmitted to the Township no later than 45 days before tax notices
§ 197-99 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-99
180:558
are to be distributed. The Chief shall post the notarized eligibility list in
an accessible area of the volunteer agency's facilities.
F. Application. Volunteers that have met the minimum criteria of the
Volunteer Service Credit Program shall sign and submit an application
for certification to their Chief. The Chief shall sign the application if the
volunteer has met the minimum criteria of the Volunteer Service Credit
Program, and forward it to the Township Manager. Applications shall
not be accepted by the Township after April 1 of each year.
G. Municipal review. The Township Manager shall review the applications
for credit under the Volunteer Service Credit Program and shall cross
reference them with the notarized eligibility list. The Board of
Commissioners shall approve all applicants that are on the notarized
eligibility list. All applicants approved by the Board of Commissioners
shall be issued a tax credit certificate by the Township Manager.
H. Official tax credit register. The Township shall keep an official tax credit
register of all active volunteers that were issued tax credit certificates.
The Township Manager shall issue updates, as needed, of the official tax
credit register to the following:
(1) Board of Commissioners.
(2) Chief of the volunteer fire company(s).
(3) Township elected Tax Collector.
(4) Tax officer for the Township's Tax Collection Bureau.
I. Injured volunteers.
(1) An emergency responder who is injured during an emergency
response call may be eligible for future tax credits. The injury must
have occurred while responding to, participating in, or returning
from an emergency response call with one of the entities listed
under § 197-99C.
(2) An injured emergency responder shall provide documentation from
a licensed physician with the application required under § 197-99
stating that their injury prevents them from performing duties to
qualify as an active volunteer. In such a case, the injured
emergency responder shall be deemed an active volunteer for that
tax year.
(3) An injured emergency responder shall annually submit the
application required under § 197-99, along with updated
documentation from a licensed physician stating that the injury still
exists and prevents them from qualifying as an active volunteer.
The injured emergency responder shall again be deemed an active
volunteer for that tax year. An injured emergency responder shall
only be deemed an active volunteer for a maximum of five
consecutive tax years.
§ 197-99 SOLID WASTE § 197-100
180:559
§ 197-100. Earned income tax credit.
§ 197-101. Real property tax credit.
A. Tax credit. Each active volunteer who has been certified under the
Lower Allen Township Volunteer Service Credit Program and elects the
earned income tax credit on the application required under § 197-99
shall be eligible to receive a tax credit of up to $100 of the earned
income tax levied by the Township. When an active volunteer's earned
income tax liability is less than the amount of the tax credit, the tax
credit shall equal the individual's tax liability.
B. Claim. An active volunteer with a tax credit certificate may file a claim
for the tax credit on their Township earned income tax liability when
filing a final return for the preceding calendar year with the tax officer
for the Cumberland County Tax Collection Bureau.
C. Rejection of tax credit claim.
(1) The tax officer shall reject a claim for a tax credit if the taxpayer is
not on the official tax credit register issued by the Township
Manager.
(2) If the tax officer rejects the claim, the taxpayer shall be notified in
writing of the decision. The notice shall include the reasons for the
rejection and provide the method of appealing the decision
pursuant to § 197-102.
(3) Taxpayers shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of the tax
officer.
A. Tax credit. Each active volunteer who has been certified under the
Lower Allen Township Volunteer Service Credit Program and elects the
real property tax credit on the application required under § 197-99 shall
be eligible to receive a real property tax credit of 20% of the Township
tax liability on qualified real property. If the tax is paid in the penalty
period, the tax credit shall only apply to the base tax year liability.
B. Claim.
(1) An active volunteer with a tax credit certificate may file a claim for
the tax credit on their qualified real property tax liability for the
Township's real estate tax levy. The tax credit shall be administered
as a refund by the Township Treasurer. An active volunteer shall
file the following with the Township Manager:
(a) A true and correct receipt from the Township Tax Collector of
the paid Township real property taxes for the tax year which
the claim is being filed.
(b) The tax credit certificate.
(c) Photo identification.
§ 197-100 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-101
180:560
§ 197-102. Appeals.
(d) Documentation that the tax paid was for qualified real property
as defined in this article.
(2) If the active volunteer provides all documents required under this
subsection, the Township Treasurer shall issue the tax refund to the
active volunteer.
C. Rejection of the tax credit claim.
(1) The Township Manager shall reject the claim for a Township real
property tax credit if the taxpayer fails to provide the documents
required under Subsection B(1).
(2) If the Township Manager rejects the claim, the taxpayer shall be
notified in writing of the decision. The notice shall include the
reasons for the rejection and provide the method of appealing the
decision pursuant to § 197-102.
(3) Taxpayers shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of the Township
Manager.
A. Earned income tax credit appeals.
(1) Any taxpayer aggrieved by a decision under § 197-100 shall have a
right to appeal said decision.
(2) A taxpayer shall have 30 days to appeal a decision or rejection of
claim.
(3) All appeals of decisions under § 197-100 shall follow the provisions
of the Act of May 5, 1998, P.L. 301, No. 50, known as the "Local
Taxpayers Bill of Rights."197
(4) Procedures for filing appeals of all decisions can be found in the
Township's Taxpayer Bill of Rights Resolution, Resolution
1999-R-06, and its attachments.198
B. Real property tax credit appeals.
(1) Any taxpayer aggrieved by a decision under § 197-101 shall have a
right to appeal said decision.
(2) A taxpayer shall have 30 days to appeal a decision or rejection of
claim.
(3) All appeals under § 197-101 shall follow the provisions of 2
Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 5, Subchapter B (relating to practice and
procedure of local agencies), and 2 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 7,
197. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
198. Editor's Note: Said resolution is on file in the Township offices.
§ 197-101 SOLID WASTE § 197-102
180:561
Subchapter B (relating to judicial review of local agency action),
also known as the "Local Agency Law."
§ 197-102 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 197-102
180:562
Chapter 202
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 162.
Disposal of trimmings — See Ch. 180.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 187.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
192.
Weeds — See Ch. 216.
§ 202-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context in which the word
is used clearly indicates otherwise:
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Lower Allen, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 202-2. Trimming over streets and sidewalks. [Amended
11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-16; 12-28-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-10]
Any person owning or occupying any property within the township abutting
on any street or highway where there exists any trees, shrubbery, bushes or
other type of plant life or growth in proximity to any street or sidewalk shall
trim such trees, shrubbery, bushes or other type of plant life or growth on
the property and in the street right-of-way along such property, so that no
part thereof is less than 14 feet over any street or less than eight feet over
any sidewalk. No person shall permit any trees, shrubbery, bushes or other
type of plant life or growth to otherwise obstruct, impede or interfere with
traffic or travel on or using such streets or sidewalks.199
§ 202-3. Trimming or cutting required.
The owner of any vacant premises, or any owner or occupant of an occupied
premises, shall trim, cut or remove all trees, shrubbery, bushes or any other
type of plant life or growth growing or remaining upon such premises in
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
199. Editor's Note: Additional regulations regarding trees are contained in Ch. 187, Art. I,
Excavations, and Ch. 192, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 197-102 TREES § 202-4
202:563
§ 202-4. Notice to remove, trim or cut. [Amended 12-28-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-10]
The Board of Commissioners, the Township Manager or any officer or
employee of the township designated thereby for the purpose, are hereby
authorized to give notice, by personal service or by mail, to the owner or
occupant, as the case may be, of any premises whereon there is a violation
of the provisions of this chapter directing and requiring such owner or
occupant to trim, cut or remove such trees, shrubbery, bushes or any other
type of plant life or growth so as to conform to the requirements of this
chapter, within 30 days after issuance of such notice.
§ 202-5. Action by township. [Amended 12-28-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-10]
In case any person neglects, fails or refuses to comply with such notice
within 30 days, the township authorities may trim, cut or remove such trees,
shrubbery, bushes or any other type of plant life or growth or may enter
into a contract to cause the same to be done, and the costs thereof, together
with a penalty of 10% of such costs, may be collected by the township from
such person in the manner provided by law.
§ 202-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord. No.
97-16]
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $600 with costs of prosecution for each offense and,
in default of the payment thereof, shall be imprisoned for not more than 30
days. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense, and notice to
the offender shall not be necessary in order to constitute an offense.
Chapter 206
VECTOR CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 121.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 162.
Sewers — See Ch. 175.
Solid waste — See Ch. 180.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 184.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 212.
§ 206-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
§ 202-4 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 206-1
206:564
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A detached structure which is not used or not
intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants and which is
located on or partially on any premises.
BREEDING AREA — Any condition which provides the necessary
environment for the birth or hatching of vectors.
COLLECTION OF WATER — Water contained in ditches, pools, ponds,
streams, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults,
fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs, urns, cans, boxes,
bottles, tubs, buckets, roof gutters, tanks of flush closets, reservoirs,
vessels, receptacles of any kind or other containers or devices which may
hold water.
DILAPIDATED — Fallen into partial ruin or decay.
DISPOSAL — Includes the storage, collection, disposal or handling of
refuse.
DWELLING — A building or structure used for residential purposes.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms in a dwelling, which room or rooms
have fixed cooking facilities arranged for occupancy by one person, two or
more persons living together or one family.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of vectors by eliminating
their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that
may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, fogging
larviciding or trapping; or by any other recognized and legal vector control
elimination methods approved by the local or state authority having such
administrative authority.
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking or consumption of foods.
HARBORAGE — Any place where vectors can live, nest or seek shelter.
OCCUPANT — Any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or
eating in or actually having possession of a dwelling unit or a rooming unit,
except that in dwelling units, a guest will not be considered an occupant.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
Has legal title to any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
A.
Has charge, care or control of any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit
as owner or agent of the owner or an executor, administrator, trustee or
guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing
the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this
article and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto to the
same extent as if he were the owner.
B.
§ 206-1 VECTOR CONTROL § 206-1
206:565
REFUSE — All solid wastes, except body wastes, and shall include garbage,
ashes and rubbish.
RUBBISH — Includes glass, metal, paper, plant growth, wood or
nonputrescible solid wastes.
TOWNSHIP OF LOWER ALLEN — The Board of Commissioners of the
Township of Lower Allen, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
VECTOR — A rodent, arthropod or insect capable of transmitting a disease
or infection. Vectors shall include but not be limited to rats, mosquitoes,
cockroaches, flies, ticks, etc.
VECTOR CONTROL OFFICER — Such person or agency or both so
designated by the township.
VECTORPROOFING — A form of construction to prevent the ingress or
egress of vectors to or from a given space or building or from gaining access
to food, water or harborage. This term shall include but not be limited to
ratproofing, flyproofing, mosquitoproofing, etc.
§ 206-2. Prohibited acts.
A. No person shall deposit any refuse, offal, pomace, dead animals,
decaying matter or organic substance of any kind in or upon any private
lot, building structure, accessory structure or premises or in or upon
any street, avenue, alley, parkway, ravine, ditch or gutter or into any of
the runs, creeks or bodies of water within or bounding the township so
that the same shall or may afford food, harborage or breeding areas for
rats, flies or other vectors.
B. No person shall deposit or permit to accumulate in or upon any
premises, improved or vacant, or on any open lot or alley any lumber,
boxes, barrels, bottles, cans, glass, scrap iron, wire, metal articles,
pipe, broken stone or cement, broken crockery, broken plaster or
rubbish of any kind, unless the same is kept in approved covered
receptacles or placed on open racks that are elevated not less than 18
inches above the ground and evenly piled or stacked or disposed of as
may be approved by the Department of Environmental Protection or the
township.
C. No person shall maintain a junkyard or a place for the dumping or
wrecking or disassembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors or
machinery of any kind or for the storing or leaving of dilapidated,
wrecked or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of
any kind or of any of the parts thereof or for the storing or leaving of
any machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or by other
persons in such a manner as may afford harborage or breeding areas
for rats or other vectors.
D. No person shall store refuse in containers other than those which are
made of durable, watertight, rust-resistant material having a closefitting
lid which must be kept on the container when in use or in plastic
§ 206-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 206-2
206:566
§ 206-3. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
§ 206-4. Vectorproofing.
bags which are durable and watertight and are secured or tied. These
containers must be kept clean by thorough rinsing and draining as often
as necessary so as not to provide food or breeding areas for flies.
E. No person shall construct, maintain or use a sewage system, privy,
urinal, cesspool or other receptacle for human excrement so that
vectors may have access to the excrementitious matter contained
therein.
F. No person shall have, keep, maintain, cause or permit any collection of
standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to
breed, unless such collection of water is treated or maintained
effectually so as to prevent such breeding.
A. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall
maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of
the dwelling and premises thereof.
B. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall maintain in a clean
and sanitary condition that part or those parts of the dwelling, dwelling
unit and premises thereof that he occupies and controls.
C. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of insects or rodents on the premises.
Every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than
one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever
his dwelling unit is the only one infested, except that where infestation
is caused by failure of the owner to maintain the dwelling in a
rodentproof or reasonable insectproof condition, extermination shall be
the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or
more of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or public
parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
A. Any dwelling, building, structure, accessory structure, premises or any
other place may be required to be vectorproofed when found by the
Vector Control Office to be providing harborage or breeding areas for
rats, flies, mosquitoes or any other vectors.
B. No owner, occupant, contractor, public utility company, plumber or any
other person shall remove or fail to restore in like condition the
vectorproofing from any building, structure or accessory structure for
any purpose.
§ 206-2 VECTOR CONTROL § 206-5
206:567
§ 206-5. Plans and specifications for private vector control
programs.
A program plan and specifications for private vector control programs may
be required to be submitted to the township as deemed necessary by the
Vector Control Office. The program plan shall be submitted by the owner
or agent of the property on or in which the vector control program is or
will be conducted. The program plan shall be submitted by the owner or
agent of the property on or in which the vector control program is or will be
conducted. The program plan shall state the type of vectors to be controlled,
the name of the company contracted to carry out the program and any and
all work to be conducted in an effort to control the vectors. If, after review of
the program plan by the Vector Control Officer, it is found to be inadequate
or incomplete, additional information may be required, as well as additional
control methods.
§ 206-6. Inspection; compliance; abatement.
§ 206-7. Violations and penalties.200
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be fined not less than
$100 and not more than $600, and the costs of prosecution. Each day's
violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
In default of the payment of such fine and costs, the person shall undergo
imprisonment for a period of not more than 30 days.
Chapter 209
A. The Vector Control Officer is empowered to make inspections of the
interior and exterior of all dwellings, buildings, structures and
accessory structures, premises, collections of water or any other places
to determine full compliance with this article and to determine evidence
of vector infestation and the need for vectorproofing or additions or
repairs to existing vectorproofing.
B. Whenever it is determined that any dwelling, building, structure,
accessory structure, premises, collection of water or any other place is
in violation of this article, a written notice shall be issued setting forth
the alleged violations and advising the owner, occupant, operator or
agent that such violations must be corrected. The notice may be
personally served upon the owner, occupant, operator or agent or
served upon the same by certified mail. The time for the correction of
the violations must be given, as well as the necessary methods to be
employed in the correction, which time shall not exceed 30 days.
C. Whenever the violations fail to be corrected within the time set forth in
the written notice, the Vector Control Officer may proceed to abate the
violations in the manner provided by law.
200. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 206-5 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 206-7
206:568
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire lanes — See Ch. 103.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 155.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 187, Art. V.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 212.
§ 206-7 VECTOR CONTROL § 206-7
206:569

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 209-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 209-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the municipality.
§ 209-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 209-4. Experimental regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this ordinance, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq. (the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except
that in this chapter the word "street" may be used interchangeably with
the word "highway" and shall have the same meaning as the word
"highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The President or Vice President of the Board of Commissioners shall
have the following powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily
and in time of emergency: [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in
limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. These temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
police in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any person who
drives or parks a vehicle in violation of any such regulation or who shall
move, remove, destroy, injure or deface any sign or marking erected,
posted or made to give notice of any such regulation shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature.
A. The Chief of Police or equivalent official may, from time to time,
designate places upon and along the streets in the municipality type
§ 209-1 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-4
206:571
§ 209-5. Streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance
or special events. [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12; 1-4-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-01]
§ 209-6. Authority of police officers and law enforcement officers.
[Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
The police officers and law enforcement officers, where granted authority,
shall have the authority to enforce all Pennsylvania Crimes Code,
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code201 and applicable ordinances of Lower Allen
Township upon the highways within the borders of Lower Allen Township.
Additionally, the police officers and law enforcement officers shall have
authority to direct traffic on the streets in the Township, at intersections
in public and in other places where the Vehicle Code or this chapter apply.
where, for a period of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or
parking regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and
effect and shall designate those locations by proper signs and markings.
Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective just as
if they had been specified in this chapter. No person shall drive or park
a vehicle in violation of any such regulation, prohibition or restriction,
and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any sign or
marking erected, posted or made by authority of this section. Any
person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction,
be liable to the penalty set out in the law or elsewhere in this chapter
for a violation of such nature. [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
98-12; 1-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the municipality type relative to traffic and parking.
A. The Chief of Police or equivalent official or officer in charge of the
Police Department shall have authority to close any street or specific
part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police
officers or law enforcement officers at each end of the closed portion
while construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event
is being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Chief of Police or equivalent official or officer in charge of the
Police Department shall have authority to establish a restricted traffic
area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is under
way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion. It shall
be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such restricted
traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign directing
that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other device,
not to proceed.
201. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 209-4 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-6
206:572
Police officers and law enforcement officers shall also have the authority to
request and temporarily appoint persons to direct traffic in the event of an
emergency situation.
§ 209-7. Compliance; enforcement.
§ 209-8. Violation notice issuance; payment. [Amended 11-9-1998
by Ord. No. 98-12]
A. No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction
of a police officer or law enforcement officer. Police officers or law
enforcement officers shall have the power and authority to direct
vehicles to proceed in a direction other than that in which the operator
intended to proceed lawfully for the purpose of avoiding or relieving
traffic congestions, during emergencies and to enforce temporary
restrictions incident to street repairs or improvements. [Amended
11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
B. No person shall fail to comply with the indications of any official traffic
equipment, unless otherwise directed by a police officer or law
enforcement officer. [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
C. No person shall deface, damage, move, obstruct, destroy, change the
wording of, alter or otherwise interfere with any traffic control device.
No person shall deface, change the wording of, discard, destroy or
throw away any traffic tag, notice or summons.
(1) Temporary alteration of a traffic signal may be allowed, if such is
necessary for construction or maintenance activities within a street
right-of-way. A permit for temporary alteration of a traffic signal is
required from the Township Manager or his/her designee prior to
commencing the temporary alteration. [Added 10-23-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-07]
A. Any police officer or law enforcement officer of the Township is hereby
authorized to place a violation notice for any traffic and/or parking
violation, under the provisions of any ordinance of the Township or for
any of the traffic or parking prohibitions contained in the Vehicle Code,
in a visible place on any vehicle found to be in violation thereof in the
Township, commanding the person to report to the Township Office
within 48 hours. The Township Manager is authorized to receive fines
for any such violation and to remit the same to the Township Treasurer.
B. When any person who has received a violation notice for a violation of
any ordinance of the Township has refused to appear within 48 hours
and to remit the fine provided for the violation, the Chief of Police or
equivalent official shall cause a proceeding to be instituted for the
violation in accordance with the provisions of the First Class Township
Code. [Amended 1-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
§ 209-6 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-8
206:573
§ 209-9. Parking and traffic violations.
C. When any person who has received a violation notice for a violation of
any parking or traffic provisions of the Vehicle Code has refused to
appear at the Township Office within 48 hours and to remit the fine
provided for the violation, the Chief of Police or equivalent official shall
cause a proceeding to be instituted in accordance with the provisions of
the Motor Vehicle Code. [Amended 1-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
D. The form of the violation notice for the violation of ordinances and the
Vehicle Code shall be established by the Township Manager.
E. The Chief of Police or equivalent official shall be responsible for
maintaining a record of the status of violation notices issued. This
record shall be available to the public upon request. [Amended
1-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
F. The Township Manager shall keep account of all fines received by him
and report the same to the Board of Commissioners of the Township at
each regular meeting, giving an itemized statement of all moneys
received and paid to the Township Treasurer.
A. Whenever a violation notice is issued for any traffic or parking violation
under the provisions of any ordinance of the Township or of the Vehicle
Code, pursuant to § 209-8A, the fine shall be as follows: [Amended
11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
(1) Ten dollars for any parking (standing) violation, except for fire lane
violators.202
(2) Twenty-five dollars for any traffic (moving) violation.
B. Whenever a proceeding is instituted before a District Justice pursuant
to § 209-8B hereof for any traffic or parking violation under the
provisions of any ordinance of the Township or of the Vehicle Code,203
fines shall be as follows:
(1) For any parking (standing) violation, except fire lane violation, a
fine of not less than $15 nor more than $25, and costs of
prosecution, and in default in payment thereof, imprisonment for
one to five days.
(2) For any other traffic violation, a fine of $25, and costs of
prosecution, and in default in payment thereof, imprisonment for
one to five days.
202. Editor's Note: See Ch. 103, Fire Prevention.
203. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 209-8 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-9
206:574
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 209-10. Speed limits.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I (§ 209-50), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated in said
schedule. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that street or part of a street.
§ 209-11. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule II (§ 209-51), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 209-12. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street
onto another one-way street) when facing a steady red signal at any of the
locations described in Schedule III (§ 209-52), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 209-13. Prohibited turns at intersections.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a turn of the
kind designated (left, right or all) at any of the intersections described in
Schedule IV (§ 209-53), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 209-14. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn on any of
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule V (§ 209-54), attached
hereto and made a part of this chapter.
§ 209-15. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI (§ 209-55), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle on any one-way street other than in the direction established for
traffic on that street.
§ 209-16. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established along those streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VII (§ 209-56), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake
or pass another vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any nopassing
zone described in said schedule.
§ 209-10 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-17
206:575
§ 209-17. Lane and turn restrictions. 204 [Added 12-11-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-09]
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive a vehicle in any lane
or to make a turn other than as established for traffic at any of the locations
described in Schedule VIII (§ 209-57), attached hereto and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 209-18. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 209-58), attached to and
made part of this chapter, are hereby established as stop intersections, and
official stops shall be erected in accordance with Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation (PennDOT) requirements. The stop intersections shall
be designated as four-way or three-way intersections. Otherwise, the stop
signs shall be erected in such a position upon the first-named street as
to face traffic approaching the second-named street in the direction or
directions indicated. Every vehicle approaching an intersection at which
an official stop sign has been erected shall come to a full and complete
stop and, if necessary, yield the right-of-way to vehicles which may be
approaching from the intersecting roadway.
§ 209-19. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule X (§ 209-59), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby established as yield intersections, and
official yield signs shall be erected in such a position upon the first-named
street as to face traffic approaching the second-named street in the
direction or directions indicated. Every driver of a vehicle approaching any
such intersection upon the first-named street, in the direction or directions
indicated in each case, shall slow down or stop the vehicle and then yield
the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on the
second-named street so closely as to constitute a hazard during the time
that the driver is moving across or within such intersection.
§ 209-20. Closing of certain streets to certain vehicles. [Amended
11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in violation of the
restriction posted upon any of the streets or parts of streets as described in
Schedule XI (§ 209-60) attached to and made a part of this Chapter 209.
§ 209-21. Vehicle weight limits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any commercial vehicle or
other tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combination having a gross weight in
excess of that respectively prescribed upon any of the streets or bridges or
portions thereof described in Schedule XII (§ 209-61), attached to and made
204. Editor's Note: Former § 209-17, Through streets, was repealed 11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
98-12.
§ 209-17 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-21
206:576
a part of this chapter, except for the purpose of making local deliveries on
said streets.
§ 209-21.1. School Zone speed limits. [Added 2-22-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-02]
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or portions
thereof described in Schedule XX (§ 209-69), attached to and made a part
of this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated in said
schedule. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that street or part of a street.
§ 209-21 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-21.1
206:577

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations205
§ 209-22. (Reserved)
§ 209-23. (Reserved)
§ 209-24. Parking prohibited at all times.
§ 209-25. Parking prohibited certain hours and/or days.
§ 209-26. Time-limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XVI (§ 209-65),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, between the hours specified,
for longer than the time indicated in said schedule.
§ 209-27. Special-purpose parking zones.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or to allow the
same to remain parked in any special-purpose parking zone established
in Schedule XVII (§ 209-66), attached to and made a part of this chapter,
except as specifically provided for such zone.
A. No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or
parts thereof described in Schedule XIV (§ 209-63), attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
B. Parking in prohibited areas. When signs are erected lawfully giving
notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of
the streets or parts of streets designated as prohibited parking areas by
temporary regulations in conformity with § 209-3.
A. No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XV (§ 209-64), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, during the hours and/or days specified in said schedule.
B. Parking limited in designated areas. When signs are erected lawfully
giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle longer than the
time permitted nor during specified hours when parking is prohibited
upon any street or part of a street designed as a limited parking area by
temporary regulations in conformity with § 209-3.
205. Editor's Note: Former §§ 209-22, Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces, and 209-23,
Angle parking, were repealed 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12.
§ 209-22 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-28
206:579
§ 209-28. Blocking garage entrance.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time in front of, opposite to or in
such a position as to block entrance to or exit by a vehicle from a garage or
driveway.
§ 209-29. Temporary parking regulations and movable truck trailer
or trailer. [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
A. No person shall park a vehicle, including but not limited to commercial
vehicles, trucks, tractors, truck tractors, trailers or semitrailers, upon
any street or portion thereof where such parking is prohibited or
restricted by temporary regulations in conformity with § 209-3.
B. No truck trailer, camper, boat, trailer or similar vehicle shall be parked
upon any street without having attached thereto a means of mechanical
traction so constructed or designed for the purpose of pulling or
drawing such trailer. [Amended 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-05]
§ 209-28 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-29
206:580
ARTICLE IIIA
Residential Permit Parking
[Added 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 97-10]
§ 209-29.1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Lower Allen Township Residential
Parking Permit Ordinance."
§ 209-29.2. Findings and purpose.
The Board of Commissioners finds that:
§ 209-29.3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, words and terms listed in this section, as
follows, shall have the following meanings:
COMMUTER VEHICLE — A motor vehicle parked in a residential area by a
person not a resident of that residential area.
PROPRIETOR — A person who owns or leases real estate within a
residential area of which he is not a resident but who owns or manages a
business enterprise or professional office maintained at that address. For
the purpose of this article, a proprietor shall be entitled to one parking
permit for that business or professional office address.
RESIDENT — A person who owns or leases real property within a
residential area and who maintains either a voting residence, or bona fide
occupancy, or both, at that address.
A. Certain residential areas in Lower Allen Township are subjected to
commuter vehicle parking, therefore depriving the residents of those
areas of spaces in which to park their own vehicles.
B. Those residential streets are also subjected to a high degree of
commuter traffic which substantially reduces the quality of the ambient
air level.
C. The establishment of a parking permit program for certain affected
areas should facilitate efficient movement of traffic by providing for
parking preference during certain hours of the day and days of the
week. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners considers it to be in the
interest of the people of Lower Allen Township to provide for the
establishment of a residential permit parking program to ensure
primary access to available parking spaces by neighborhood residents.
D. Some narrow residential streets are subject to the interruption of
services such as refuse, collection, deliveries, and fire protection when
commuter vehicles fill in parking spaces on both sides of the residential
street. [Added 8-20-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
§ 209-29.1 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-29.3
206:581
RESIDENTIAL AREA — A contiguous area containing public highways or
parts of public highways abutted by residential property or residential and
nonbusiness property (such as schools, parks, places of worship, hospitals
and nursing homes).
§ 209-29.4. Criteria of designation.
The residential areas designated in § 209-29.5 of this article are those
deemed impacted and hence eligible for residential parking on the basis of
the following criteria:
§ 209-29.5. Designation of areas.
A. The local and metropolitan needs with respect to clean air and
environment.
B. The possibility of a reduction in total vehicle miles driven in Lower Allen
Township.
C. The likelihood of alleviating traffic congestion, illegal parking, service
interruptions, and related health and safety hazards. [Amended
8-20-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
D. The proximity of public transportation to the residential area.
E. The desire and need of the residents for residential permit parking and
their willingness to bear the administrative costs in connection with it.
F. The need for parking in excess of the residential permit parking
program in proximity to establishments located in the residential
permit parking area and used by the general public for religious, health
or educational purposes.
A. The following streets shall be designated as residential permit parking:
Name of Street Limits Side Hours/Days
Laurel Avenue From Rosemont Avenue to
U.S. Route 15
East 6:00 a.m. to
11:00
p.m./weekdays
only
(excepting
legal holidays)
Manchester
Road [Added
8-20-2007 by
Ord. No.
2007-13]
From Warwick Road to
Lowther Road
Both 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Friday
§ 209-29.3 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-29.5
206:582
§ 209-29.6. Application for permit. [Amended 8-20-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-13]
Application for a residential parking permit shall be made to the Manager or
his/her designee by the person desiring the permit, who shall be the owner,
lessee, or the driver of a motor vehicle who resides on or is a proprietor
immediately adjacent to a street or other location within a residential
parking permit area. Each residence shall be entitled to three parking
permits, one of which shall be used by guests of the resident or proprietor,
at no charge. Applications for additional permits must be accompanied by
an application fee, such fee to be established from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Commissioners, which shall be for the use of Lower Allen
Township, to be applied to the cost of administering the residential permit
parking program. Each application shall contain the following information:
the name of the owner, lessee or the driver, as the case may be, of the
motor vehicle; the address of the resident or the proprietor, as the case may
be; the make, model and registration number of the motor vehicle; and the
driver number as taken from the applicant’s current driver’s license.
§ 209-29.7. Issuance of permit; display. [Amended 8-20-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-13]
Upon receipt of the application and the permit fee, and determination
by him/her that the application shows that the applicant is entitled to a
residential parking permit, the Manager or his/her designee shall issue to
the applicant a residential parking permit, which shall be permanently valid
as long as the recipient remains a qualified applicant. It shall be unlawful
and a violation of this section for any person to display other than the
Name of Street Limits Side Hours/Days
Selwick Road
[Added
8-20-2007 by
Ord. No.
2007-13]
From Carlisle Road to
Manchester Road
Both 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Friday
Strafford Road
[Added
8-20-2007 by
Ord. No.
2007-13]
From Carlisle Road to
Kingsley Road
Both 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Friday
Warwick Road
[Added
8-20-2007 by
Ord. No.
2007-13]
From Carlisle Road to
Norman Road
Both 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Friday
B. Signs shall be erected along the streets in each residential permit
parking area, indicating the days, hours and locations under which
parking shall be by permit only.
§ 209-29.5 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-29.7
206:583
current and valid permit while standing or parking in a residential permit
parking area at any time when those permits are to be displayed.
§ 209-29.8. Temporary and exemption parking permits.
Temporary parking permits may be issued by the Manager or his designee,
upon payment of a permit fee established from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Commissioners, to bona fide visitors of residents of a
designated residential permit parking area who themselves have been
issued a residential parking permit, and exemption parking permits may be
issued, without payment of a fee, to handicapped persons.
§ 209-29.9. Responsibilities of permit holders.
§ 209-29.10. Revocation of permit; appeals.
A. Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the holder
of a residential parking permit shall be permitted to stand or park a
motor vehicle operated by him in any designated residential parking
area during those times when parking of motor vehicles is permitted in
that area. While a vehicle for which a residential parking permit has
been issued is so parked, that permit shall be displayed so as to be
clearly visible through the windshield of the vehicle. A residential
parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder a parking
space within a designated residential permit parking area.
B. A residential parking permit shall not authorize its holder to stand or
park a motor vehicle in any place where or at any time when stopping,
standing or parking of motor vehicles is prohibited or set aside for other
specified types of vehicles, nor shall the permit exempt its holder from
the observance of any traffic or parking regulation other than
residential permit parking regulation or restriction.
C. No person other than the permit holder whose name appears on the
parking permit shall use a residential parking permit or display ft on a
vehicle operated; any such use or display by a person other than the
permit holder shall constitute a violation of this section by the permit
holder and by the person who so used or displayed the parking permit.
D. It shall constitute a violation of this section for any person falsely to
represent himself as eligible for a residential parking permit or to
furnish false information in an application to the Manager or his
designee in order to obtain a residential parking permit.
A. The Manager or his designee shall have authority to revoke the
residential parking permit of any permit holder found to be in violation
of any provision of this section. Upon written notification to him of the
revocation, the permit holder shall surrender the permit to the
Manager or his designee. Failure to do so, when so requested, shall
constitute a violation of this section, provided that any person receiving
such a notice may, within 10 days after the date of the notice, appeal to
§ 209-29.7 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-29.10
206:584
§ 209-29.11. Violations and penalties.
The following provisions shall apply to violations of § 209-29.8 or 209-29.9
hereinabove:
the Board of Appeals for a hearing on the revocation, and the decision
of the Board of Appeals shall be final.
B. The Board of Commissioners shall be the Board of Appeals.
C. The Board of Appeals shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence,
and all relevant evidence of reasonable probative value may be
permitted. Reasonable examination and cross-examination shall be
permitted.
D. The Board of Appeals shall in every case reach a decision within 30 days
after the hearing or if such hearing is continued within 30 days after the
continued hearing. Failure to render a decision within 30 days after the
continued hearing shall not be deemed approval in favor of the
appellant. Every decision shall be in writing and shall contain findings
and the reason for the adjudication. Every decision shall be filed in the
office of the Manager and shall be open to public inspection. A certified
copy of the decision shall be served upon all parties or their counsel
personally, or by mail, not later than 10 days following the decision.
E. Any person aggrieved by an adjudication who has a direct interest in
such adjudication shall have the right to appeal therefrom to the court
vested with jurisdiction of such appeals by or pursuant to Title 42
(relating to judiciary and judicial procedures).
A. The Police Department shall have the power and authority to issue a
written violation notice to be attached to the vehicle which shall
indicate that the penalty for violation shall be the payment of $10 to the
Police Department at its office within 48 hours of the time of issuance of
said notice. The violator shall have the privilege of paying such penalty
within said period of 48 hours in full satisfaction of his responsibility
hereunder.
B. Any person who fails to resolve his obligation under Subsection A above
shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding before a District
Justice, pay a fine of $25 to the use of the Township and the costs of the
prosecution.
C. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article other than
§ 209-29.8 or 209-29.9 hereinabove shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding before a District Justice, pay a fine of not less than $15 nor
more than $25 and the costs of prosecution. The provisions of this
Subsection C shall be in addition to and shall not prevent or stop the
prosecution of the violator for other penalties authorized by law,
including but not limited to prosecution of 18 Pa. C.S. § 4904.
§ 209-29.10 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-29.11
206:585

ARTICLE IIIB
Parking Regulations For Recreational Vehicles and Commercial
Vehicles.
[Added 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-05]
§ 209-29.12. Word usage and definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSES — [Added 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE VEHICLES — Vehicles used for
construction and maintenance purposes, including but not limited to
backhoes, tractors, excavators, bulldozers, trailers for transporting said
vehicles and similar type vehicles.[Amended 10-24-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-07]
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A truck or construction and maintenance
vehicle used primarily in business or industry.[Amended 10-24-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-07]
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of Lower Allen Township.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A self-propelled motorcoach; travel trailer,
whether solid-sided or pop-up and whether connected to a power source
by fifth-wheel or tongue; towing trailers for transportation of boats,
motorcycles, snowmobiles, personal water craft, and/or recreational
devices including all-terrain vehicles (ATVs); detachable living quarters
made mobile by attachment to another motor vehicle. The term shall not
include a motor home when located in a mobile home park or when
otherwise complying with the concept of a detached dwelling
house.[Amended 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
SLIDE-OUTS — A section of a recreational vehicle designed to slide out
or move away from the main frame or wall of the recreational vehicle so
as to add additional inside living area to the recreational vehicle.[Added
6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
STREET — Any street, public or private, intended primarily as a means of
pedestrian and vehicle traffic.
STANDARD — Any Type A-2, B, C, or D multipassenger vehicle used
for scheduled transport, including public, tour, school, charter, or
promotional campaign designed to carry 10 or more passengers and
with a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating of 10,000 pounds or more.
A.
SMALL — Any Type A-1 multipassenger vehicle used for scheduled
transport, including public, tour, school, charter, or promotional
campaign designed to carry 10 or more passengers and with a Gross
Vehicle Weight Rating of less than 10,000 pounds.
B.
§ 209-29.12 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-29.12
206:587
TRUCK — A motor vehicle, excluding passenger cars, designed, used or
maintained primarily for the transportation of persons or
property.[Amended 10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-07]
§ 209-29.13. Recreational vehicle storage.
A. Except as specifically provided herein with respect to large recreational
vehicles, currently licensed wheeled vehicles in operating condition,
including recreational vehicles of 30 feet or less in overall length, used
for transportation of an occupant of a residential premises may be
parked within the front, rear or side yards of a residential premises,
provided the location thereof is approved under Chapter 220, Zoning,
as an impervious off-street parking space. Such vehicles may be parked
on the residential street for no more than 72 hours for the purpose of
loading, unloading, or cleaning. [Amended 6-24-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-02]
B. Currently licensed recreational vehicles exceeding 30 feet in overall
length, owned or leased by an occupant of a residential premises, may
be parked only on a driveway or pad constructed of impervious
material, the dimension of which at least encompasses the entire length
and width of the recreational vehicle stored thereon:
(1) In the side or rear yards of the residential premises, provided that
it is no closer than seven feet to any other property line.
(2) In the front yard of the residential premises, provided it is at least
10 feet from the house side of the street curb or the edge of paving
of the street where no curb exists and no closer than seven feet to
any other property line.
(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, such vehicles may be
parked on a residential premises for a period of time not exceeding
72 hours for the purposes of loading, unloading or performing
routine maintenance.
(4) Such vehicles may be parked on a residential street for no more
than 72 hours for the purpose of loading, unloading, and cleaning.
[Added 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
C. For the purposes of determining length of recreational vehicles,
measurement shall be taken between the most distant parts of the front
and rear of the vehicle (e.g., "bumper to bumper"; "bumper to end of
tongue").
D. The foregoing regulations shall not apply to the storage of a
recreational vehicle at the same pad or location where storage
commenced more than three months prior to the effective date hereof.
E. All recreational vehicles stored on a residential property must be
currently licensed, registered, and, if required by law, inspected.
[Added 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
§ 209-29.12 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-29.13
206:588
§ 209-29.14. Truck, construction and maintenance vehicle parking
and storage limitations. [Amended 10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-07]
§ 209-29.15. Enforcement. [Amended 10-24-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-07]
The provisions of this article will be enforced by the Police Department for
violations occurring on public streets. All other violations will be enforced
by the Department of Community Development. Any person seeking a
temporary exemption from this article may make said application to the
Township Manager.
§ 209-29.16. Violations and penalties.
F. Recreational vehicles may not have slide-outs extended while parked on
a public street. [Added 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
A. Effective the date of this article, it shall be unlawful for the owner or
operator of any truck with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) in
excess of 4B or 11,000 pounds gross vehicle weight or in combination
with a trailer to park or store such vehicle on any street or residential
property located within the residential zoning districts R-1, R-2 and R-3.
B. Parking or storing of construction and maintenance vehicles within
residential zoning districts R-1, R-2 and R-3 shall also be prohibited by
this article.
C. Exceptions.
(1) Subsections A and B shall not apply to trucks or construction and
maintenance vehicles as follows:
(a) Used in conjunction with permitted nonresidential uses in
residential zoning districts R-1, R-2 and R-3.
(b) Parked for the purpose of making deliveries or improvements
to a property or street located in residential zoning districts
R-1, R-2 and R-3.
(2) Subsection A shall not apply to trucks with a gross vehicle weight
rating (GVWR) in excess of 4B or 11,000 pounds gross vehicle
weight when housed in an enclosed structure that complies with all
Township building and zoning regulations.206
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article
dealing with parking in residential districts shall pay a fine as follows:
(1) Any person, firm or corporation who or which causes, allows,
permits or suffers any vehicle to be parked in any zone in which
parking is prohibited by this article shall pay to the Township an
206. Editor's Note: See Ch. 70, Building Construction and Safety Standards, and Ch. 220,
Zoning.
§ 209-29.13 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-29.16
206:589
§ 209-29.17. Buses. [Added 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
unlawful parking charge in the amount of $50. There shall be a
separate unlawful parking charge for each consecutive day during
which such unlawful parking continues. [Amended 10-24-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-07]
(2) Whoever parks unlawfully in a restricted zone as provided in this
article and fails to pay any unlawful parking charge, including any
late charge, shall be, upon conviction thereof, fined not less than
$15 nor more than $25 and costs of the prosecution and, in default
of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned in the Cumberland County
Prison from one to five days.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article
relating to parking a camper, trailer, boat or other similar recreational
vehicle on a public street shall pay a fine in the sum of $10 if paid within
five days, or upon failure to pay the sum of $10 within the
aforementioned time period, then upon summary conviction before a
District Justice be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $15 nor more
than $25 and the costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment
thereof shall be imprisoned in the Cumberland County Prison from one
to five days.
A. Standard buses are not permitted to park in Residential Zones (R-1,
R-2, R-3, MUN) at any time.
B. Currently licensed and registered small buses may be parked only on a
driveway or pad constructed of impervious material, the dimensions of
which at least encompass the entire length and width of the bus parked
thereon. Small buses are not permitted to park on any residential street
at any time.
C. Restrictions in this section shall not apply to micro-coaches, microbuses,
or high-capacity vans.
§ 209-29.16 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-29.17
206:590
ARTICLE IV
Removal and Impounding of Certain Vehicles
§ 209-30. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under the authority of Section 6109(a)(22) of the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code207 and gives authority to the Township to remove
and impound vehicles that are parked on any street in the Township in
violation of any provision of this chapter.
§ 209-31. Authority to remove and impound.
The municipality type shall have authority to remove and impound or to
order the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked illegally, provided
that the circumstances of its parking are within the conditions stated in this
article and provided that no such vehicle shall be removed or impounded
except in strict adherence to the provisions of this article.
§ 209-32. Towing and storage of impounded vehicles.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by those companies which are currently on the Township Police Department
Towing List and the designated salver for the Township or designated from
time to time by the Board of Commissioners. Every such garage shall submit
evidence to the Board of Commissioners that it is bonded or has acquired
liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to the Board of Commissioners
as sufficient to indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against loss or
damage to those vehicles while in the custody of the garagekeeper for the
purpose of towing or storage. The approved storage garage shall submit to
the Board of Commissioners its schedule of charges for towing and storage
of vehicles under this article, and, when the schedule is approved by the
Board of Commissioners, those charges shall be adhered to by the approved
storage garage. No different schedule of charges shall be adopted without
approval of the Board of Commissioners, and no different charges shall be
demanded of or collected from any person whose vehicle is removed or
impounded under this article by any approved storage garage. The Board
of Commissioners shall delete from its list of approved storage garages any
garage that makes any unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle
removed or impounded under this article.
§ 209-33. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 48 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that the vehicle was removed shall
be sent by the Township to the owner of record of the vehicle. The notice
shall designate the place from which the vehicle was removed, the reason
for its removal and impounding and the garage in which it is impounded.
Notification, at minimum, shall be by regular mail to the last known address
207. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A § 6109(a)(22).
§ 209-30 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-33
206:591
listed for the owner. If the vehicle meets the criteria of being abandoned,
the procedure listed in the Vehicle Code208 shall be followed.
§ 209-34. Effect of payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this article
shall, unless payment is made under protest, be final and conclusive and
shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid. If
payment of any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a District Justice. Payment
of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver of any
vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the provision
of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 209-35. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The municipality type shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles
impounded under this article and shall be able at all reasonable times
to furnish the owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with
information as to the place of storage of the vehicle. The towed/abandoned
vehicle inventory ticket for the vehicle shall be considered a record for this
section.
§ 209-36. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the
time of the intended removal, the owner or the person who has legitimate
control of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove the vehicle immediately.
208. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 209-33 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-36
206:592
ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice Emergency Routes
§ 209-37. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
A snow, ice or bad weather emergency may be declared by the Township in
compliance with Chapter 187, Streets and Sidewalks, Article V, Snow and
Ice Removal. If declared, the parking restrictions of Chapter 187, Streets
and Sidewalks, Article V, Snow and Ice Removal, shall be in effect.
§ 209-38. Parking and driving restrictions on snow emergency
routes.
After any snow, ice or bad weather emergency is declared, it shall be
unlawful, at any time during the continuance of the emergency, for any
person:
§ 209-39. Snow emergency routes.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XVIII (§ 209-67),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as snow
emergency routes.
A. To park a motor vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked anywhere
on any snow emergency route designated pursuant to this article; or
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
§ 209-37 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-39
206:593

ARTICLE VI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 209-40. Driving or parking on sidewalk.
The operator of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at
a permanent or temporary driveway, nor shall any person park a vehicle at
any place between the curb line and property line of any street.
§ 209-41. Parking restrictions on private property. [Added
11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12209]
§ 209-42. Commercial vehicles. [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
98-12; 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-05]
No person shall operate any vehicle, including but not limited to commercial
vehicles, trucks, tractors, truck-tractors, trailers or semitrailers, upon any
A. In any privately owned parking area which is held open for parking to
the public within the Township, the owner or a person in control or
possession thereof may, by the erection of appropriate signs, reserve or
restrict certain parking spaces or areas.
B. The signs to be posted must be an approved sign and meet PennDOT
requirements. The signs shall be erected in compliance with PennDOT
guidelines.
C. Prior to any enforcement of the parking restrictions posted on private
property, the owner or the person in control or possession shall notify,
in writing, the Chief of Police or equivalent official requesting
enforcement of the parking restrictions. The notice shall state the type
of restriction(s) and location of signs. The notice shall also grant
permission to the Police Department to enforce the restrictions upon
the private property. The Chief of Police or equivalent official or their
designee shall view the signs erected to ensure the compliance of
PennDOT requirements. If all posting of signs is found to be in
compliance, the Chief of Police or equivalent official shall authorize
enforcement of the parking restriction(s). [Amended 1-4-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-01]
D. The owner of the property or the person in control or possession shall,
in writing, annually update the request for enforcement with the Chief
of Police or equivalent official. All such notifications shall be kept on file
with the Police Department. [Amended 1-4-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-01]
E. Enforcement of the parking restrictions shall be in compliance with
§ 209-8 of this Code. Violations and fines shall be in accordance with
§ 209-9.
209. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 209-41, Bicycles, pushcarts and
animals keep to right.
§ 209-40 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-42
206:595
street or portion thereof where such operation is restricted or prohibited
upon any street or portion thereof designated as such in Schedule XI:
Closing of Certain Streets to Certain Vehicles (§ 209-60).
§ 209-43. Tracking and depositing mud.
§ 209-44. Operation on closed road prohibited.
§ 209-45. Displaying or advertising vehicles for sale.
No vehicle shall be displayed or advertised for sale while parked or stored
upon any street.
§ 209-46. Selling from parked vehicles.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of
offering for sale or selling therefrom any goods, wares or merchandise.
A. No operator of a motor vehicle shall operate such vehicle so that mud
and dirt become deposited and strewn upon and about the streets or
roads of the Township.
B. Any operator of a motor vehicle which has caused the streets or roads
of the Township to be strewn and littered with mud or dirt from the
wheels thereof shall be charged with a violation of Subsection A and
shall cause such mud or dirt to be removed from such streets or roads
after a notice to do so is issued by a police officer or code enforcement
officer of the Township. [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
C. Any operator or owner of a motor vehicle who has unlawfully caused the
streets or roads of the Township to be strewn or littered with mud or
dirt and who has refused to remove the same as required in Subsection
B shall be ordered to cease and desist from further tracking and
depositing of mud and shall reimburse the Township for the cost of any
required removal of the mud or dirt. [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-12]
A. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or bicycle on any highway in
the Township which may be closed for repairs, resurfacing or for any
other reason, including the protection and safety of the motorist, and
such closing shall be indicated by the erection of barricades or other
protective devices.
B. Whenever a highway in the Township is closed for any of the reasons
provided herein and a barricade or protective device is erected in
connection therewith, no person shall fail to observe the same or
destroy such barricade or protective device by driving around or
moving the same in any manner whatsoever.
§ 209-42 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-46.1
206:596
§ 209-46.1. Engine brake retarders prohibited. [Added 2-22-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-02]
No gasoline-powered or diesel-powered motor vehicle shall be operated
using, as part of the operation, an engine brake retarder without exhaust
mufflers or with defective or modified exhaust mufflers upon any street or
portion thereof where such operation is restricted or prohibited upon any
street or portion thereof designated as such in Schedule XIX: Engine Brake
Retarders Prohibited (§ 209-68).
§ 209-46.1 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-46.1
206:597

ARTICLE VII
Handicapped Parking
§ 209-47. Parking by handicapped persons or disabled veterans.
A. In any public parking area maintained by the Township, the Board of
Commissioners may cause to be designated, by appropriate sign,
parking spaces specifically reserved for use by vehicles operated by or
transporting handicapped persons.
B. In any privately owned parking area which is held open for parking to
the public within the Township, the owner or person in control or
possession thereof may, by the erection of appropriate signs, reserve
certain parking spaces for use by vehicles operated by or transporting
handicapped persons. Immediately upon erection of such sign, the
owner or person in control or possession shall notify, in writing, the
Chief of Police or equivalent official. The written notice shall state the
location and number of spaces so reserved. [Amended 1-4-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-01]
C. The vehicles entitled to occupy the parking spaces reserved pursuant to
Subsections A, B or D hereof shall be as follows: [Amended 8-14-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-05]
(1) Any vehicle bearing a handicapped registration plate, as provided
by Section 1338 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 1338), when occupied by the person to whom or on behalf of
whom such plate has been issued.
(2) Any vehicle bearing a disabled veteran registration plate, as
provided by Section 1342 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code (75
Pa.C.S.A. § 1342), when occupied by the disabled veteran to whom
such plate has been issued.
(3) Any other vehicle when occupied by a person who is entitled to
receive a handicapped or disabled veteran registration plate under
the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.210
(4) Any other vehicle when occupied by a person who has a currently
valid handicapped parking placard or any similar form issued by
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles and Licensing of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation or the like agency of another state or
local government.
D. Request for designation of handicapped parking space. [Added
3-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-02]
(1) Pursuant to the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, 75 Pa. C.S.A.,
§ 3354, and upon written request of a qualified resident, the
Township may designate handicapped parking spaces upon public
210. Editor's Note: See Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 209-47 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-47
206:599
§ 209-48. Violations and penalties.
The operator of any vehicle, other than those specified in § 209-47C, who
parks such vehicle in any parking space reserved for use by a handicapped
person or disabled veteran in accordance with the provision of § 209-47
shall be fined $50, and costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of
such fines and costs shall be imprisonment for not more than two days.
roadways. The request must be from an eligible handicapped
person and must be for a vehicle entitled to use the space as
in Subsection C. A feasibility study must be conducted by the
Township Engineer and Police Department. The study shall include,
but not be limited to:
(a) Availability of off-street parking at the location;
(b) Parking restrictions currently in effect at the location;
(c) The effect the handicap parking space would have on the
traffic of the roadway; and
(d) Other criteria that may require consideration due to the
specific location.
(2) The space will be properly marked and signed as required by law.
All costs, including, but not limited to, engineering and traffic
studies and sign installation, of establishing a handicap parking
space location on a public roadway must be paid by the requesting
party.
(3) A letter will be provided to the requesting party and a copy kept on
file with the Police Department for all locations so designated. The
handicap parking space will be removed when the need no longer
exists.
(4) The requesting party shall confirm with the Township on an annual
basis after the establishment date of the handicap parking space,
whether the need for the space continues to exist.
(5) The designated handicap parking space will not be person or
vehicle specific, but shall be permitted to be utilized by any vehicle
entitled as in Subsection C.
§ 209-47 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-48
206:600
ARTICLE VIII
General Penalty
§ 209-49. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Vehicle Code (75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or except as herein specified, every person
convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of $25 and costs of prosecution.
§ 209-49 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-49
206:601

ARTICLE IX
Schedules
§ 209-50. Schedule I: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-10, speed limits are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location or Limits
Allendale Way 25 From Cedar Cliff Drive to terminus
at Blacksmith Road
Arcona Road -- From Lisburn Road (SR 2017 to
Upper Allen Township line
Argali Lane 25 From Slate Hill Road to Ewe Road
Arthur Avenue (all)
[Added 10-23-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-07]
35 From Weis Market Drive to Hann
Way
Beacon Hill Boulevard 35 From York County line to Poplar
Avenue
Blacklatch Road 25 From Allendale Way (400 Block) to
terminus at cul-de-sac
Blacksmith Road 25 From Allendale Way to terminus at
Fineview Road
Candlewyck Road 25 From Allendale Way to Lantern
Lane
Capital View Drive 35 From Beacon Hill Boulevard to
terminus at new construction area
Carlisle Road Borough
(SR 2018) (SR 2014)
35 From New Cumberland Borough
Line to Gettysburg Road
Cedar Cliff Drive 25 From Carlisle Road (SR 2018) to
Creek Road (SR 2033)
Center Drive [Added
12-22-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-09]
25 From Clemson Drive to Carlisle
Road
Chatham Drive (all)
[Added 2-22-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-02]
25 From 20th Street to Letchworth
Drive
Chatham Road 25 From Letchworth Road to 18th
Street (SR 2033)
Creek Road/18th Street
(SR 2033)
35 From Lisburn Road (SR 2031) to
State Road (SR 2014)
§ 209-50 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-50
206:603
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location or Limits
Cumberland Road
[Added 10-8-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-07]
25 From Locust Road to Sussex Road
Deerfield Road [Added
12-11-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-09]
25 From Allendale Way to terminus at
cul-de-sac
Essex Road [Added
10-11-1999 by Ord. No.
99-8]
25 From Cumberland Road to
Shiremanstown Borough line
Forge Road (SR 2019) 40 From Lisburn Road (SR 2017) to
York County line
Gettysburg Road (SR
2014)
35 From Carlisle Road (SR 2018) to
Simpson Ferry Road (SR 2014)
Gettysburg Road (SR
2027)
35 From Simpson Ferry Road (SR
2014) to St. Johns Road (SR 2029)
Gettysburg Road 35 From St. Johns Road (SR 2029) (SR
2027) to William Penn Drive
Gettysburg Road (SR
2027)
40 From William Penn Drive to Wesley
Drive (SR 2021)
Gettysburg Road (Twp.)
[Added 11-9-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-12]
40 From Wesley Drive to Upper Allen
Township line
Green Lane Drive (all)
[Added 12-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-18]
15 Cedar Cliff Drive to York County
line
Hartzdale Drive 35 From Zimmerman Drive to Palmer
Drive
Hummel Avenue (SR
2016)
25 From Lemoyne Borough line to
State Road (SR 2014)
Kensington Drive 25 From Scarsdale Drive to
Nottingham Road
Kent Drive (all) [Added
2-22-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-02]
25 From 20th Street to 18th Street
Lancaster Boulevard 25 From Windsor Boulevard to Upper
Allen Township line
Letchworth Drive (all)
[Added 2-22-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-02]
25 From Kent Drive to Chatham Drive
§ 209-50 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-50
206:604
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location or Limits
Letchworth Road 25 From Lowther Road (SR 2028) to
18th Street (SR 2033)
Lisburn Road (SR 2017)
[Amended 11-9-1998 by
line Ord. No. 98-12]
40 From Spanglers Mill Road to
terminus of York County line
Lisburn Road (SR 2031) 35 From Carlisle Road (SR 2018) to
Creek Road (SR 2033)
Lisburn Road (SR 2031) 40 From Creek Road (SR 2033) to
Spanglers Mill Road (SR 2031)
Lowther Road (SR 2028) 25 From Carlisle Road (SR 2018) to
Lemoyne Borough line
Main Street Lisburn (SR
114)
35 From York County line to Upper
Allen Township line
Maplewood Drive [Added
12-22-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-09]
25 From Summitview Court to
Maplewood Drive (complete)
Milltown Road (all)
[Added 10-23-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-07]
25 From Shetter Lane to Lisburn
Road
Mooreland Court 25 From Oxford Drive to Gloucester
Street
Norman Road [Added
2-12-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-02]
25 Letchworth Road to Kingsley Road
Oxford Drive (all)
[Amended 2-22-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-02]
25 From Winston Drive to Upper Allen
Township line
Palmer Drive (all) [Added
10-23-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-07]
25 From Kensington Drive to
Hartzdale Drive
Poplar Avenue 35 From New Cumberland Borough
line to York County Line
Rosemont Avenue St. 25 From Fernwood Avenue to St.
Johns Road
Rossmoyne Road 35 From Route 15 to Westport Drive
(SR 2021)
Rossmoyne Road (SR
2021)
40 From Westport Drive to Lisburn
Road (SR 2017)
§ 209-50 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-50
206:605
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location or Limits
Royal Drive 25 From Wesley Drive (SR 2021) to
Lancaster Boulevard
Scarsdale Drive 25 From Old Slate Hill Road (SR
2041) to Kensington Drive
Sheepford Road [Added
8-10-1998 by Ord. No.
98-6]
25 Lisburn Road (SR 2017) to York
County line
Simpson Ferry Road (SR
2014)
40 From Shiremanstown Borough line
to Wesley Drive (SR 2021)
Simpson Ferry Road (SR
2014)
35 From Wesley Drive (SR 2021) to
Mechanicsburg Borough line
Slate Hill Road (old) (SR
2041)
35 From Route 15N to Hartzdale
Drive
Slate Hill Road 40 From Gettysburg Road (SR 2027)
(SR 2025) to Lisburn Road (SR
2017)
Slate Hill Road [Added
10-8-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-07]
35 From Lisburn Road to Fairview
Township Line
Spanglers Mill Road 40 From Lisburn Road (SR 2017) to
(SR 2031) York County line
St. Johns Road 35 From Gettysburg Road (SR 2027)
(SR 2029) to Simpson Ferry Road
(SR 2014)
State Road (SR 2014) 35 From Hummel Avenue (SR 2016)
to Carlisle Road (SR 2018)
Wesley Drive (SR 2021) 35 From Simpson Ferry Road (SR
2014) to Sheely Lane
Wesley Drive (SR 2021) 40 From Sheely Lane to Route 15
Westport Drive 35 From Rossmoyne Road (SR 2021)
to terminus at cul-de-sac
William Penn Drive (all)
[Added 2-22-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-02]
25 From Rupp Avenue to Gettysburg
Road
Wilson Lane [Added
12-22-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-09]
35 From Wesley Drive (SR 2021) to
Upper Allen Township line
Winding Way 25 From Blacksmith Road to terminus
at Creekwood Drive
§ 209-50 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-50
206:606
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location or Limits
Windsor Boulevard 25 From Wesley Drive (SR 2021) to
Lancaster Boulevard
Winston Drive 25 From Windsor Boulevard to Royal
Drive
§ 209-51. Schedule II: Traffic Control Signals. [Amended
12-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-09]
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-11, traffic control signals and
related signs shall be installed, operated and maintained in accordance
with traffic signal permits issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation at the following described intersections:
Intersection(s)
Traffic Control
Signal No.
Carlisle Road (SR 2018) at Cedar Cliff Drive and
Exit 19 on I83 South (SR 8011)
1
Carlisle Road (SR 2018) at Gettysburg Road (SR
2014) and State Road (2014)
4
Carlisle Road (SR 2018) at Lowther Road (SR
2028), Commercial Drive and Center Drive
2
Carlisle Road (SR 2018) at South 18th Street (SR
2033) and Creek Road (SR2033)
3
Gettysburg Road (SR 2027) at Executive Park West/
Diner Driveways [Added 2-22-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-02]
21
Gettysburg Road (SR 2014) at Hartzdale Drive 7
Gettysburg Road (SR 2014) at Municipal Services
Center Driveway [Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-02]
22
Gettysburg Road (SR 2027) at Slate Hill Road (SR
2025) and Locust St (SR 2025) Gettysburg Road
(SR 2027) at Wesley Drive (SR 2021)
12 14
Gettysburg Road and Simpson Ferry Road (SR
2014) at Gettysburg Road (SR 2027) and Linda
Lane [Added 2-22-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02]
28
Gettysburg Road (SR 2014) at Spangler Road and
Ramp R (SR 8007) [Added 2-22-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-02]
27
Gettysburg Road (SR 2014) at Zimmerman Drive 8
§ 209-50 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-51
206:607
Intersection(s)
Traffic Control
Signal No.
Hartzdale Drive (SR 2048) at Capital City Mall
Drive (SR 2051) [Added 10-23-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-07]
29
Hummel Avenue (SR 2016) at 17th Street (SR
2014) [NOTE: Lower Allen Township is
responsible for maintenance at traffic signal
located at 17th Street (SR 2014) and State
Street and invoice Camp Hill Borough.]
5
Hummel Avenue (SR 2014) at South 18th Street
(SR 2033) [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
98-12]
6
Lisburn Road (SR 2017) at Slate Hill Road (S.R.
2025/T-371) [Added 11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
98-12]
18
Lower Allen Drive (SR 2047) at Hartzdale Drive (SR
2048) [Added 2-22-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02]
23
Lower Allen Drive (SR 2047) at Mall Drive [Added
2-22-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02]
24
Lower Allen Drive (SR 2047) at ramps for US Route
15 North (SR 8017, Ramps M and N) [Added
2-22-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02]
25
Lower Allen Drive (SR 2047) at ramps for US Route
15 South (SR 8017, Ramps I and J) [Added
2-22-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02]
26
Rossmoyne Road (SR 2021) at Louise Drive and
Westport Drive.
17
Rossmoyne Road (SR 2021) at ramps for US Rt. 15
North (SR8001, Ramps F and G)
16
Rossmoyne Road (SR 2021) at ramps for US Rt. 15
South (SR 8001, Spurs E and J)
15
Simpson Ferry Road (SR 2014) at St. Johns Road
(SR 2029)
[NOTE: Maintenance is by Shiremanstown and
cost is shared with Lower Allen and
Hampden.]
10
Simpson Ferry Road (SR 2014) at Wesley Drive (SR
2021) and Sheely Lane (SR 2021)
[NOTE: Maintenance is by Lower Allen
Township and cost is shared with Hampden
Township.]
11
§ 209-51 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-51
206:608
Intersection(s)
Traffic Control
Signal No.
Simpson Ferry Road (SR 2014) at Zimmerman
Drive
[NOTE: Maintenance is by Lower Allen
Township and cost is shared with Hampden
Township.]
9
Slate Hill Road (SR 2025) at Hartzdale Drive 13
Wesley Drive (SR 2021) at Century Drive [Added
12-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-09]
20
Wesley Drive (SR 2021) at Wilson Lane and
Bethany Drive [Added 12-22-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-09]
19
§ 209-52. Schedule III: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-12, no person shall make a right
turn (or a left turn from a one-way street onto another one-way street) when
facing a steady red signal at any of the locations described below:
Name of Street
Traffic
Control
Signal No.
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right
Turn on Red Signal
Onto (Street Name)
Carlisle Road 2 West Lowther Road (SR
2028)/Commercial
Drive
Cedar Cliff Drive
[Repealed
12-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-08]
Hartzdale Drive 7 East/north Gettysburg Road (SR
2027)
I83 South, Exit 19
[Repealed
2-12-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-02]
Westport Drive 17 West Rossmoyne Road (SR
2021)
Wilson Lane
[Added
12-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-18]
19 East/north Wesley Drive (SR
2021)
§ 209-51 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-53
206:609
§ 209-53. Schedule IV: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-13, no driver of any vehicle
shall make a turn of the kind designated below at any of the following
intersections:
Name of Street Location Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn
Gettysburg Road Eastbound at 30th
Street
No U-turn
Gettysburg Road Eastbound at 31st
Street
No U-turn
Gettysburg Road Northbound exit from
Royers Flowers
No left turn
Gettysburg Road Westbound at 31st
Street
No U-turn
Hartzdale Drive
[Added 10-23-2017
by Ord. No.
2017-07]
3400 Hartzdale Drive Eastbound
Hartzdale
Drive
No left turn
Driveway Southbound
driveway
No left turn
Lebanon Avenue Northbound at
Gettysburg Road
No left turn
Linda Lane Southbound at Simpson
Ferry
2 no-left-turn
signs
Lowther Road
[Repealed
11-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-12]
Nina Alley [Repealed
11-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-12]
Shoreham Road At on ramp of I-83S No left turn
Simpson Ferry Road Northbound exit from
Hechinger's
No left turn
Simpson Ferry Road Westbound at
Hechinger's
No U-turn
Simpson Ferry Road Westbound at SR 8007
Ramp E
No left turn
Slate Hill Road (new) North of Hartzdale
Drive
South Right turn (3
or more axle
trucks)
§ 209-53 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-53
206:610
Name of Street Location Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn
Slate Hill Road
[Repealed
11-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-12]
Wass Park Driveway
[Added 12-22-2003
by Ord. No.
2003-09]
Wesley Drive (SR 2021) No left turn
Wesley Drive (SR
2021) [Added
12-22-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-09]
Cobblestone Drive Northbound No left turn
Wesley Drive (SR
2021) [Added
12-22-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-09]
Wass Park Driveway Southbound No left turn
Yetter Court [Added
10-23-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-07]
St. Johns Road Westbound Three axles
or more no
left turn
Yetter Court [Added
10-23-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-07]
St. Johns Road Westbound Trucks to
Route 15
turn right
Zimmerman Drive Northbound at
Gettysburg Road
No U-turn
Zimmerman Drive Northbound at Simpson
Ferry Road
No U-turn
Zimmerman Drive Southbound at Capital
City Mall
No U-turn
Zimmerman Drive Southbound at
Gettysburg Road
No U-turn
Zimmerman Drive Southbound at
Hartzdale Drive
No U-turn
Zimmerman Drive
[Repealed
11-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-12]
§ 209-54. Schedule V: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-14, no person shall make a Uturn
at the locations described below:
§ 209-53 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-54
206:611
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Hartzdale Drive [Added
12-11-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-09]
South 200 feet south of
Gettysburg Road
§ 209-55. Schedule VI: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-15, the following described
streets or parts thereof are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location or Limits
28th Street 100 feet
[Added 12-11-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-09]
North From Gettysburg Road to
north of Gettysburg Road
Chatham Drive (circle)
[Amended 11-9-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-12]
West Between 1812 and 1822
Commercial Drive
[Amended 11-9-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-12; repealed
12-27-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-11]
Gorgas Drive Avenue South Hummel Avenue to
Hummel
Kingsley Road Driveway
[Added 12-11-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-09]
South At Cedar Cliff Mall
Lancaster Boulevard
[Added 2-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-03]
South Geneva Drive to a point
120 feet north of Geneva
Drive
Pennsylvania Avenue
[Added 12-11-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-09]
East From Gettysburg Road to
Nina Alley
Riddle Road From Letchworth Road to
Letchworth Road
Selwick Road From Carlisle Road to
Manchester Road
§ 209-56. Schedule VII: No-Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-16, no-passing zones are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
§ 209-54 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-56
206:612
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location or Limits
Carlisle Road From Gettysburg
Road to Township line
Creek Road From Lisburn Road to
South 18th Street
Gettysburg Road From Fernwood
Avenue westbound to
Township line
Hummel Avenue [Amended
11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
98-12]
All From 1600 Block to
Lemoyne Borough line
Lisburn Road/Spanglers Mill
Road (SR2031) [Amended
11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
98-12]
All From Carlisle Road to
York County line
Lisburn Road [Amended
11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
98-12]
All From Spanglers Mill
Road to York County
line
Lisburn Road [Repealed
11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
98-12]
Main Street Lisburn From Township line to
Township line
Rossmoyne Road [Added
11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
98-12]
All From Louise Drive to
Lisburn Road
Rossmoyne Road From Simpson Ferry
Road to Township line
Slate Hill Road From Lisburn Road to
Township line
South 18th Street/Creek Road
[Amended 11-9-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-12]
All From Hummel Avenue
to Lisburn Road
Wesley Drive [Amended
11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
98-12]
All From Simpson Ferry
Road to Gettysburg
Road
§ 209-56 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-57
206:613
§ 209-57. Schedule VIII: Lane and Turn Restrictions. 211 [Added
12-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-09]
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location Restriction
Commercial Drive
[Added 12-27-2001
by Ord. No.2001-11]
South Lowther Road All traffic
must turn
right
Gettysburg Road East From Linden
Drive to Carlisle
Road
Center lane
left turn only
Gettysburg Road South Driveway at 2100 All traffic
must turn
right
Gettysburg Road South Kranzel Drive All traffic
must turn
right
Gettysburg Road West From Carlisle
Road to 29th
Street
Center lane
left turn only
Hartzdale Drive West Approaching
Zimmerman Drive
Right lane
must turn
right
Lisburn Road [Added
10-23-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-07]
Westbound St. Johns Road Right lane
must turn
right to St.
Johns Road
Westport Drive West Approaching
Rossmoyne Road
Trucks, right
turn from
right lane
only
§ 209-58. Schedule IX: Stop Intersections. [Amended 11-9-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-12]
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-18, the following described
intersections are hereby established as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as provided therein:
Intersection Type of Device
19th Street at Carlisle Road 1-way
19th Street at Letchworth Drive 1-way
20th Street at Carlisle Road 1-way
211. Editor's Note: Former § 209-57, Schedule VIII: Through Streets, was repealed 11-9-1998
by Ord. No. 98-12.
§ 209-57 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-58
206:614
Intersection Type of Device
20th Street at Kent Drive 1-way
28th Street at Morningside Drive [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
29th Street at Gettysburg Road 1-way
29th Street at Morningside Drive [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
30th Street at Gettysburg Road 1-way
30th Street at Morningside Drive [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
31st Street at Gettysburg Road 1-way
31st Street at Morningside Drive [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
40th Street, Cherokee Avenue and Rosemont
Avenue
2-way
40th Street at Gettysburg Road 1-way
41st Street at Gettysburg Road 1-way
41st Street at Seneca Avenue [Added 12-26-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-18]
2-way
Allen Court at Limestone Drive [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
Allen Road at Locust Street 1-way
Allen Road at William Penn Drive 2-way
Allendale Way and Fineview and Blacksmith Road 1-way
Allendale Way at Cedar Cliff Drive 1-way
Allendale Way at Deerfield Avenue and Candlewyck 2-way
Allendale Way at Fieldstone 2-way
Amherst Drive at Cedar Cliff Drive 1-way
Appleton Street at Slate Hill Road 1-way
Arcona Road at Lisburn Road 1-way
Arcona Road at Lisburn Road 1-way
Argali Lane at Ewe Road 1-way
Argali Lane at Slate Hill Road 1-way
Ashburn Way at Wellgate Lane [Added
10-11-1999 by Ord. No. 99-8]
1-way
Audobon Road at Gettysburg Road 1-way
Beacon Hill Boulevard and Poplar Avenue 1-way
Beaver Road at Creek Road 1-way
Beaver Road at Lisburn Road 1-way
§ 209-58 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-58
206:615
Intersection Type of Device
Belaire Drive at South West Avenue 1-way
Belaire Drive at West Maple Avenue and South
West Avenue
1-way
Bellmore Road at Hartzdale Drive 1-way
Bellmore Road at Scarsdale Drive 1-way
Belmont Street at Florence Avenue (Harrisburg
Manor Neighborhood) [Added 12-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-08]
1-way
Belmont Street at Linden Avenue (Harrisburg
Manor Neighborhood) [Added 12-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-08]
2-way
Blacklatch Lane at Allendale Way 1-way
Blacklatch Lane at Allendale Way 2-way
Blacksmith Road at Allendale Way 1-way
Boxwood Lane at Creek Road 1-way
Brandton Road at Lisburn Road 1-way
Brenda Avenue and Main Street Lisburn 1-way
Briar Lane at Neponsit Lane [Added 4-22-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-04]
1-way
Briar Lane at Palmer Drive [Added 4-22-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-04]
1-way
Briarwood Court at Cricket Lane [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
Brockton Circle at Quincy Circle [Added
10-11-1999 by Ord. No. 99-8]
1-way
Brookview Drive at Creekview Drive 1-way
Cambridge Drive at Oxford Drive 1-way
Cambridge Drive at Windsor Boulevard 1-way
Capitol View Drive at Beacon Hill Boulevard 2-way
Capitol View Drive at Maplewood Drive [Added
12-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-09]
1-way
Cedar Cliff Drive at Cedar Cliff High School exit 1-way
Cedar Cliff Drive at Creek Road 1-way
Cedar Run Drive at Lisburn Road 1-way
Cedar Run Drive at Nailor Drive 3-way
Cedarhurst Lane at Palmer Drive [Added
4-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-04]
1-way
Cedarhurst Lane at Scarsdale Drive 1-way
§ 209-58 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-58
206:616
Intersection Type of Device
Center Drive at Citadel Drive 2-way
Center Drive at Clemson Drive [Added
12-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-09]
1-way
Center Drive at Colgate Drive 2-way
Center Drive at Colgate Drive 2-way
Century Drive (westbound) at turn/private
commercial driveway [Added 12-11-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-09]
1-way
Century Drive at Wesley Drive 1-way
Chatham Road at South 18th Street 1-way
Chelsea Road at Carlisle Road 1-way
Chelsea Road at Chatham Road 1-way
Chelsea Road at Letchworth Road 2-way
Chelsea Road at Wyndham Road 2-way
Chelten Circle at Cedar Cliff Drive 1-way
Chelten Circle at Cedar Cliff Drive 1-way
Cherokee Avenue at St. Johns Road 1-way
Chestnut Street at Locust Street 1-way
Chestnut Street East at Locust Street 1-way
Chimney Lane at Allendale Way 1-way
Chimney Lane at Deerfield Road 1-way
Christ Community Church at Old Slate Hill Road 1-way
Citadel Drive at Amherst Drive [Added
12-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-09]
1-way
Citadel Drive at Clemson Drive [Added
12-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-09]
1-way
Clemson Drive at Colgate Drive [Added
12-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-09]
1-way
Clemson Drive at Creek Road 1-way
Colgate Drive at Carlisle Road 1-way
Colgate Drive at Cedar Cliff Drive 1-way
Colgate Drive at Citadel Drive 2-way
Colonial Drive at Woodbox Lane (Fair Oaks
Neighborhood) [Added 12-12-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-08]
1-way
Colonial Road at Rossmoyne Road 1-way
Columbia Drive at Citadel Drive 2-way
Columbia Drive at Colgate Drive 1-way
§ 209-58 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-58
206:617
Intersection Type of Device
Columbia Drive at Colgate Drive 1-way
Columbus Avenue Extension and Lowther Road 1-way
Commercial Drive at Letchworth Road 1-way
Commercial Drive at Lowther Road [Added
12-27-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-11]
1-way
Conway Heath at Olmstead Way [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
Cornell Drive at Center Drive 1-way
Cornell Drive at Citadel Drive [Added 12-22-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-09]
1-way
Courtland Road at Cumberland Road (Cumberland
Park Neighborhood) [Added 12-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-08]
1-way
Creek Road at Lisburn Road and Milltown and
except turn
3-way 1, right
Creek Vista Drive and Capitol View Drive 1-way
Creekview Court at Creekview Drive 1-way
Creekview Drive at Capitol View Drive 1-way
Creekview Drive at Creek Vista Drive 1-way
Cressman Circle at McCormick Drive [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
Cricket Lane at Deerfield Road 1-way
Cricket Lane at Deerfield Road 1-way
Crisswell Place and Cushing Green at Olmstead
Way [Added 12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
2-way
Cumberland Drive at Essex Road [Repealed
10-11-1999 by Ord. No. 99-8]
Cumberland Drive at Wayne Road (Cumberland
Park Neighborhood) [Added 12-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-08]
1-way
Cumberland Road at Essex Road (east intersection)
[Amended 10-11-1999 by Ord. No. 99-8]
3-way
Deerfield Road at Fieldstone 2-way
Dishley Drive at Argali Lane 1-way
Dishley Drive at Ewe Road 1-way
Edgar Lane and Olmstead Way East at Olmstead
Way West [Added 12-26-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-18]
2-way
§ 209-58 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-58
206:618
Intersection Type of Device
Edinburg Circle at Brockton Circle [Added
10-11-1999 by Ord. No. 99-8]
1-way
Elmhurst Road at Chatham Road 1-way
Elmhurst Road at Letchworth Road 1-way
Essex Road at Cumberland Road (west intersection)
[Added 10-11-1999 by Ord. No. 99-8]
1-way
Essex Road at William Penn Drive (Cumberland
Park Neighborhood) [Added 12-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-08]
1-way
Eton Place at Cambridge Drive 1-way
Eton Place at Lancaster Boulevard 1-way
Ewe Road at Zenu Road 2-way
Exit from Bon Ton at Zimmerman Drive 1-way
Exit from Capital City Mall at Zimmerman Drive 1-way
Fernwood Avenue at Gettysburg Road 1-way
Fernwood Avenue at Hartzdale Drive 1-way
Fernwood Avenue at Rosemont Avenue 2-way
Fieldstone at Blacksmith Road 1-way
Fieldstone at Deerfield Road 2-way
Fineview at Deerfield Road 1-way
Fineview at Fieldstone 2-way
Firethorn Lane at Woodbox Lane (Fair Oaks
Neighborhood) [Added 12-12-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-08]
1-way
Florence Avenue at Rupp Avenue 1-way
Florence Avenue at Windsor Place 2-way
Forge Road and Lisburn Road 1-way
Fox Hollow Circle at High Meadow Lane (High
Meadow Neighborhood) [Added 12-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-08]
1-way
Fox Hollow Road at Lisburn Road 1-way
2232 Gettysburg Road Driveway at Gettysburg
Road [Added 12-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-09]
1-way
2400 Gettysburg Road Driveway at Gettysburg
Road [Added 12-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-09]
1-way
2500 Gettysburg Road Driveway at Gettysburg
Road [Added 12-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-09]
1-way
Gettysburg Road exit from Bon Ton 1-way
§ 209-58 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-58
206:619
Intersection Type of Device
Gettysburg Road exit from rear of Trinity High
School
1-way
Gettysburg Road exit from Royer's Flowers 1-way
Glendale Drive at South West Avenue 2-way
Glendale Drive at West Maple Avenue 1-way
Glenfinnan Place at Main Street Lisburn
[Amended 10-11-1999 by Ord. No. 99-8]
1-way
Glenfinnan Place at Wellgate Lane [Amended
10-11-1999 by Ord. No. 99-8]
4-way
Glenwood Road at Linden Drive [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
Grandview Avenue and Lisburn Road 1-way
Grandview Avenue and McCormick Drive 1-way
Green Lane Drive at Cedar Cliff Drive 1-way
Grinnel Drive at Cedar Cliff Drive 1-way
Hearth at Blacksmith 1-way
Highland Drive at Creek Road 1-way
Highland Drive at Village Road (Highland Village
Neighborhood) [Added 12-12-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-08]
1-way
High Meadow Lane at Fox Hollow Road [Added
10-8-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-07]
2-way
High Meadow Lane at Thompson Lane (High
Meadow Neighborhood) [Added 12-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-08;amended 2-12-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-02]
3-way
Holly Drive at Willow Road [Added 12-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
Indian Lane at Brandton Road [Added 12-26-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
Ivy Lane at Blacklatch Lane 1-way
Ivy Lane at Deerfield Road 1-way
Kelton Road at Manchester Road 1-way
Kelton Road at Norman Road 1-way
Kensington Drive at Neponsit Lane 2-way
Kensington Drive at Scarsdale Drive 2-way
Kent Drive at Letchworth Drive and 1-way 2-way
Kent Road at Chatham Road 1-way
Kent Road at Chelsea Road 2-way
§ 209-58 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-58
206:620
Intersection Type of Device
Kent Road at South 18th Street 1-way
Kings Arm Court at Capitol View Drive 1-way
Kingsley Road at Manchester 1-way
Kingsley Road at Strafford Road 2-way
Kranzel Drive at corner of building 1-way
Kranzel Drive at Gettysburg Road [Added
12-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-09]
1-way
Kylock Road at Woodbox Lane (Fair Oaks
Neighborhood) [Added 12-12-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-08]
1-way
Lantern Lane at Allendale Way 1-way
Lantern Lane at Candlewyck Road 2-way
Laurel Avenue at Hartzdale Drive 1-way
Laurel Avenue at Rosemont Avenue [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
Lebanon Avenue at Gettysburg Road 1-way
Letchworth Road at Chatham Road 3-way
Letchworth Road at Chelsea Road 4-way
Letchworth Road at Lowther Road 1-way
Letchworth Road at Norman Road 3-way
Letchworth Road at South 18th Street 1-way
Limestone Drive (east) at Rosemont Avenue
[Added 12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
Limestone Drive (west) at Rosemont Avenue
[Added 12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
Linda Lane at Simpson Ferry Road 1-way
Linden Drive at Gettysburg Road 1-way
Lisburn Road and Main Street 4-way
Lisburn Road at Carlisle Road 1-way
Lisburn Road at Spangler Mill Road 1-way
Little League Drive at Gettysburg Road 1-way
Liz Burns Place at McCormick Drive [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
Locust Road at Cumberland Drive (Cumberland
Park Neighborhood) [Added 12-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-08]
1-way
Locust Road at Locust Street 1-way
§ 209-58 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-58
206:621
Intersection Type of Device
Lonk Lane at Ewe Road [Added 12-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
Louise Drive and Ritter Road 2-way
Manchester Road at Lowther Road 1-way
Manchester Road at Warwick Road 1-way
Maplewood Drive and Capitol View Drive
[Repealed 12-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-09]
Maplewood Drive at Summitview Court [Added
12-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-09]
1-way
Marlin Ridge (east) at Olmstead Way [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
Marlin Ridge (west) at Olmstead Way [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
McCormick Drive and Lisburn Road 1-way
McCormick Drive and Main Street Lisburn 1-way
McCormick Road and Lisburn Road 1-way
Merino Lane at Ewe Road 1-way
Merino Lane at Ewe Road 1-way
Merino Lane at Ewe Road 1-way
Mooreland Court at Gloucester Street 1-way
Mooreland Court at Oxford Drive 1-way
Nabal Road at Ewe Road 1-way
Nabal Road at Sheepford Road 1-way
Nailor Drive at Orchard Road 1-way
Nations Way terminal at St. Johns Road 1-way
Neponsit Lane at Palmer Drive [Added 4-22-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-04]
1-way
Nina Alley at Gettysburg Road [Added
12-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-09]
1-way
Nina Alley at Lebanon Avenue [Added 10-23-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-07]
1-way
Nina Alley at Schuylkill Avenue 2-way
Norman Road at Kingsley Road 4-way
Norman Road at Lowther Road 4-way
Norway Maple Court and Maplewood Drive 1-way
Nottingham Road at Kensington Drive [Added
4-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-04]
1-way
§ 209-58 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-58
206:622
Intersection Type of Device
Nottingham Road at Palmer Drive [Added
4-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-04]
1-way
Old Mill Drive at Cedar Cliff Drive 1-way
Olmstead Way at Cedar Cliff Drive 1-way
Oneida Road at Gettysburg Road 1-way
Oneida Road at St. Johns Road 1-way
Orchard Avenue at Gettysburg Road 1-way
Orchard Avenue at St. John's Road 1-way
Orchard Road at Carlisle Road 1-way
Ovis Drive at Argali Lane 3-way
Ovis Drive at Ewe Road 1-way
Oxford Drive at Allendale 1-way
Oxford Drive at Apple Drive 3-way
Oxford Drive at Gloucester Street 2-way
Oxford Drive at Lancaster Boulevard 4-way
Oxford Drive at Winston Drive 1-way
Palmer Drive at Hartzdale Drive 1-way
Palmer Drive at Kensington Drive [Added
4-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-04]
1-way
Park Circle at Letchworth Road 1-way
Parklea Drive at Essex Road [Added 10-8-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-07]
1-way
Parklea Road at Chestnut Street/Forge Road
(Cumberland Park Neighborhood) [Added
12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-08]
1-way
Park Place at Glenwood Road [Added 12-26-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
Pennsylvania Avenue at Nina Alley [Added
12-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-09]
1-way
Pine Street at Holly Drive [Added 12-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
Pinewood Drive at South West Avenue [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
Plainview Road at Hartzdale Drive 1-way
Plainview Road at Scarsdale Drive 1-way
Primrose Avenue at Cedar Avenue 1-way
Primrose Avenue at Glenwood Avenue 1-way
§ 209-58 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-58
206:623
Intersection Type of Device
Primrose Avenue at Rosemont Avenue [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
Quincy Circle at Beacon Hill Boulevard [Added
10-11-1999 by Ord. No. 99-8]
1-way
Rana Villa Avenue at Cedar Avenue 1-way
Rana Villa Avenue at Gettysburg Road 1-way
Rana Villa Avenue at Glenwood Avenue 1-way
Rana Villa Avenue at Hartzdale Drive 1 way
Raven Hill Road at Lisburn Road 1-way
Red Maple Court at Maplewood Drive 1-way
Riddle Road at Letchworth Road 1-way
Rockaway Drive at Palmer Drive [Added
4-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-04]
1-way
Rockaway Drive at Scarsdale Drive 1-way
Rosemont Avenue at Rana Villa Avenue 2-way
Rosemont Avenue at St. Johns Road 2-way
Rossmoyne Road at Lisburn Road 1-way
Royal Drive at Lancaster Boulevard 2-way
Royal Drive at Wesley Drive 1-way
Rupp Avenue at Gettysburg Road 1-way
Rupp Avenue at Somerset Drive and Linden Avenue 4-way
Santa Maria Avenue at New York Avenue (Spring
Lake Neighborhood) [Added 12-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-08]
1-way
Scarsdale Drive at Neponsit Lane 4-way
Scarsdale Drive at Slate Hill Road (old) 1-way
Schuylkill Avenue at Gettysburg Road 1-way
Schuylkill Avenue at New York Avenue 2-way
Selwick Road at Manchester Road 1-way
Seneca Avenue at Oneida Road 2-way
Seneca Avenue at St. Johns Road 1-way
Sheely Lane at Gettysburg Road 1-way
Sheely Lane at Wesley Drive [Repealed
12-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-09]
Sheepford Road at Lisburn Road 1-way
Sherman Road at Linden Drive [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
§ 209-58 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-58
206:624
Intersection Type of Device
Shetter Lane at Lisburn Road 1-way
Shoreham Road at I-83 on ramp 1-way
Shoreham Road at Norman Road 1-way
Simpson Ferry Road exit from Hechinger's 1-way
Simpson Ferry Road exit from rear of Hechinger's 1-way
Simpson Ferry Road exit from Trinity High School 1-way
Slate Hill Business Center at Hartzdale Drive 1-way
Slate Hill Road (old) at Hartzdale Drive 1-way
Slate Hill Road (old) at Slate Hill Road 1-way
Slate Hill Road at Lisburn Road 2-way
Sna Lane at Argali Lane 1-way
Society Hill Drive at Lisburn Road 1-way
Society Hill Drive at Slate Hill Road 1-way
Somerset Drive at West Maple Avenue 2-way
Somerset Drive at West Maple Avenue and Rupp
Avenue
2-way
South 21st Street at Wentworth Drive [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
South West Avenue at Glendale Drive 1-way
South West Avenue at Somerset Drive 3-way
Spangler Road at SR 8007 Ramp I 1-way
Spera Drive at Gettysburg Road 1-way
SR 8002 Ramp A at SR 8007 Ramp C 1-way
SR 8007 Ramp A and Gettysburg Road 1-way
SR 8007 Ramp B at SR 8007 Ramp D 1-way
SR 8007 Ramp E at Simpson Ferry Road 1-way
SR 8007 Ramp H at SR 8007 Ramp I (except turn) 1-way right
SR 8007 Ramp O and Gettysburg Road 1-way
St. Johns Road at Appleton Street 2-way
St. Johns Road at Cedar Avenue 1-way
St. Johns Road at Gettysburg Road 2-way
St. Johns Road at Hartzdale Drive 2-way
St. Johns Road at Lisburn Road 2-way
St. Johns Road at Slate Hill Road [Added
10-8-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-07]
1-way
Strafford Road at Carlisle Road 1-way
§ 209-58 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-58
206:625
Intersection Type of Device
Stuart Drive at Cambridge Drive 1-way
Stuart Drive at Lancaster Boulevard 4-way
Sugar Maple Court and Maplewood Drive 2-way
Summitview Court and Beacon Hill Boulevard 1-way
Summitview Court and Maplewood Drive
[Repealed 12-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-09]
Sussex Circle at Rupp Avenue 2-way
Sussex Circle at Sussex Road 2-way
Sussex Road at Courtland Road 2-way
Sussex Road at Cumberland Drive 2-way
Sussex Road at Essex Road (Cumberland Park
Neighborhood) [Added 12-12-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-08]
1-way
Sussex Road at William Penn Drive 1-way
The Burns Road at Grandview Avenue [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
The Burns Road at McCormick Drive [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
Thompson Lane at Lisburn Road 1-way
Thompson Lane at Sheepford Road 1-way
Utley Drive at Hartzdale Drive 1-way
Utley Drive at St. Johns Road 1-way
Valley Road at Sheepford Road 1-way
Valley Road at Slate Hill Road 1-way
Valley Road at Slate Hill Road 1-way
Victoria Drive at Oxford Drive 1-way
Victoria Drive at Stuart Drive 1-way
Village Road at Carlisle Road 1-way
Village Road at Highland Drive 1-way
Village Road at Highland Drive 1-way
Walnut Circle at Walnut Lane (Cumberland Park
Neighborhood) [Added 12-12-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-08]
1-way
Walnut Lane at Essex Road 1-way
Walnut Lane at Sussex Road 2-way
Ward Lane at Sheepford Road 1-way
§ 209-58 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-58
206:626
Intersection Type of Device
Warrington Avenue at Windsor Place (Harrisburg
Manor Neighborhood [Added 12-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-08]
1-way
Warwick Road at Carlisle Road 1-way
Warwick Road at Norman Road 1-way
Wayne Circle at Wayne Road (Cumberland Park
Neighborhood) [Added 12-12-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-08]
1-way
Wayne Road at Cumberland Road [Added
10-11-1999 by Ord. No. 99-8]
1-way
Wayne Road at William Penn Drive (Cumberland
Park Neighborhood) [Added 12-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-08]
1-way
Weatherburn at Capitol View Drive 1-way
Weis Market Drive at Simpson Ferry Road [Added
12-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-09]
1-way
Wellgate Lane and Ashburn Way 1-way
Wentworth Drive at Lisburn Road 1-way
Wentworth Drive at South 21st Street [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
West Shore Drive at Carlisle Road 1-way
West Shore Drive at Cedar Cliff Drive 1-way
William Penn Drive at Gettysburg Road 1-way
William Penn Drive at Rupp Avenue 1-way
Willow Road at Creek Road 1-way
Wilson Lane at Sheely Lane [Repealed
12-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-09]
Wilson Lane, Wilson Lane and Bethany Village West
Driveway [Added 12-22-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-09]
3-way
Winding Way at Blacksmith 1-way
Winding Way at Creekwood Drive [Added
12-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
1-way
Winding Way at Glenside 1-way
Windsor Boulevard at Tudor Drive 3-way
Windsor Boulevard at Wesley Drive 1-way
Windsor Place at Gettysburg Road 1-way
Windsor Place at Linden Avenue 1-way
Winston Drive at Royal Drive 1-way
§ 209-58 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-58
206:627
Intersection Type of Device
Winston Drive at Windsor Boulevard 1-way
Woodbox Lane at Kylock Road (Fair Oaks
Neighborhood) [Added 12-12-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-08]
1-way
Woodbox Lane private drive 1-way
Woodland Street at Century Drive [Amended
12-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-09]
1-way
Woodland Street at Wesley Drive 1-way
Woodmere Drive at Nottingham Road [Added
4-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-04]
1-way
Wyndham Road at Chatham Road 3-way
Wyndham Road at Chelsea Road 2-way
Wyndham Road at South 18th Street 1-way
Yorkshire Drive at Oxford Drive 1-way
Yorkshire Drive at Stuart Drive 1 way
Zenu Road at Sheepford Road 1-way
Zimmerman Drive at Hartzdale Drive 3-way
§ 209-59. Schedule X: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-19, the following described
intersections are hereby established as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on
(street name)
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Century Drive [Repealed
12-11-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-09]
Green Lane Drive South York County line at
bridge (“yield to
oncoming traffic”
“one lane bridge”)
Hartzdale Drive East to South Slate Hill Road (new)
Hartzdale Drive West to North Slate Hill Road (new)
Highland Circle East 20th Street
Louise Drive [Amended
11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
West (left-turn
lane)
Rossmoyne Road
Louise Drive [Amended
11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
West (straight/
right-turn lane)
Rossmoyne Road
§ 209-58 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-59
206:628
Yield Sign on
(street name)
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Ramp East Route 15 South North Wesley Drive (north)
St. Johns Road [Repealed
10-8-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-07]
SR 0015 North Old [Added
11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
North Entrance/exit ramp
from Slate Hill Road
SR 0015 South Old [Added
11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
South Entrance/exit ramp
from Slate Hill Road
SR 8001 Ramp E [Added
11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
South Route 15
SR 8001 Ramp J [Added
11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
South SR 8001 Spur J
SR 8001 Spur F [Added
11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
North SR 8001 Ramp F
SR 8007 Ramp C East Simpson Ferry Road
SR 8007 Ramp F North SR 0015 North
SR 8007 Ramp G East Gettysburg Road
SR 8007 Ramp H South Gettysburg Road
SR 8007 Ramp I North SR 0015 North
SR 8007 Ramp K South SR 0015 South
Wesley Drive (Northbound) North Gettysburg Road
(east)
Wesley Drive North Simpson Ferry Road
(east)
Zimmerman Drive South Capital City Mall
NOTES:
1 Andersontown Bridge marked yield to oncoming traffic, one lane bridge
§ 209-60. Schedule XI: Closing of Certain Streets to Certain
Vehicles. [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12]
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-20, it shall be unlawful for any
person to drive any vehicle, except a passenger vehicle, upon any of the
streets or parts thereof described below:
Name of Street Location or Limits
Type of
Restriction
28th Street Northbound at Gettysburg Road No trucks
29th Street Northbound at Gettysburg Road No trucks
§ 209-59 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-60
206:629
Name of Street Location or Limits
Type of
Restriction
30th Street Northbound at Gettysburg Road No trucks
31st Street Northbound at Gettysburg Road No trucks
Allen Road No trucks
except local
deliveries
(3-ton limit)
Beaver Road [Added
10-23-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-07]
Lisburn Road to Creek Road No trucks
three or
more axles,
except local
deliveries
Cedar Cliff Drive East from Creek Road No trucks
except local
deliveries
(3-ton limit)
Cedar Cliff Drive West from Carlisle Road No trucks
except local
deliveries
Chestnut Street No trucks
except local
deliveries
Commercial Drive No trucks
except local
deliveries
Essex Road Shiremanstown line No trucks
except local
deliveries
(3-ton limit)
Hartzdale Drive West of Old Slate Hill Road No trucks
except local
deliveries
Kranzel Drive [Added
12-11-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-09]
Northbound at Gettysburg Road No trucks
Laurel Avenue [Added
10-11-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-8]
Hartzdale Drive to Glenwood
Avenue
No trucks
except local
deliveries
Letchworth Road Eastbound at South 18th Street No trucks
except local
deliveries
§ 209-60 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-60
206:630
Name of Street Location or Limits
Type of
Restriction
Letchworth Road Westbound at Lowther Road No trucks
except local
deliveries
Linden Drive Northbound at Gettysburg Road No trucks
Locust Road No trucks
except local
deliveries
(3-ton limit)
Lowther Road [Added
10-23-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-07]
Carlisle Road to Letchworth Road No trucks
three or
more axles,
except local
deliveries
Manor Drive [Added
10-23-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-07]
Southbound at Lena Drive No trucks
three or
more axles,
except local
deliveries
Milltown Road [Added
10-23-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-07]
Shetter Lane to Lisburn Road No trucks
three or
more axles,
except local
deliveries
Rana Villa Avenue
[Added 10-23-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-07]
Cedar Avenue to Glenwood Avenue No trucks
three or
more axles,
except local
deliveries
Royal Drive Royal Drive at Wesley Drive No trucks
except local
deliveries
Rupp Avenue Gettysburg Road northbound No trucks
except local
deliveries
(3-ton limit)
Rupp Avenue Shiremanstown line No trucks
except local
deliveries
(3-ton limit)
Scarsdale Drive West of Old Slate Hill Road No trucks
except local
deliveries
§ 209-60 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-60
206:631
Name of Street Location or Limits
Type of
Restriction
Shetter Lane [Added
10-23-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-07]
Lisburn Road to Milltown Road No trucks
three or
more axles,
except local
deliveries
Shoreham Road
[Added 10-23-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-07]
Norman Road to end of street No trucks
three or
more axles,
except local
deliveries
South West Avenue Shiremanstown line No trucks
except local
deliveries
(3-ton limit)
Strafford Road North at Carlisle Road No trucks
except local
deliveries
Sussex Road Eastbound at Rupp Avenue No trucks
except local
deliveries
(3-ton limit)
Tudor Drive Tudor Drive at Windsor Park
Shopping Center
No trucks
except local
deliveries
Walnut Lane Rupp Avenue No trucks
except local
deliveries
(3-ton limit)
Warwick Road Odd side at Carlisle Road No trucks
except local
deliveries
West Maple Avenue Shiremanstown line southbound No trucks
except local
deliveries
(3-ton limit)
William Penn Drive Eastbound at Rupp Avenue No trucks
except local
deliveries
(3-ton limit)
Willow Road Westbound from Creek Road No trucks
except local
deliveries
§ 209-60 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-60
206:632
Name of Street Location or Limits
Type of
Restriction
Windsor Boulevard Windsor Boulevard at Wesley Drive No trucks
except local
deliveries
§ 209-61. Schedule XII: Vehicle Weight Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-21, gross weight limits are
hereby established as indicated for commercial vehicles or other tractor,
trailer or tractor-trailer combinations upon the streets, bridges or portions
thereof described below, except for the purpose of making local deliveries
on said streets, bridges or portions thereof:
Name of Street Location or Limits
Gross Weight
Limit
28th Street Northbound entrance at
Gettysburg Road
No trucks;
3-ton limit
29th Street Northbound entrance at
Gettysburg Road
3 tons
30th Street Northbound entrance at
Gettysburg Road
3 tons
31st Street Northbound entrance at
Gettysburg Road
No trucks;
3-ton limit
Allen Road Locust Street 3 tons
Essex Road Shiremanstown line 3 tons
Gettysburg Road Eastbound 2200 Block 12 feet, 5
inches next
right
Green Lane Drive Cedar Cliff Drive Bridge; weight
limit 8 tons 0.2
miles ahead
Green Lane Drive [Added
10-23-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-07]
Cedar Cliff Drive to York
County line
8 tons
Green Lane Drive York County line Bridge; weight
limit 8 tons
Hartzdale Drive West of Old Slate Hill Road 3 tons
Linden Drive Southbound entrance from
Gettysburg Road
3 tons
Locust Road 3 tons
Main Street Bridge Cumberland 33 tons
Lisburn County/York 40 tons
combination
§ 209-60 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-61
206:633
Name of Street Location or Limits
Gross Weight
Limit
Rupp Avenue Gettysburg Road
northbound
3 tons
Rupp Avenue Shiremanstown line 3 tons
St. Johns Road [Added
12-11-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-09; amended
10-23-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-07]
Lisburn Road to Slate Hill
Road
3 tons
Sheely Lane Wilson Lane to Gettysburg
Road
5 tons
Sheepford Road [Amended
11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
98-12]
Bridge (at York County
line)
5 tons
Sheepford Road Sheepford Road at
Thompson Lane
5 tons
Slate Hill Road [Amended
12-11-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-09; 2-22-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-02]
Lisburn Road to York
County line, including
bridge over Yellow
Breeches Creek
3 tons
South West Avenue 3 tons
Sussex Circle Eastbound at Rupp Avenue 3 tons
Walnut Lane Eastbound at Rupp Avenue 3 tons
West Maple Avenue Shiremanstown line
southbound
3 tons
William Penn Drive Eastbound at Rupp Avenue 3 tons
§ 209-62. (Reserved)212
§ 209-63. Schedule XIV: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-24, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
17th Street From Township line to
Hummel Avenue
Appleton Street [Amended
11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
98-12]
Both From Slate Hill Road to St.
Johns Road
212. Editor's Note: Former § 209-62, Schedule XIII, Angle Parking, was repealed 11-9-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-12.
§ 209-61 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-63
206:634
Name of Street Side Location
Ashburn Way [Added
10-11-1999 by Ord. No.
99-8]
Both From Wellgate Lane to end
Beacon Hill Boulevard
[Amended 10-23-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-07]
Both From Township line to
Township line, except as noted
in § 209-64, Schedule XV
Capital View Drive From Beacon Hill Boulevard to
terminus
Carlisle Road From Stafford Road to Cedar
Cliff Drive
Carlisle Road [Added
10-23-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-07]
North From Strafford Road to a point
58 feet west of the western
curbline of Strafford Road
Carlisle Road [Added
7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-10]
North From Warwick Road to a point
76 feet west of the western
curb face of Warwick Road
Carlisle Road [Added
7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-10]
North From Warwick Road to a point
140 feet east of the eastern
curb face of Warwick Road
Carlisle Road [Added
12-11-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-09]
South From Lisburn Road to Creek
Road
Cedar Cliff Drive From Carlisle Road to Green
Lane Drive
Center Drive From Carlisle Road to 56
Center Drive
Chatham Drive From 1812 to 1822
Chelsea Road From Carlisle Road to
Letchworth Road
Creek Road [Added
10-11-1999 by Ord. No.
99-8]
East From Boxwood Lane south a
distance of 120 feet
Gettysburg Road At 2200 Block
Gettysburg Road From Hartzdale Drive to SR
8007 (Highland Park
interchange)
Gettysburg Road From Rana Villa to SR 8007
(Highland Park interchange)
Gettysburg Road [Added
11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
98-12]
Both From Wesley Drive to Upper
Allen Township line
§ 209-63 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-63
206:635
Name of Street Side Location
Gettysburg Road [Added
7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-10]
South From Rana Villa Avenue to a
point 100 feet west of the
western curb face of Rana
Villa Avenue
Gettysburg Road (SR2014)
[Added 11-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-12]
Both From Carlisle Drive to
Simpson Ferry Road
Gettysburg Road (SR2027)
[Added 11-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-12]
Both From Simpson Ferry Road to
Wesley Drive
Glenfinnan Place [Added
10-11-1999 by Ord. No.
99-8]
Both From Main Street Lisburn to
end
Gorgas Drive At Hummel Avenue
Green Lane Drive [Amended
11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
98-12]
Both From Cedar Cliff Drive to York
County line
Hartzdale Drive [Amended
10-11-1999 by Ord. No.
99-8]
North From Palmer Drive to
Gettysburg Road
Hartzdale Drive [Added
10-11-1999 by Ord. No.
99-8]
South From Old Slate Hill Road to
Gettysburg Road
Highland Drive From Creek Road to Village
Road
Hummel Avenue [Repealed
10-11-1999 by Ord. No.
99-8]
Hummel Avenue [Added
10-11-1999 by Ord. No.
99-8]
North From 17th Street to west side
of 4 Hummel Avenue
Hummel Avenue [Added
10-11-1999 by Ord. No.
99-8]
South From 17th Street to west side
of 11 Hummel Avenue
Kingsley Road From 300 to 400 Block
Linda Lane [Amended
11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
98-12]
Both From Gettysburg Road to
terminus
Linden Drive From Gettysburg Road to
Sherman Road
Lisburn Road At Arcona Road (around Bell
Telephone transfer station)
§ 209-63 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-63
206:636
Name of Street Side Location
Lisburn Road From Carlisle Road to
Wentworth Road
Lisburn Road [Added
10-23-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-07]
West From Wentworth Drive to a
point 85 feet north of the
northern curbline of
Wentworth Drive
Lisburn Road [Added
10-23-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-07]
West From Wentworth Drive to a
point 54 feet south of the
southern curbline of
Wentworth Drive
Locust Street From Township line to
Gettysburg Road
McCormick Drive From Main Street Lisburn to
Grandview Avenue
McCormick Road From Lisburn Road to
townshp line
Nottingham Road At Palmer Drive
Olmstead Way From Cedar Cliff Drive to
Lantern Lane (to include
Olmstead way east and west)
Oneida Road From Seneca Avenue to
Gettysburg Road (odd side of
street)
Orchard Road From Carlisle Road to Nailor
Drive
Palmer Drive From Hartzdale Drive to
Cedarhurst Lane
Pine Street [Amended
11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
98-12]
From Holly Drive to curve
(even side)
Pine Street [Amended
11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
98-12]
From curve to terminus (odd
side)
Poplar Avenue [Added
10-23-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-07]
West From Beacon Hill Boulevard to
Township line, parking
prohibited off pavement
Quincy Circle [Added
10-11-1999 by Ord. No.
99-8]
Both From Beacon Hill Boulevard to
Brockton Circle
Riddle Road From Letchworth Road to
Letchworth Road
§ 209-63 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-63
206:637
Name of Street Side Location
Rosemont Avenue At intersection with Primrose
Avenue
Rosemont Avenue [Added
12-11-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-09]
South From Fernwood Avenue to
Laurel Avenue
St. Johns Road From Lisburn Road to
Appleton Street
Selwick Road From Carlisle Road to
Manchester Road
Seneca Avenue From 41st Street to Allen
Middle School (on school side
of street)
Sheepford Road [Added
12-28-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-09]
Both From the bridge over Yellow
Breeches Creek to a point 700
feet west of the bridge
South 18th Street From Hummel Avenue to Kent
Drive
SR 0581 overpass Right-of-way between State
Road and Hummel Avenue
State Road From Carlisle Road to
Hummel Avenue
Wesley Drive 100 block to Bethany Village
Wesley Drive [Added
2-22-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-02]
East From Woodland Street to a
point 100 feet north of the
northern curbline of Woodland
Street
Wesley Drive [Added
2-22-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-02]
East From Woodland Street to a
point 118 feet south of the
southern curbline of Woodland
Street
West Shore Drive [Added
12-22-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-09]
East From Carlisle Road (SR 2018)
to a point 112 feet from
Carlisle Road
West Shore Drive [Added
7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-10]
East From Cedar Cliff Drive to the
start of the driveway at 5 West
Shore Drive
West Shore Drive From Cedar Cliff Drive to
Carlisle Road
Westport Drive From Rossmoyne Road to
turning circle
§ 209-63 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-63
206:638
Name of Street Side Location
Woodland Street [Added
10-8-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-07]
East From Wesley Drive to a point
340 feet from the center line
of Wesley Drive
Woodland Street [Added
10-8-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-07]
West From Wesley Drive to a point
680 feet from the center line
of Wesley Drive
Zimmerman Drive From Simpson Ferry Road to
Hartzdale Drive
§ 209-64. Schedule XV: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours and/or
Days.
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-25, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours and/or dates specified below upon any of the streets or
parts thereof described below:
Name of Street Side
Date/Day/Hour
Parking
Restriction
Location or
Limits
19th Street Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
From Carlisle Road
to Letchworth
Drive
19th Street Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
From Carlise Road
to Letchworth
Drive
20th Street [Added
6-24-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-02]
Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
From Carlisle Road
to Kent Drive
20th Street [Added
6-24-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-02]
Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
From Carlisle Road
to Kent Drive
28th Street [Added
10-23-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-07]
Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
Gettysburg Road to
Morningside Drive
Apple Drive [Added
12-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-18;
amended
2-22-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-02]
Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
From Oxford Drive
to Mechanicsburg
line
§ 209-63 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-64
206:639
Name of Street Side
Date/Day/Hour
Parking
Restriction
Location or
Limits
Apple Drive [Added
12-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-18;
amended
2-22-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-02]
Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
From Oxford Drive
to Mechanicsburg
line
Beacon Hill
Boulevard [Added
10-23-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-07]
South Parking permitted,
dawn to dusk
Poplar Avenue to a
point 360 feet west
of the western
curbline of Poplar
Avenue
Capitol View Drive Right 2-hour parking From Josiah
Chowning Way to
dead end (1 sign)
Carlisle Road
[Repealed
6-24-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-02]
Carlisle Road
[Repealed
6-24-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-02]
Chatham Drive Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
From Kent Drive to
20th Street
Chatham Drive Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
From 20th Street
to Kent Drive
Chatham Road Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
Chatham Road Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
Cherokee Avenue Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and February
Cherokee Avenue Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
§ 209-64 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-64
206:640
Name of Street Side
Date/Day/Hour
Parking
Restriction
Location or
Limits
Elmhurst Road Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
Elmhurst Road Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
Highland Circle
[Added
10-23-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-07]
Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
20th Street to end
Highland Drive Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
Highland Drive Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
Kelton Road Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./Janaury
and March
From Manchester
Road to Norman
Kelton Road Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
From Manchester
Road to Norman
Kent Drive Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
From Letchworth
Drive to 20th
Street
Kent Drive Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
From Letchworth
Drive to 20th
Street
Kent Road Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
Kent Road Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
Kingsley Road Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
From Stafford
Road to Norman
Road
Kingsley Road Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
From Stafford
Road to Norman
Road
§ 209-64 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-64
206:641
Name of Street Side
Date/Day/Hour
Parking
Restriction
Location or
Limits
Kingsley Road Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
From Stafford
Road to Norman
Road
Kingsley Road Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
From Stafford
Road to Norman
Road
Letchworth Drive Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
Between Kent
Drive and Kent
Drive
Letchworth Drive Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
Between Kent
Drive and Kent
Drive
Letchworth Road Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
Letchworth Road Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./Janaury
and March
Manchester Road Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
Manchester Road Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
Norman Road Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
From Letchworth
Road to Kingsley
Road
Norman Road Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
From Letchworth
Road to Kingsley
Road
Oxford Drive
[Added
12-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-18]
Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
From Lancaster
Boulevard to
Gloucester Street
Oxford Drive
[Added
12-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-18]
Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
From Lancaster
Boulevard to
Gloucester Street
Park Circle [Added
10-23-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-07]
Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
Letchworth Road
to end
§ 209-64 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-64
206:642
Name of Street Side
Date/Day/Hour
Parking
Restriction
Location or
Limits
Shoreham Road Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
From Norman to
I-83 on ramp
Shoreham Road Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
From Norman to
I-83 on ramp
Stafford Road Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
From Carlisle Road
to Kingsley Road
Stafford Road Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
From Carlisle Road
to Kingsley Road
Village Road Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
Village Road Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
Warwick Road Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./January
and March
From Norman
Road to Carlisle
Road
Warwick Road Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
From Norman
Road to Carlisle
Road
Wyndham Road Even 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./Janaury
and March
Wyndham Road Odd 12:00 midnight to
4:00 p.m./December
and February
§ 209-65. Schedule XVI: Time-Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-26, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the described streets or parts thereof except for the time limits
indicated:
§ 209-64 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-65
206:643
Name of Street Side Time Limit
Location or
Limits
Strafford Road
[Added
12-26-2007 by
Ord. No.
2007-18]
Both 2-hour parking From Carlisle Road
to a point 95 feet
from Carlisle Road
§ 209-66. Schedule XVII: Special-Purpose Parking Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 209-27, the following are hereby
established as special-purpose parking zones:
Name of Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle Location
Carlisle Road West Handicapped
reserved
Grace Lutheran
Church
Hummell Avenue
[Repealed 10-11-1999
by Ord. No. 99-8]
Hummel Avenue
[Added 10-11-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-8]
South No truck
parking
1993 Hummel
Avenue
Kelton Road [Added
2-22-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-02]
East Handicapped
reserved
1301 Kelton Road
Linda Lane Loading zone
(15-minute
limit)
925 Linda Lane
Lisburn Road Loading zone
(30-minute
limit)
700 Block
Peter's Field [Added
7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-09]
Patrons parking
only
Seneca Avenue [Added
10-23-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-07]
North Handicapped
reserved
4042 Seneca
Avenue
§ 209-67. (Reserved)213
213. Editor's Note: Former § 209-67, Schedule XVIII: Snow Emergency Routes, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12.
§ 209-65 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 209-68
206:644
§ 209-68. Schedule XIX: Engine Brake Retarders Prohibited. [Added
2-22-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02]
Limits
Name of Street Direction Begin End
Hartzdale Drive
(SR 2041)
Eastbound Old State Hill
Road (SR 2041)
State Hill Road
(SR 2025)
Old State Hill
Road (SR 2041)
Southbound 185 feet south of
center line of
Scarsdale Drive
Hartzdale Drive
§ 209-69. Schedule XX: School Zone Speed Limits. [Added
2-22-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02]
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
Carlisle Road (SR 2018) 15 when flashing From flashing warning
device 1,119 feet east of
Selwick Road center line
to flashing warning
device 287 feet west of
Selwick Road center line
Gettysburg Road (SR
2027)
15 when flashing From flashing warning
device 380 feet west of
school driveway center
line to flashing warning
device 345 feet east of
school driveway center
line
Rossmoyne Road (SR
2021)
15 when flashing From flashing warning
device 390 feet south of
school driveway center
line to flashing warning
device 465 feet north of
school driveway center
line
§ 209-68 VECTOR CONTROL § 209-69
206:645
Chapter 212
VEHICLES, STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 121.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 162.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 209.
§ 212-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows:
JUNK — Any material considered detrimental to the health, cleanliness,
beauty or safety of the Township.
PERSON — Includes every person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
VEHICLE or MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes one or more motor vehicles,
including trailers or semitrailers and parts thereof, tractors and
motorcycles.
§ 212-2. Repairing vehicles on street.
No person shall park or store a vehicle upon any street, highway or alley
of the Township for the purpose of repairing, assembling or disassembling
such vehicle except for repairs necessitated by an emergency.
§ 212-3. Leaving junk vehicle on street.
No person shall park or store any abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicle or
parts thereof on any street, highway or alley in the Township.
§ 212-4. Leaving unlicensed vehicle on street.
No person shall park or store any unlicensed vehicle on any street, highway
or alley of the Township.
§ 212-5. Leaving junk or unlicensed vehicle on private grounds.
[Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12; 10-22-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-14]
No person shall park or store any wrecked or junked or unlicensed vehicle,
or parts thereof, on any private grounds within the Township which
constitutes a nuisance or violation of Chapter 121, Junkyards, except those
being stored temporarily on municipal or fire company property for the
purpose of evidence, evidence processing, and firefighting and/or rescue
§ 209-69 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 212-5
212:646
training. Storage on municipal or fire company property shall be limited to
30 days in residential zoning districts.
§ 212-6. Manager's approval required for storing extra vehicles.
With the exception of motor vehicles regularly used for transportation by
the owner or occupant of private grounds within the Township, no motor
vehicle, junked or wrecked or otherwise, shall be stored on such premises
unless the keeping or storage of the same has been approved by the
Township Manager.
§ 212-7. Permit to store extra vehicles.
Any person desiring to store or to continue to store motor vehicles on
private grounds except those kept for the purpose set out in § 212-6 shall
apply, in writing, to the Township Manager for a permit setting forth the
location and description of the land on which such motor vehicles are to be
placed, the number and nature thereof, the manner of storage, the length
and purpose for the storage.
§ 212-8. Disposal of unclaimed vehicles. [Amended 11-9-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-12]
In case of unclaimed or unidentified vehicles, the Township may dispose of
the same in accordance with the provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 7301.
§ 212-9. Notice to abate nuisance.
Any person in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be given 10
days' written notice to remove the vehicle or abate the nuisance.
§ 212-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-10-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-16]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or aiding, abetting or
assisting in the violation of any provision shall be fined not less than $100
nor more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, if in default of payment of
such fine or costs, shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days. Each 10
days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 212-5 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 212-10
212:647
Chapter 216
(RESERVED)
Chapter 220
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Official Map — See Ch. 36.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 40.
Sexually oriented businesses — See Ch. 59.
Filling and excavating — See Ch. 98.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 110.
Junkyards — See Ch. 121.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 184.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
192.
§ 212-10 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 212-10
216:648
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 220-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Lower Allen Township Zoning
Ordinance of 2009."
§ 220-2. Authority.
This chapter is enacted and ordained under the grant of powers by the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Act 247, the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, July 31, 1968, as amended.214
§ 220-3. Purpose.
§ 220-4. Community development goals and objectives.
This chapter shall promote and foster the community development goals
and objectives as contained in the Lower Allen Township Comprehensive
Plan Update, adopted August 28, 2006.
§ 220-5. Repealer.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this chapter, are
intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as new enactments.
The provisions of this chapter shall not affect any act done or liability
incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense under the
authority of any ordinance repealed by this chapter.
A. This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
(1) To promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following: the
public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and
practical community development, proper density of population,
emergency management, the provision of adequate light and air,
police protection, vehicle parking and loading space,
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, public grounds and other
public requirements; and
(2) To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land,
blight, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of
health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
B. This chapter is made in accordance with an overall program and with
consideration for the character of the Township, its various parts and
the suitability of the various parts for particular uses and structures.
214. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 220-1 (RESERVED) § 220-5
216:649

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 220-6. Definitions; word usage.
A. Word usage.
(1) The following words are defined in order to facilitate the
interpretation of the chapter for administrative purposes and in the
carrying out of duties by appropriate officers and by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
(2) Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
(3) The singular includes the plural.
(4) The word "person" includes a natural person, corporation,
partnership, limited liability company, business trust, other
association, government entity, estate, trust or foundation.
(5) The word "lot" includes the words "plot," "tract" or "parcel."
(6) The term "shall" is always mandatory.
(7) The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building
shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or
designed to be used or occupied."
B. Wherever a reference document is cited with a publication date, the
phrase "as amended" is assumed to follow the date.
C. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words
shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings herein
indicated. Such definitions shall take precedence of other definitions
contained within other Township codes and ordinances.
ABANDONMENT — The relinquishment of property or a cessation of
the use of the property by the owner with the intention neither of
transferring rights to the property to another owner nor of resuming
the use of the property.
ACCESS DRIVE — A private drive providing pedestrian and/or
vehicular access and point of dropoff between a public or private street
and a parking area within a land development, and any driveway
servicing two or more units of occupancy on a single lot or contiguous
lots.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure subordinate to and detached
from the principal building on the same lot and used for purposes
customarily incidental to the principal structure. Such structures shall
also include utility sheds and bath houses.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to
the principal use of the main building or land and located on the same
lot with such principal use or main building.
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:651
ACREAGE, NET — That land area remaining upon the exclusion of
any portions of a tract located within existing and proposed rights-ofway
(excluding utility rights-of-way), environmentally sensitive areas
(e.g., wetlands, floodplains or slopes) in excess of 25%, those areas
designated for nonresidential uses, including but not limited to limited
neighborhood commercial areas and common open space.
ACT — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as
amended.215
ADULT BUSINESS — As defined within Chapters 59, Sexually Oriented
Businesses, and 140, Massage Establishments, of the Code of the
Township of Lower Allen.
AGRICULTURAL USE — The use of land for the growing and/or
production of field crops, livestock and livestock products for the
production of income, including but not limited to the following:
AGRICULTURAL USES, INTENSIVE (AGRIBUSINESS) — Includes, but
is not necessarily limited to:
Field crops, including barley, soybeans, corn, hay, oats, potatoes,
rye, sorghum and sunflowers.
(1)
Livestock, including dairy and beef cattle, goats, horses, sheep,
hogs, poultry, game birds and other animals, excluding dogs.
(2)
Livestock products, including milk, butter, cheese, eggs, meat, fur
and honey.
(3)
(1) Slaughter areas.
Areas for the storage or processing of manure, garbage or spent
mushroom compost.
(2)
(3) Structures housing more than 50 animal units.
Confined livestock operations or concentrated animal feeding
operations (CAFO). Federal regulations define a CAFO as an animal
feeding operation that:
(a) Confines more than 1,000 animal units (AU); or
Confines between 301 and 1,000 AU and discharges pollutants
into waters of the United States through a man-made ditch,
flushing system or similar man-made device, or directly into
waters of the United States that originate outside of and pass
over, across or through the facility or otherwise come into
direct contact with the animals confined in the operation.
Animal quantities equivalent to 1,000 AU are 1,000 slaughter
and feeder cattle; 700 mature dairy cattle; 2,500 swine each
weighing more than 55 pounds; 30,000 laying hens or broilers
(b)
(4)
215. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:652
AGRICULTURAL USES, NONINTENSIVE — Any agricultural use that is
other than intensive agricultural use, as defined, but may include retail
sale of agricultural products as an accessory use.
AGRICULTURE — The production, keeping or maintenance, for sale,
lease or personal use, of plants and animals useful to man, including
but not limited to forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy
animals and dairy products and poultry and poultry products; livestock,
including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules or goats or
any mutations or hybrids thereof, including the breeding and grazing
of any or all of such animals; bees and apiary products; fur animals;
trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts
and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental and greenhouse
products; or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry
management program.
AIRPORT — Any area of land or water which is used or intended to
be used for the landing and takeoff of aircraft, and any appurtenant
areas which are used or intended to be used for airport buildings or air
navigation facilities or rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings
and facilities thereon.
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare, other than a minor street, which
affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and is
not intended for general traffic circulation.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, any change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the existing facilities, or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height,
or the moving from one location or position to another.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL — Any change in the supporting members
of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers,
tall steeples, light poles and similar alternative design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas on
towers.
AMENDMENT — A change, which includes revisions to the zoning text
and/or the Official Zoning Map, and the authority for any amendment
lies solely with the Board of Commissioners.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A building used for the treatment, housing or
boarding of small domestic animals, such as dogs, cats, rabbits and
birds or fowl, by a veterinarian.
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, rods, discs, panels, flat panels,
dishes, whips, or other similar devices used for the transmission or
reception of wireless signals. An antenna may consist of an
omnidirectional antenna (rod), directional antenna (panel), parabolic
(if a facility uses a liquid manure system); and 100,000 laying
hens or broilers (if a facility uses continuous overflow
watering).
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:653
antenna (disc) or any other wireless antenna.[Amended 10-24-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-04]
ANTENNA HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the base
of the antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of
the structure. If the support structure is on a sloped grade, then the
average between the highest and lowest grades shall be used in
calculating the antenna height.216
ANTENNA, SATELLITE DISH — A parabolic or dish-shaped antenna,
or any other apparatus or device that is designed for the purpose of
receiving electromagnetic or other types of signals.
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit within a multiple dwelling. This
classification includes apartments in apartment houses, bachelor
apartments, studio apartments and kitchenette apartments. Accessory
apartments and conversion apartments, as defined herein, shall not be
included in the classification.
APARTMENT, ACCESSORY — An independent dwelling unit
incorporated within an existing single-family detached dwelling without
any substantial external modification.
APARTMENT, CONVERSION — An existing dwelling unit that is or was
converted to a dwelling for more than one family without substantially
altering the exterior of the building.
APARTMENT, EFFICIENCY OR STUDIO — A single unit providing
complete independent living facilities for one or more persons,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation, but not including separate room(s) for sleeping.
APARTMENT, GARDEN — A three-story multifamily dwelling,
containing one-story dwelling units, having a common means of access.
APARTMENT HOUSE — See "dwelling, multifamily."
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who
has filed an application, including his heirs, successors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior to
the start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for approval of a subdivision plat or plan or for the approval
of a development plan.
APPOINTING AUTHORITY — The Lower Allen Township Board of
Commissioners, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
AREA, BUILDING — See "building area."
AREA, GROSS LAND — The gross land area of any development parcel
or parcels, including the area contained within the property line and the
216. Editor’s Note: The definition of “antenna support structure,” which immediately followed,
was repealed 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04.
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:654
ultimate right-of-way line. The area within the right-of-way is computed
as part of the gross land area.
AREA, LOT — The area contained within the property lines of a lot or
as shown on a subdivision plan, excluding space within any street, but
including the area of any easement.
AREA, NET — The net land area of any development parcel, including
only the area contained within the property line and the ultimate rightof-
way line. The area within the right-of-way (public or private) is not
computed as part of the net land area.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partially or wholly
below ground level. This portion is not a completed structure and
serves as a substructure or foundation for a building. A basement
shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement if
the vertical distance between the ceiling and the average level of the
adjoining ground is more than five feet.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — A home occupation
providing, for compensation, sleeping accommodations and breakfast
for transient guests (see also "home occupation"). Bed-and-breakfast
establishments as a principal use shall be defined as a boarding home.
BILLBOARD — A sign displaying changeable advertising copy which
pertains to a business, organization, event, person, place, service or
product not principally located or sold on the premises upon which
said sign is located, and shall include public service messages, political
campaign advertisements and other noncommercial speech.
BLOCK — An area of land bounded by streets.
BOARD — The Lower Allen Township Zoning Hearing Board.
BOARDING HOME — A building arranged or used for the lodging,
with or without meals, of either transient or permanent residents for
compensation. This definition includes rooming houses, lodging houses
and bed-and-breakfast establishments operated as a principal use.
BUFFER YARD — See "yard, buffer."
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or
walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals or chattels, including covered porches, decks and patios,
whether enclosed or unenclosed, storage/utility sheds.
BUILDING AREA — The total of the areas taken on a horizontal plane
at the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory
buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building surrounded by open space on the
same lot.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — That portion of a lot located within the
minimum prescribed front, rear and side yard setbacks and/or required
distances between structures.
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:655
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the
average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the
building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of
mansard roofs and to the mean height between the eaves and ridge for
gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal
plane and a vertical plane that coincides with the exterior surface
of a building or structure on any side. In the case of a cantilevered
or projected section of a building, except overhanging eaves, gutters
and cornices, the vertical plane will coincide with the most projected
surface.
BUILDING OR STRUCTURE SETBACK LINE — A line within a lot
which is equidistant from a lot line and which represents the minimum
separation distance between the property line and the building line as
determined by the yard requirements of this chapter.
BUILDING PERMIT — Written permission issued by the proper
municipal authority for construction activity regulated by the
Pennsylvania UCC, as amended by municipal ordinance..
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building or, where the context so indicates,
a group of buildings in which is conducted the principal use of the lot
on which such building is located.
BUILDING SUPPLY ESTABLISHMENT — A commercial establishment
storing or offering for sale building supplies, home improvement
materials and similar goods.
CAMPGROUND — A parcel of land used by campers for seasonal,
recreational or other similar temporary living purposes, in buildings
of a movable, temporary or seasonal nature, such as cabins, tents or
shelters.
CARPORT — A covered space, open on at least three sides, for the
storage of one or more vehicles and accessory to a principal or
accessory building.
CARTWAY — That portion of a street or alley which is improved,
designed or intended for vehicular use.
CELLAR — A story partly underground and having more than 1/2 of its
clear height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar
shall not be considered in determining the maximum number of stories.
CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the
deceased, including a columbarium and mausoleum when operated in
conjunction with the cemetery and within its boundaries.
CENTRAL PUBLIC SPACE — An area in the core neighborhood of a
TND development that includes either public recreation land, common
open space, or a combination of both.
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:656
CHURCH — A building or structure or groups of buildings or structures
which by design and construction are primarily intended for the
conducting of organized religious services and accessory uses.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
or driveway intersections. It is defined by lines of sight, measured at a
driver eye height of 3.5 feet, between points at a given distance from
the intersection of the streets' center lines.
CLUB AND/OR LODGE — A building and/or structure utilized as a
private club offering food and/or drink privileges.
CLUSTER — A development design technique that concentrates
buildings on a part of a site to allow the remaining land to be used for
recreation, common open space and preservation of environmentally
sensitive areas.
CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more WCFs, including
antennas, on an existing tower-based WCF, or on any structure that
already supports at least one nontower WCF.[Added 10-24-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-04]
COMMERCIAL MOBILE SERVICE — Any mobile service (as defined in
Section 153 of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended)
that is provided for profit and makes interconnected service available
to the public or to such classes of eligible users as to be effectively
available to a substantial portion of the public. It includes but is not
limited to personal communications services (PCS), cellular
radiotelephone service and paging.
COMMERCIAL, REGIONAL — A use containing a wide range of retail
and service establishments, having one or more anchor stores, which
draws its clientele from a forty-five-mile driving radius.
COMMON CARRIER — Any person engaged as a common carrier for
hire, in interstate or foreign communications by wire or radio or in
interstate or foreign radio transmission of energy, but a person engaged
in radio broadcasting shall not, insofar as such person is so engaged,
be deemed a common carrier.
COMMON ELEMENTS — Land amenities, parts of buildings, central
services and utilities and any other elements and facilities owned and
used by all unit owners and designated as common elements. These
elements may include, but are not limited to:
The land on which the building is located and portions of the
building which are not included in a unit;
(1)
The foundation, structural parts, supports, main walls, roofs,
basements, halls, corridors, lobbies, stairways, entrances and exits
of the building;
(2)
(3) The yards, parking area and driveways;
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:657
COMMON OPEN SPACE — See "open space, common."
COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION — A homeowners' association organized
to own, maintain and operate common facilities and to enhance and
protect their common interests.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted, and approved by the Board of
Commissioners, in a particular Zoning District upon demonstration by
an applicant that such use in a specified location will comply with all
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of the use as
specified in this chapter.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for
common ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real estate
is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common
elements are vested in the unit owners.
CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION — The community association which
administers and maintains the common property and common elements
of a condominium.
CONFERENCE CENTER — A facility that is constructed for and
devoted to meetings and meeting space.
CONSERVATION AREAS — Environmentally sensitive and valuable
lands protected from any activity that would significantly alter their
ecological integrity, balance or character, except in cases of overriding
public interest. Such areas include wetlands, floodplains, steep-sloped
lands and heavily wooded areas.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a structure,
including the placement of manufactured (mobile) homes.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — A series of
improvements on a parcel of land used to provide housing, boarding
and health care for persons of retirement status, extending from
independent living to skilled nursing accommodations, whether by
rental or contract for services, including, but not limited to, facilities
for the following specific uses:
Portions of the land and building used exclusively for the
management, operation or maintenance of the common elements;
(4)
(5) Installations of all central services and utilities;
All other elements of the building necessary or convenient to its
existence, management, operation, maintenance and safety or
normally in common use; and
(6)
(7) Such other facilities as are designated as common elements.
(1) Apartment residences.
(2) Room residences.
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:658
CONVENIENCE STORE — Any retail establishment offering for sale
prepackaged food products, household items, energy products and
other goods commonly associated with the same and having a gross
floor area of less than 5,000 square feet.
CORE NEIGHBORHOOD — The area in a traditional neighborhood
development (TND) that has been designated as such on the TND
Overall Master Plan, and that contains a mix of residential, commercial
and public uses in accordance with Article XVI, Traditional
Neighborhood Development (TND) Overlay District, of this chapter.
COUNTRY CLUB — See "golf course."
COUNTY — The County of Cumberland, Pennsylvania.
(3) Attached and detached single-family dwellings.
(4) Health-care housing.
Accessory use facilities designed primarily for the use of residents,
employees and guests:
(a) Dining facilities, including kitchens and food storage.
(b) Health-care provider offices and treatment facilities.
Fitness facilities, including but not limited to swimming pools,
spas, saunas, gymnasiums, exercise equipment rooms and
supporting facilities.
(c)
Stores for retail sale of goods and services for the convenience
of residents, including but not limited to banking, pharmacy,
dry cleaning, laundry, food stuffs, sundries, reading materials,
gifts, beauty salons and barber shops.
(d)
(e) Religious worship facilities.
(f) Auditoriums and other group meeting facilities.
(g) Outdoor exercise trails and athletic facilities for residents' use.
(h) Library and computer facilities.
(5)
(6) Administrative offices and conference rooms.
Continuing care retirement community (CCRC) support facilities as
accessory uses:
Property maintenance facilities such as garages, trade shops,
material storage, repair equipment, landscaping equipment.
(a)
(b) Laundry facilities.
(c) Trash storage facilities.
(7)
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:659
COURT — An unoccupied open space, other than a yard, on the same
lot with a building, which is bounded on two or more sides by the walls
of such building.
COURT, INNER — A court enclosed on all sides by exterior walls of a
building or by exterior walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable
and which does not extend to a street, alley, yard or other outer court.
COURT, OUTER — A court enclosed on not more than three sides by
exterior walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable, with one side
or end open to a street, driveway, alley or yard.
COVERAGE, IMPERVIOUS — That portion or percentage of the lot area
covered by all impervious materials.
CREMATORIUM — A facility utilized for cremation purposes.
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, intended to
furnish access of pedestrians.
CULVERT — A structure with appurtenant works which carries a
stream or drainage water underground or through an embankment or
fill.
CURB — A stone or concrete boundary usually marking the edge of the
roadway or paved area.
CURB CUT — The opening along the curbline at which point vehicles
and/or pedestrians may enter or leave the roadway.
CUT — An excavation; the difference between a point on the original
ground and a designated point of lower elevation of the final grade;
also, the material removed in excavation.
DAY-CARE FACILITIES, CHILD/ADULT —
DECISION — The final adjudication of the Zoning Hearing Board.
DECK — A flat, floored, roofless area adjoining a dwelling unit.
DAY-CARE FACILITY — A facility not in a private residence,
enrolling four or more children or adults in need of supervised day
care and where tuition, fees or other forms of compensation for
care are charged. Such facility shall employ licensed personnel and
shall be licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(1)
FAMILY DAY-CARE FACILITY — A residence offering baby-sitting
services and day-care services for four to six children or adults
unrelated to the resident household and meeting all applicable
licensing/registration requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare.
(2)
GROUP DAY-CARE FACILITY — A residence offering baby-sitting
services and day-care services for seven to 11 children or adults
unrelated to the resident household and meeting all applicable
licensing/registration requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare.
(3)
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:660
DENSITY — A term used to express the allowable number of dwelling
units per acre of land.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
storage of equipment and materials, filling, grading, paving,
excavation, mining, dredging or drilling operations and the subdivision
of land.
DEVELOPMENT, CONVENTIONAL — Development other than open
space or planned residential development.
DEVELOPMENT, LOW-IMPACT (LID) — A stormwater management
approach with a basic principle that is modeled after nature: manage
rainfall at the source using uniformly distributed decentralized microscale
controls. LID's goal is to mimic a site's predevelopment hydrology
by using design techniques that infiltrate, filter, store, evaporate, and
detain runoff close to its source. Techniques are based on the premise
that stormwater management should not be seen as stormwater
disposal. Instead of conveying and managing stormwater in end-ofpipe
facilities located at the bottom of drainage areas, LID addresses
stormwater through smaller landscape features located at the lot level.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures,
intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking
facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phrase
"provisions of the development plan," when used in this chapter, shall
mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DEVELOPMENT, PLANNED RESIDENTIAL — An area of land
controlled by a landowner to be developed as a single entity for a
number of dwelling units or combination of residential and
nonresidential uses, the development plan for which does not
correspond in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling or use, density, or intensity,
lot coverage and required open space to the regulations established in
any one district created from time to time under the provisions of this
chapter.
DISPLAY AREA, OUTDOOR — An outdoor area of a tract utilized for
purposes of displaying articles for sale as part of a retail establishment,
such as the display of nursery stock, vehicular sales and farm
equipment sales. Display areas shall not include outdoor storage as
defined herein.
(1) NET DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per net acre.
(2) GROSS DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre.
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:661
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS) — Network of spatially
separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.[Added
10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
DISTRIBUTION CENTER — An establishment engaged in the receipt,
storage and distribution of goods, products, cargo and materials.
DRAINAGE —
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any ditch, gutter, culvert, storm sewer or
other structure designed, intended or constructed for the purpose of
diverting surface waters from or carrying surface waters off streets,
public rights-of-way, parks, recreational areas or any part of any
subdivision or contiguous land areas.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Pipes, swales, natural features and man-made
improvements designed to carry drainage.
DRIVE-THROUGH EATING ESTABLISHMENT — An eating
establishment where patrons may place orders and/or be served in their
automobiles.
DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE FACILITY — An establishment which, by
design, physical facilities or service or by packaging procedures,
encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods or
be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles.
DRIVEWAY — A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a
residential parking space, garage, dwelling or other structure.
DRIVEWAY, SHARED — a private driveway servicing two residential
units of occupancy and designed to the standards of this chapter.
DUMP — A lot or land or part thereof used primarily for disposal
by abandonment, dumping, burial or other means and for whatever
purpose of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery,
vehicles or parts thereof or waste material of any kind.
DWELLING — A building or structure designed for living quarters
for one or more families, including industrialized housing and
manufactured (mobile) homes which are supported either by a
foundation or are otherwise permanently attached to the land, but
not including hotels, boarding- or rooming houses or other
accommodations used for transient occupancy. This definition of
"dwelling" shall also include permanently attached model homes
(1) Surface water runoff; and/or
The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains,
grading or other means which include runoff controls to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction of
development, the means for preserving the water supply and the
prevention or alleviation of flooding.
(2)
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:662
intended for residential purposes upon the completion of the
development.
DWELLING, ACCESSORY — A second dwelling unit either in or added
to an existing single-family detached dwelling, or in an accessory
structure on the same lot as the primary dwelling, for use as a
complete, independent living facility with provision within the
accessory dwelling for cooking, eating, sanitation and sleeping. Such a
dwelling is an accessory use to the main dwelling.
DWELLING, AGE-RESTRICTED — A dwelling authorized under the
federal Fair Housing Act, as amended by the Housing for Older Persons
Act of 1995, which requires that the dwellings be limited to those
intended for, and solely occupied by persons 55 years of age or older.
DWELLING GROUP — A group of two or more single-family, two-family
or multifamily dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership.
DWELLING, INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING — Any structure designed
primarily for residential occupancy, except a manufactured (mobile)
home, which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or
assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and
installation on the building site in such a manner that all concealed
parts or processes of manufacture cannot be inspected at the site
without disassembly, damage or destruction.
DWELLING, MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME — A transportable,
single-family detached dwelling intended for permanent occupancy,
contained in one unit or in two or more units designed to be joined into
one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing,
which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations and which is
constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation.
For Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) floodplain
management purposes, this definition includes park trailers, travel
trailers and other similar vehicles located on site for greater than 180
consecutive days.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building used by three or more
families living independently of each other and doing their own
cooking, including apartment houses.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, ATTACHED (TOWNHOUSE) — A
dwelling containing at least three but not more than six dwelling units
attached side by side by the use of a common wall, with end units
having a side yard, or front yard for corner lots..
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED — A building used by one
family, having only one dwelling unit and two side yards, or, for corner
lots, a side yard and a front yard, and shall include family care facilities.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY, ATTACHED — A building used by two
families, with one dwelling unit arranged over the other and having two
side yards, or, for corner lots, a side yard and a front yard.
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:663
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY OR TWIN, SIDE-BY-SIDE — A building used
by two families, with one dwelling unit arranged next to the other, and
each unit having one side yard, or front yard for corner lots.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete independent
living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions
for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
DWELLING, ZERO-LOT-LINE — A single-family detached dwelling with
the building positioned on a lot in such a manner that one or more of
the building's sides rest directly on a lot line.
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more property rights by the property
owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another
person or entity.
EATING ESTABLISHMENT — Any form of restaurant and/or tavern
open to the public, dispensing food and drink.
EATING ESTABLISHMENT, FAST-FOOD — An establishment that
serves prepared food generally packaged in wrappers and/or
disposable containers. Such food can be consumed either on or off site.
EATING ESTABLISHMENT, FREESTANDING — An eating
establishment which wholly occupies a given building.
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION — An assemblage of equipment, for purposes
other than generation or utilization, through which bulk electric energy
is passed for the purpose of switching or modifying its characteristics
to meet the needs of the general public. This definition includes
transformer substations.
ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES —
Electric public utilities transmission and distribution facilities,
including substations.
EMERGENCY — A condition that:[Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-04]
ENGINEERING LAND SURVEYS —
Constitutes a clear and immediate danger to the health, welfare, or
safety of the public; or
(1)
Has caused or is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be
unusable and result in loss of the services provided.
(2)
Surveys for the development of any tract of land, including the
incidental design of related improvements, such as line and grade
extension of roads, sewers and grading, but not requiring
independent engineering judgment; provided, however, that tract
perimeter surveys shall be the function of the professional land
surveyor.
(1)
Surveys for the determination of the configuration or contour of the
earth's surface or the position of fixed objects thereon or related
(2)
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:664
ENGINEER, MUNICIPAL (TOWNSHIP) — A registered professional
engineer in Pennsylvania, designated by the Township to perform the
duties of Engineer as herein specified.
ENGINEER, PROFESSIONAL — An individual licensed and registered
under the laws of the commonwealth to engage in the practice of
engineering. A professional engineer may not practice land surveying
unless licensed as set forth in P.L. 534, No. 230;217 however, a
professional engineer may perform engineering land surveys.
ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS — The Engineering Specifications
of Lower Allen Township regulating the installation of any required
improvements or for any facility installed by any owner, subject to
public use.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA — An area with one or more of
the following environmental characteristics:
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments,
or the wearing away of the land surface by water, wind, ice and gravity.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed. It shall also include the conditions
resulting therefrom.
thereto by means of measuring lines and angles and applying the
principals of mathematics, photogrammetry or other measurement
methods.
Geodetic or cadastral surveys, underground survey and
hydrographic survey.
(3)
(4) Sedimentation and erosion control surveys.
(5) Surveys for the determination of the quantities of materials.
(6) Tests for water percolation in soils.
Surveys for the preparation of plans and specifications and
estimates of proposed work as described herein.
(7)
(1) Steep slopes over 25%.
(2) Floodplain (floodway and flood-fringe).
Soils classified as highly erodible, subject to erosion or of
calcareous material as identified within the Soil Survey of
Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
(3)
(4) Wetlands and hydric soils.
(5) Mature woodlands.
217. Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 151.1 et seq.
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:665
EXCHANGE ACCESS — The offering of access to telephone exchange
services or facilities for the purpose of the originator or terminator of
telephone toll services.
EXISTING CONDITIONS — Land use present at the time a drainage/
stormwater management plan is submitted. However, a more
impervious existing condition can be used if the developer can
document that a more impervious condition was present at the time the
Township adopted this chapter. For computation purposes, "meadow"
or "good woods/forest" shall be used for existing pervious conditions.
For existing areas consisting of a combination of pervious and
impervious cover, either a composite of "meadow," "good woods/forest"
and "impervious/parking" shall be used or the various precomputed
composite covers for developed areas shall be used.
FAMILY — A group of individuals not necessarily related by blood,
marriage, adoption or guardianship, living together in a dwelling unit
as a single housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping
management plan based on an intentionally structured relationship
providing organization and stability.
FAMILY-CARE FACILITY — A facility providing shelter, counseling and
other rehabilitative services in a family-like environment for four to
six residents, plus such minimum supervisory personnel as may be
required to meet standards of the licensing agency. Residents may
not be legally related to the facility operators or supervisors and, by
reason of mental or physical disability, chemical or alcohol dependency
or family or school adjustment problems, require a minimal level of
supervision but do not require medical or nursing care or general
supervision. A family-care facility must be licensed and/or approved by
the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare and may include uses
such as foster homes, community residential alternative facilities or
home individual programs. A family-care facility shall be considered a
single-family detached dwelling and be permitted as such.
FARM — A tract of land of at least 10 acres in size which is principally
used for agricultural uses, such as the production of cash crops or
livestock or poultry farming. Such farms may include a farm dwelling
and accessory uses, buildings and structures.
FARM-RELATED OCCUPATION — A business accessory to and
operated on a farm in accordance with provisions as set forth herein.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.[Added 10-24-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-04]
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of any material or
combination of materials erected to enclose, screen or separate areas.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material
is placed, pushed, dumped, transported or moved to a new location
above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped
surface and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom; the
difference in elevation between a point on the original ground and a
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:666
designated point of higher elevation on the final grade; or the material
used to make a fill.
FINANCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Establishments such as banks and
savings and loans, credit agencies, investment companies, brokers and
dealers of securities and commodities, security and commodity
exchanges, insurance agents, lessors, lessees, buyers, sellers, agents
and developers of real estate.
FITNESS CENTER — An establishment that provides facilities for
aerobic exercises, running and jogging, exercise equipment, game
courts, swimming facilities and saunas, showers, massage rooms and
lockers.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD, BASE (ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD) — A flood volume likely
to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent chance of
occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
FLOOD ELEVATION, REGULATORY — The one-hundred-year-flood
elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
FLOOD-FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside the floodway.
FLOODPLAIN —
FLOODPLAIN ENCROACHMENT — Any activity that occurs within a
designated floodplain.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to proposed or existing structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The designated area of a floodplain required to carry
and discharge floodwaters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of
this chapter, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of
the one-hundred-year magnitude without increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot at any point.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS (GFA) — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of
the floors of a building or structure and its accessory buildings on the
same lot, excluding cellar and basement floor areas not used as primary
living and sleeping quarters, but including the area of roofed porches
and roofed terraces. All dimensions shall be measured between exterior
faces of walls.
A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or
watercourse, which is subject to partial or complete inundation; or
(1)
An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any surface.
(2)
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — The aggregate of the horizontal
areas of all rooms used for habitation, such as living room, dining
(1)
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:667
FLOOR ELEVATION, LOWEST — The lowest floor of the lowest fully
enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant
partially enclosed area, used solely for vehicle parking, building access
and incidental storage, in an area other than a basement area is not
considered the lowest floor of a building, provided that such space
is not designed or built so that the structure is in violation of the
applicable nonelevation requirements of this chapter.
FOOD PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment in which
food is processed or otherwise prepared for eventual human
consumption but not consumed on the premises.
FOREST — An area containing mature woodlands, woodlands and/or
young woodlands.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberland, when
practiced in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through
developing, cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for
commercial purposes, which does not involve any land development.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION — An area of land or building used by
a fraternal association of persons for meetings and routine socializing
and recreation that is limited to members and their occasional guests,
but not including members of the general public. These uses are
restricted to those not conducted primarily for gain, although a
restaurant may be operated primarily to serve members and their
guests. This use shall not include boardinghouse, a tavern, restaurant
open to the general public, or an auditorium, unless that particular use
is permitted in that district and the applicable requirements of that use
are met.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between elevation of the design
high-water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, diversion ridge or
other stormwater management facility. The space is required as a safety
margin in a pond or basin.
FUNERAL HOME — A building used for the preparation of the
deceased for burial and display of the deceased and rituals connected
room, kitchen and bedroom, but not including hallways, stairways,
cellars, attics, service rooms or utility rooms, bathroom, closets
nor unheated areas such as enclosed porches nor rooms without at
least one window or skylight opening onto an outside yard or court.
At least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a
ceiling height of not less than seven feet, and the floor area of that
part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall
not be considered as part of the habitable floor area.
FLOOR AREA, NET RETAIL — All that space relegated to use
by the customer and the retail employee to consummate retail
sales, including display areas used to indicate the variety of goods
available for the customer, but not to include office space, storage
space and other general administrative areas.
(2)
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:668
therewith before burial or cremation. This definition includes
mortuaries.
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY —
GALLERY — A structure for housing the visual arts either for display or
for retail sales purposes.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An enclosed or covered space for the storage of
one or more vehicles or vessels, provided that no business, occupation
or service is conducted for profit therein nor space therein for more
than one vehicle or vessel is leased to a nonresident of the premises.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any structure, other than a private garage, which
is used for storage, repair, rental, servicing or supplying of gasoline or
oil to motor vehicles for compensation.
GARBAGE — All table refuse, animal and vegetable matter, offal from
meat, fish and fowl, vegetables and fruits and parts thereof and all
other articles and materials ordinarily used for food, for humans or for
domestic animals and which have become unfit for such use or which
are discarded for any reason.
GARDEN APARTMENT — See "apartment, garden."
GARDENING — The cultivation of herbs, fruits, flowers or vegetables,
excluding the keeping of livestock.
GLARE — Excessive brightness that may be caused by either direct or
indirect viewing of a light source
GOLF COURSE — A tract of land improved with tees, greens, fairways
and hazards for playing at least nine holes of the game of golf, that
may include a clubhouse with dining facilities (excluding drive-through
facilities), swimming pool, tennis courts, driving range, miniature golf
and other customarily and incidental accessory uses and structures.
GOLF DRIVING RANGE — A location, either at a golf course or at a
separate location, where players can practice by hitting balls provided
with their various clubs in order to improve or warm up.
GOVERNING BODY — The Lower Allen Township Board of
Commissioners, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
GRADE, ESTABLISHED — The elevation of the center line of the
streets, as officially established by the municipal authorities.
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surfaces of lawns, walks and
roads brought to grades as shown on official plans or designs relating
thereto.
Right-of-way width required for the expansion of existing streets to
accommodate anticipated future traffic loads.
(1)
A right-of-way established to provide future access to or through
undeveloped land.
(2)
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:669
GREENHOUSE — A building whose roof and sides are made largely
of glass or other transparent or translucent material and in which
the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of
delicate or out-of-season plants for subsequent sale or for personal
enjoyment.
GROUND FLOOR — The floor of a building nearest the mean grade of
the front of the building.
GROUP-CARE FACILITY — A facility providing shelter, counseling and
other rehabilitative services in a family-like environment for more than
seven but fewer than 15 residents, plus such minimum supervisory
personnel as may be required to meet standards of the licensing
agency. Residents may not be legally related to the facility operators or
supervisors and, by reason of mental or physical disability, chemical or
alcohol dependency or family or school adjustment problems, require a
minimal level of supervision but do not require medical or nursing care
or general supervision. A group-care facility must be licensed and/or
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare.
HALFWAY HOUSE — A residence for inmates on release from more
restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more
restrictive custodial confinement, wherein supervision, rehabilitation
and counseling are provided to mainstream residents back into society,
enabling them to live independently. Such facility must be leased and
operated by the Pennsylvania Department of Corrections for such
services.
HAZARDOUS WASTE —
Any garbage, refuse, sludge from an industrial or other wastewater
treatment plant, sludge from a water supply treatment plant or air
pollution control facility and other discarded material, including
solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting
from municipal, commercial, industrial, institutional, mining or
agricultural operations and from community activities or any
combination of the above, which, because of its quantity,
concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics
may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality
or an increase in morbidity in either an individual or the total
population or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to
human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed, but shall not
include coal refuse as defined in the Act of September 24, 1968
(P.L. 1040, No. 318), known as the "Coal Refuse Disposal Control
Act."218
(1)
Hazardous waste shall not include coal refuse as defined in the Act
of September 24, 1968 (P.L. 1040, No. 318), known as the "Coal
Refuse Disposal Control Act."219 Hazardous waste shall not include
(2)
218. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq.
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:670
HEARING — An administrative proceeding conducted by the Zoning
Hearing Board in accordance with Article XXVII herein.
HEIGHT OF A TOWER-BASED WCF — The vertical distance measured
from the ground level, including any base pad, to the highest point on
a tower-based WCF, including antennas mounted on the tower and any
other appurtenances.[Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — See "building height."
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory business or commercial activity,
conducted entirely within a residential dwelling by one or more of the
permanent residents, that is clearly incidental and secondary to the
residential use.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — A community association, other
than a condominium association, that is organized in a development in
which individual owners share common interests and responsibilities
for costs and upkeep of common open space or facilities.
treatment sludge from coal mine drainage treatment plants,
disposal of which is being carried on pursuant to the Act of June 22,
1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as "The Clean Streams Law,"220
solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage or solid or dissolved
materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges which
are point sources subject to permits under Section 402 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 U.S.C.
§ 1342), or source, special nuclear or by-product material as
defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C.A. §§ 2011
through 2394).
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the United States Department of Interior)
or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register.
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
(2)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places, at either
the county or Township level, that has been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
(b) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior.
(3)
219. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq.
220. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:671
HORTICULTURE — The use of land for the growing or production
for income of fruits, vegetables, flowers, nursery stock, including
ornamental plants and trees, and cultured sod.
HOSPITAL — An institution specializing in giving clinical, temporary
and emergency services of a medical or surgical nature to human
patients and injured persons and licensed by state law to provide
facilities and services in surgery, obstetrics and general medical
practice.
HOTEL — A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the
general public and providing additional services such as restaurants,
meeting rooms and recreational facilities.
HYDRIC SOILS — A soil that is saturated, flooded or ponded long
enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions that
favor the growth and regeneration of hydrophytic vegetation [United
States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Soil Conservation Service
(SCS) 1985, as amended by the National Technical Committee for
Hydric Soils (NTCHS) in December 1986].
IMPERVIOUS CONDITIONS — A surface that generally prevents the
infiltration of water into the ground.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — See "coverage, impervious."
IMPERVIOUS MATERIAL — Any substance placed on a lot which covers
the surface in such fashion as to prevent natural absorption of surface
water by the earth so covered. The following items shall be deemed to
be impervious material: buildings, concrete sidewalks, paved driveways
and parking areas, swimming pools and other nonporous structures or
materials.
IMPROVEMENTS — Any man-made, immovable item which becomes
part of or placed upon or is affixed to real estate.
INCINERATOR — An approved device in which combustible material,
other than garbage, is burned to ashes.
INDOOR RECREATIONAL FACILITY — Any establishment which
provides recreation, amusement or entertainment for the general
public within a completely enclosed structure for a fee or admission
charge, including but not limited to theaters, dance halls, bowling
alleys, billiard and pool halls, amusement arcades and spas or health
clubs where the principal use includes a gymnasium, exercise room,
swimming pool or other sports facility.
INDUSTRY — The manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembly
or treatment of materials, articles or merchandise.
INSTITUTION — A building or grounds, all or a portion of which is used
by persons who occupy the buildings for a common purpose, including
but not limited to hospitals, convents, school dormitories, correctional
institutions, college campuses, nursing homes and the educational,
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:672
administrative and/or recreational facilities of such organizations as the
YMCA, YWCA, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts and Boys Clubs.
JUNK — Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or
not stored or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage,
storage, baling, disposal or other use or disposition. "Junk" includes but
is not limited to vehicles, tires, vehicle parts, equipment, paper, rags,
metal, glass, building materials, household appliances, brush, wood and
lumber.
JUNKYARD — A lot, land or structure or part thereof used primarily
for the collecting, storage and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal
or reclaimable material or for the collection, dismantling, storage and
salvaging of machinery or two or more unregistered, inoperable motor
vehicles or other types of junk. Two or more unregistered and/or
inoperable farm vehicles/equipment utilized solely for on-site
replacement parts by the owner of the farm shall not be considered a
junkyard.
KENNEL — A structure on any lot on which animals (except livestock,
horses or poultry) are kept, boarded, raised, bred, treated or trained for
a fee, including but not limited to dog or cat kennels. For the purpose of
this definition, the production of more than two litters in any calendar
year shall be considered breeding.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LANDFILL — A disposal site in which refuse and earth or other suitable
cover material are deposited and compacted in alternative layers of
specified depth in accordance with a state-approved plan and permit.
Such use shall not include the disposal or processing of hazardous or
radioactive materials.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
Provisions for the exclusion of certain land development only when
such land development involves the addition of an accessory
building, including farm buildings, on a lot or lots subordinate to an
existing principal building.
(3)
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:673
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition); a lessee, if he is
authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner; or
other persons having a proprietary interest in land.
LANE — Private access to a single lot and/or a vehicular drive
necessary to the reasonable function of a lot.
LAUNDRY — A business premises equipped with individual clothes
washing and/or drying machines for the use of retail customers,
exclusive of laundry facilities provided as an accessory use.
LIGHTING —
LIVE-WORK UNIT — A building or portion of a building that includes
commercial use, such as a shop, studio, office or other place of business
in combination with a dwelling unit located above such place of
business. A person or persons other than the proprietor of the business
may occupy a live-work unit.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street area on the same lot with a building
or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of
a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or
materials and which abuts on a street or other appropriate means of
access.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
LOT AREA — The area of horizontal plane bounded by the vertical
planes within the front, side and rear lot lines. For the purposes of
calculating the minimum lot area necessary to comply with the
requirements of this chapter, the following areas shall be excluded from
such calculation:
DIFFUSED — That form of lighting wherein the light passes from
the source through a translucent cover or shade.
(1)
DIRECT or FLOOD — That form of lighting wherein the source is
visible and the light is distributed directly from it to the object to
be illuminated.
(2)
INDIRECT — That form of lighting wherein the light source is
entirely hidden, the light being projected to a suitable reflector
from which it is reflected to the object to be illuminated.
(3)
(1) Any area within a street or other transportation right-of-way; and
Any area within a right-of-way used for gas, oil, natural gas, electric
or communication transmission facilities, whether below or above
ground, that do not serve the lot traversed.
(2)
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:674
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting two street rights-of-way at their
intersection, in which the average center lines of such roads along the
frontage of the lot form an interior angle of less than 135°.
LOT, DEPTH OF — The average horizontal distance between the front
and rear lot lines.
LOT, FLAG — A lot not meeting frontage requirements and where
access to the public road is by a narrow private driveway or right-ofway.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — A line dividing one lot from another lot or from a street or
alley.
LOT, MINIMUM WIDTH — The minimum lot width at the building
setback line.
LOT, MULTIPLE FRONTAGE — A lot having frontage on more than one
street.
LOT, MULTIPLE USE — A lot that contains more than one principal
nonresidential use.
LOT, NONCONFORMING — See "nonconforming lot."
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which has been recorded in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
LOT, REVERSE-FRONTAGE — A lot extending between and having
frontage on an arterial or collector street and on a local or minor
Township street and with vehicular access solely from the latter.
LOT, SINGLE-USE — A lot that contains no more than one principal
nonresidential use.
LOT, SINGLE-USE COMMERCIAL, LARGE — A single lot that meets the
criteria in § 220-128A(1).
LOT LINE, FRONT — A lot line separating the front of the lot
from the street other than an alley. On a corner lot, all lot lines
which abut a street other than an alley shall be front lot lines. On
a through lot, the front lot line shall be the lot line which abuts the
street providing the primary access to the lot.
(1)
LOT LINE, REAR — A lot line which does not intersect a front lot
line and is most distant from and most parallel to a front lot line.
For the purposes of this chapter, where the side lot lines of an
interior lot meet in a point, the rear lot line shall be assumed to be
a line not less than 10 feet long, drawn within the lot between the
two side lot lines, which is parallel to or, in the event of a curved
front lot line, equidistant from the front lot line.
(2)
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line.
Corner lots shall have a side lot line opposite each front lot line.
(3)
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:675
LOT, SINGLE-USE COMMERCIAL, STANDARD — A single lot that
meets the criteria in § 220-128A(2).
LOT, THROUGH — A lot abutting two road rights-of-way, which is not
located at the intersection of such two roads.
LOT WIDTH — In the case of an interior lot, lot width shall be the
horizontal distance, measured at the minimum building setback line,
between the side lot lines. In the case of a corner lot, lot width shall
be the horizontal distance, measured at the minimum building setback
line, between each front lot line and its opposite side lot line. Such
distance shall be measured along a straight line which is at right angles
to the axis of a lot.
Street
LOT TYPES DIAGRAM
MALL — A shopping center that includes a commercial complex
containing various retail, service, and restaurant establishments
housed in a building or series of connected buildings containing at
least 500,000 square feet of gross floor area, where the commercial
establishments may be accessed by a common internal concourse in
addition to any exterior access points. A mall may be contained within
a shopping center.[Added 10-13-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-06]
MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME DWELLING — See "dwelling,
manufactured (mobile) home."
MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile
(manufactured) home park, improved with the necessary utility
connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erections
thereon of a single manufactured (mobile) home.
MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous
parcels of land which has been so designated and improved that it
contains two or more manufactured (mobile) home lots for the
placement thereon of manufactured (mobile) homes.
MANUFACTURING — The processing and/or converting of raw
unfinished or finished materials or products or of any combination
thereof into an article or substance of a different character or for use
for a different purpose, or industries furnishing labor in the case of
manufacturing or the refinishing of manufactured articles.
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:676
MASTER DEED — A legal instrument under which title to real estate is
conveyed and by which a condominium is created and established.
MEDICAL CENTER — Establishments primarily engaged in furnishing
medical, surgical or other services to individuals, including the offices
of physicians, dentists and other health care practitioners, medical and
dental laboratories, outpatient care facilities, blood banks and oxygen
and miscellaneous types of medical supplies and services.
MINERALS — Any aggregate or mass of mineral matter, whether or
not coherent, that is extracted by surface mining. The term includes
but is not limited to limestone and dolomite, sand and gravel, rock and
stone, earth, fill, slag, iron ore, zinc ore, vermiculite and clay, but it
does not include anthracite or bituminous coal or coal refuse, except as
provided in Section 4 of the Noncoal Surface Mining Conservation and
Reclamation Act, No. 1984-219, as amended,221 or peat.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but
not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof,
the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support or the
removal or change of any required means of egress or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements, nor shall minor
repairs include the addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation
of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil,
waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other
work affecting public health or general safety.
MIXED USE — Occupancy of a building or land for more than one use.
MOBILE HOME — See "dwelling, manufactured (mobile) home."
MONOPOLE — A tower-based WCF which consists of a single-pole
wireless support structure, designed and erected on the ground or
on top of a structure, to support antennas and connecting
appurtenances.[Amended 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings, whether detached or in
connected units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units, with
separate entrances and designed for year-round occupancy, primarily
for transient automobile travelers, and providing for accessory offstreet
parking facilities. The term "motel" includes buildings designated
as tourist courts, tourist cabins, motor lodges and similar terms.
MUNICIPAL FACILITY — Any building, structure or use of land by
Lower Allen Township, a municipal authority/commission created by
the Lower Allen Township Board of Commissioners or the West Shore
School District.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Includes garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom
or office waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid
or contained gaseous material resulting from operation of residential,
221. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 3304.
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:677
municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from
community activities, and sludge not meeting the definition of residual
or hazardous waste from a municipal, commercial or institutional water
supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air pollution
control facility.
MUNICIPAL WASTE LANDFILL — A facility, permitted by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, for the
disposing of municipal waste.
NOISE — Any sound which is unwanted or which causes an adverse
psychological or physiological effect on human beings.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area or dimension of which was
lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter but which
fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of
use provisions of this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter
enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment
of this chapter or amendment or prior to the application of this chapter
or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such
nonconforming structures include but are not limited to nonconforming
signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions herein or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was
lawfully in existence prior to the application of this chapter or
amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
NONTOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NONTOWER
WCF) — All WCFs that are not tower-based, such as an antenna sited
on an existing utility pole, building or water tower. A nontower WCF
consists of an antenna and all related equipment.[Added 10-24-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-04]
NORTH AMERICAN INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM (NAICS),
1997 — As amended, published by the United States Office of
Management and Budget. Use categories are referenced by their
NAICS Code Number. Two-digit categories are sectors. Three-digit
categories are subsectors. Categories containing four or more digits
are industries. Unless specifically excluded, two-digit classifications
include all three-, four-, five- and six-digit classifications beginning
with the same two-digit number. Three-digit classifications include all
four-, five- and six-digit classifications beginning with the same threedigit
number. Four-digit classifications include all five- and six-digit
classifications beginning with the same four-digit number. Five-digit
classifications include all six-digit classifications beginning with the
same five-digit number. Six-digit classifications include all uses under
that number.
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:678
NURSERY, HORTICULTURE — Any lot or parcel of land used to
cultivate, propagate and grow trees, shrubs, vines and other plants,
including the buildings, structures and equipment customarily
incidental and accessory to the primary use.
NURSING/PERSONAL HEALTH CARE FACILITIES — A building with
sleeping rooms where persons are housed or lodged and furnished with
meals and nursing care for hire and which is approved for nonprofit/
profit corporations licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Public
Welfare for such use.
OBSTRUCTION — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike,
projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert, building, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting
into any channel, watercourse or flood-prone area, which may impede,
retard or change the direction of the flow of water either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by such water or is placed where
the flow of the water might carry the same downstream to the damage
of life and property.
OFFICE BUILDING — A building designed or used primarily for office
purposes, no part of which is used for manufacturing.
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL — A room or rooms used for carrying on a
profession including, but not limited to, physicians, dentists, architects,
engineers, accountants, attorneys, planners, real estate brokers and
insurance agents entitled to practice under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or similar type.
ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system designed to
eliminate sanitary sewage within the boundaries of the lot that the
system serves.
ON-LOT WATER SUPPLY — A potable supply of water used for the
consumption by a single-family user from a private well.
OPEN SPACE — The unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot
with the building, not including parking lots.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — A parcel or parcels of land or an area
of water or a combination of land and water within a development
site designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a
development, not including streets, off-street parking areas and areas
set aside for public facilities.
OUTDOOR AMUSEMENT FACILITY — An establishment which
provides outdoor recreation, amusement or entertainment to the
general public for a fee or admission charge, including but not limited
to golf courses, carriage rides and amusement rides.
PARKING GARAGE — A structure where vehicles may be stored for
short-term, daily or overnight off-street parking.
PARKING LOT OR AREA — Any lot, municipally or privately owned
for off-street parking facilities, providing for the transient storage of
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:679
automobiles or motor-driven vehicles. Such parking services may be
provided as a free service or for a fee.
PARKING SPACE — The space within a building or on a lot or parking
lot for the parking or storage of one vehicle.
PARTY WALL — A common shared wall between two separate
structures, buildings or dwelling units.
PATIO — A recreational area, usually, but not limited to, being roofless,
adjoining a dwelling unit.
PAVED AREA — That amount of land required for the location of
adequate parking spaces, driveways or other access roads. In the
computation of a paved area, the actual building area shall be excluded.
PERSON — Any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership or any similar entity.
PERSONAL-CARE BOARDING HOME — A building in which food,
shelter and personal assistance or supervision are provided for a period
exceeding 48 consecutive hours for more than three adults who are not
relatives of the operator and who require assistance or supervision in
such matters as dressing, bathing, diet or medication prescribed for
self-administration. Residents shall consist primarily of elderly persons
55 years of age or older.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Establishments primarily
engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his or
her apparel.222
PERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that generally permits the infiltration
of water into the ground.
PLACE OF ASSEMBLY — Any room or space used by people for
religious, educational, recreational, political, social or amusement
purposes, or for the consumption of food or drink.
PLAN, COMPREHENSIVE — The Development Policy Plan (Master
Plan) and/or Future Land Use Plan and/or Official Map or other such
plans or portions thereof as may be adopted pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.
PLANNED BUSINESS CENTER — A group of offices planned and
designed to function as a unit on the parcel(s) on which it is located,
with internal vehicle circulation (public or private) and off-street
parking provided as an integral part of the center.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Lower Allen
Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.
222. Editor’s Note: The definitions of “personal wireless service facilities,” “personal wireless
services,” and “personal wireless services site,” which immediately followed, were
repealed 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04.
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:680
PLAN, SKETCH — An informal plan, not necessarily to exact scale,
indicating salient existing features of a tract and its surroundings and
the general layout of a proposed subdivision or land development.
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PORCH — A covered area in excess of 20 square feet in area at a front,
side or rear door of a structure.
PREMISES — Any lot, parcel or tract of land and any building
constructed thereon.
PRIVATE — Not publicly owned, operated or controlled.
PRIVATE DRIVE — See "lane."
PRODUCE STAND — A use intended for temporary duration, for the
display and retail sale of agricultural products grown and produced by
the seller.
PROFESSIONAL OCCUPATION — The practice of a profession by any
professional, including, but not limited to, attorney, physician, surgeon,
osteopath, chiropractor, dentist, optician, optometrist, chiropodist,
engineer, surveyor, architect, landscape architect, planner or similar
type, entitled to practice under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
PROFILE LINE — The profile of the center line of the finished surface of
the street, which shall be midway between the side lines of the street.
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency
(federal, state or local), including a corporation and/or board created by
law for the performance of certain specialized governmental functions.
PUBLIC/COMMUNITY SEWERAGE SYSTEM — Any sanitary sewer
collection and treatment system, whether publicly or privately owned
approved for use by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
PUBLIC/COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM — A potable supply of water
subject to either the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission
jurisdiction or other appropriate regulating agency.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes the following:
FINAL PLAT — A complete and exact subdivision or land
development plan prepared for official recording, as required by
statute, to define property rights and proposed streets and other
improvements. The definition of "final plat" shall include "minor
plat."
(1)
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A tentative subdivision or land
development plan, in lesser detail than a final plan, showing
approximate proposed street and lot layout as a basis for
consideration prior to preparation of a final plan.
(2)
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:681
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the Board of Commissioners or Planning Commission, intended to
inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance
herein.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of
July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."223
PUBLIC NOTICE — A notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing
and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing.
PUBLIC RECREATION LAND — Land dedicated to and accepted by
Lower Allen Township for recreation use by the public, in accordance
with Chapter 192, Subdivision and Land Development.
PUBLIC USE — Public and semipublic uses of a welfare and educational
nature, including but not limited to hospitals, schools, parks, churches,
cemeteries, day-care centers, historical restorations, fire stations,
municipal buildings, essential public utilities which require enclosure
within a building, airports, fraternal clubs and homes, nonprofit
recreational facilities, open space, easements for alleys, streets and
public utility rights-of-way.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES — Public utility transmission and
distribution facilities, including substations and the like.
QUARRY (INCLUDING SAND PIT, GRAVEL PIT, BORROW PIT AND
TOPSOIL STRIPPING) — A lot or part thereof used for the purpose
of extracting stone, sand, clay, gravel or top soil, and exclusive of the
process of grading a lot associated with a permit that has been issued.
REAL ESTATE — Any fee, leasehold or other estate or interest in, over
or under land, including structures, fixtures and other improvements
and interests which, by custom, usage or law, pass with a conveyance
of land though not described in the contract of sale or instrument of
conveyance. Real estate includes parcels with or without upper or lower
boundaries and spaces that may be filled with air or water.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and
other public areas;
(1)
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other
publicly owned or operated facilities; and
(2)
(3) Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
223. Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 10-15-1998 by P.L. 729, No. 93. See now 65 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 701 et seq.
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:682
RECREATION, ACTIVE — Leisure-time activities, usually of a formal
nature and often performed with others, requiring equipment and
taking place at prescribed places, sites, or fields.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicular-type unit primarily designed
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use
and which has its own motor power or is mounted or drawn by another
vehicle, and licensed as such by the commonwealth to include, but not
be limited to, travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers and selfpropelled
motor homes.
RECREATION, PASSIVE — Recreation activities that involve relatively
inactive or less energetic activities, such as walking, sitting, picnicking,
card games, chess, checkers and similar table games.
RECYCLABLES — Reusable material, including but not limited to clear
glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans, high-grade
office paper, newsprint, corrugated paper, plastics and other materials
designated as recyclable under the Pennsylvania Municipal Waste
Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act.224
RECYCLING FACILITY — A facility employing a technology known as
a process that separates or classifies municipal waste and creates
or recovers reusable materials that can be sold to or reused by a
manufacturer as a substitute for or a supplement to virgin raw
materials. This term does not include such facilities as transfer stations,
municipal waste landfills, landfills, composting facilities, resource
recovery facilities or junkyards.
REFUSE — All combustible refuse and incombustible refuse, referred
to collectively.
RELATED EQUIPMENT (INCLUDING BASE STATIONS) — Any piece
of equipment related to, incidental to, or necessary for, the operation
of a tower-based WCF or nontower WCF. By way of illustration, not
limitation, related equipment includes generators and base
stations.[Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
REPAIR SHOP — Any building, premises and land in which or upon
which a business, service or industry involving maintenance, servicing
or repairing of goods, excluding vehicles, is conducted or rendered.
RESERVE STRIP — A strip of land adjacent to a street, intended to
control access to the street from an adjacent property.
COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE — All paper, straw, excelsior, packaging
materials, rags, rubber, shoes and such other refuse as may result
from ordinary housekeeping and commercial pursuits and which
may be burned by fire.
(1)
INCOMBUSTIBLE REFUSE — All discarded articles or materials
other than sewage, liquid waste, garbage and combustible refuse.
(2)
224. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:683
RESOURCE RECOVERY — The process of obtaining materials or
energy, particularly from solid waste.
RETAIL SALES ESTABLISHMENTS — Establishments engaged in
selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or
household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of
such goods. Adult businesses, as separately addressed within Chapter
59, Sexually Oriented Businesses, and Chapter 140, Massage
Establishments, of the Code of the Township of Lower Allen, are
excluded from this definition.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication,
forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be
occupied or occupied by a road, sidewalk, railroad, oil or gas pipeline,
water line, sanitary or storm sewer, electric transmission lines, bus
shelters, with or without advertising signs as where the Board of
Commissioners granted a franchise with respect thereto, and other
similar uses; generally, the right of one to pass over the property of
another.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, STREET — A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic
and/or pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, alley or however
designated.
RIPARIAN BUFFER — An area of land adjacent to a perennial or
intermittent stream that is managed to maintain the integrity of stream
channels and to reduce stream impacts from upland sources.
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but
runs off the surface of the land.
SANITARY SEWER (PUBLIC) — A sanitary sewage collection method in
which sewage is carried from the site by a system of pipes to a central
treatment and disposal plant.
SATELLITE DISH — See "antenna, satellite dish."
SCHOOL — Any place offering instruction in any branch of knowledge
under the supervision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or a
lawfully constituted ecclesiastical governing body, person, partnership
or corporation meeting the requirements of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
SCHOOL, NURSERY — See "day-care facility."
SCHOOL (PRESCHOOL) — See "day-care facility."
SCREEN PLANTING — A completely planted visual barrier composed
of evergreen and/or deciduous plants and trees arranged to form both
a low-level and high-level screen, of sufficient height and density to
conceal from the view of property owners in adjoining residential
districts the structures and uses on the premises on which the screen
planting is located.
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:684
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by wind, water or gravity. Once this matter is
deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is usually referred to as
"sediment."
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY — A structure or group of
structures intended for lease for the sole purpose of storing customers'
goods and wares.
SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS — Establishments primarily engaged in
providing assistance, as opposed to products, to individuals and
business, industry, government and other enterprises.
SERVICE ROAD — A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to
a limited access highway or arterial street, which provides access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
SETBACK (BUILDING SETBACK LINE) — The line within a property
defining the required minimum distance between any enclosed
structure and the adjacent dedicated right-of-way, and the line defining
rear and side yards, where required.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of establishments planned, constructed
and managed as a total entity, with customer and employee parking
provided on-site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer
access, and landscaping and signage in accordance with an approved
plan.
SHOPPING CENTER, NEIGHBORHOOD — A shopping center generally
offering goods necessary to meet daily needs, which draws its clientele
from a five-mile driving radius from the center.
SHOPPING CENTER, REGIONAL — A shopping center containing a
wide range of retail and service establishments, having one or more
anchor stores, which draws its clientele from a forty-five-mile driving
radius.
SIDEWALK — A paved, surfaced or leveled area, parallel to and usually
separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of roadway visible to the driver of a
passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic.
SIGN — Any visual communication device, structure or object used for
the purpose of bringing the subject thereof, or the property on which
it is located, to the attention of the public. Examples include pennants,
flags, banners, balloons, searchlights, message copy that is painted on
an object or structure and message copy that is manufactured and
attached to a supporting structure.
SIGN, ANIMATED — A sign that employs actual motion or the illusion
of motion, whether activated by electrical, mechanical, environmental
or other means. Examples include rotating and flashing signs. Flashing
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:685
will not be deemed to occur if the interval between on and off cycles of
the display phase exceeds six seconds.
SIGN, BUILDING — A sign that is painted, projected, adhered or
mechanically fastened onto any building wall, including doors and
windows contained within these walls, or attached in similar manner
to any architectural projection of a building. Examples of architectural
projections include awnings, canopies, marquees, mansards and pent
eaves. Signs affixed to freestanding canopies, such as ones used to
shelter motor fuel dispensing pumps, shall be considered building
signs.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE MESSAGE — A sign that changes in appearance
due to physical positioning of sign elements or change in light intensity.
SIGN COPY — Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and
graphic elements comprising the content or message of a sign.
SIGN, ELECTION CAMPAIGN — A sign associated with a candidate for
elective office or with an issue that is on a ballot of a public election.
SIGN FACE — The surface upon, against or through which the sign
copy is displayed or illustrated, not including structural supports,
architectural features of a building or sign structure, nonstructural or
decorative trim or any areas that are separated from the background
surface upon which the sign copy is displayed by a distinct delineation,
such as a reveal or border.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign that is painted, projected, adhered
or mechanically fastened onto any structure principally intended for
the support of a sign, and that is placed upon, or anchored into, the
ground. Examples include pole, pylon, monument (blade) and ground
(low-profile).
SIGN, MALL DIRECTIONAL — A freestanding sign located on the same
lot or lots as a mall that provides orientation information for where
commercial establishments are located within a mall.[Added
10-13-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-06]
SIGN, MALL IDENTIFICATION — A freestanding sign located on the
same lot or lots as a mall that indicates the name of the mall and
may indicate the names of the various establishments located
therein.[Added 10-13-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-06]
SIGN, MEMORIAL — A sign that commemorates a person, place,
building or event of historical or socially significant nature, or that
indicates the date of construction or dedication of a building.
SIGN MESSAGE — Definitions by function of sign message:
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — An off-premises or on-premises sign that
locates or provides distance and orientation information to a
destination from a public street.
(1)
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:686
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES — A sign that contains a message that is usually
unrelated to the property on which it is located. Examples include
outdoor advertising panels (billboards), temporary signs containing
election or civic event information and signs providing directions to
places of public attraction.
SIGN, ON-PREMISES — A sign that contains a message related to the
use or occupancy of the property on which it is located. These signs
may identify the owner, occupants and/or uses of the property, provide
information that is either commercial or noncommercial in nature,
provide directions or provide notice of a regulatory nature.
SIGN, OPINION — A sign expressing or demonstrating an opinion,
protected as free speech.
SIGN, PORTABLE — A sign that is not permanently attached to the
ground or a building.
SIGN, EVENT — An off-premises or on-premises sign that displays
a message for a limited time regarding special activities of a
commercial or noncommercial nature. Examples include sales,
grand openings and civic or social events.
(2)
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — An on-premises sign that indicates the
name of the owner or occupant of a property, the address of a
building, the name of a building or building development or the
business conducted on the property.
(3)
SIGN, INCIDENTAL — An on-premises sign that displays
instructional information that is primarily oriented to pedestrians
and motor vehicle operators who have entered a property from
a public street. Signs indicating whether a business is "open" or
"closed" may be visible from the public street. Examples include
parking and building entrance instructions.
(4)
SIGN, MARKETING — An on-premises sign that displays
information about activities, products or services offered on the
property where the sign is located.
(5)
SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING — An off-premises sign commonly
known as a "billboard," and signs displayed on public mass
transportation shelters. The message displayed on an outdoor
advertising sign may be commercial or noncommercial, and is
usually not related to the property on which the sign is located.
(6)
SIGN, REGULATORY NOTICE — An on-premises sign that displays
information intended to warn the public about property
restrictions, hazards on the property, or a public notice mandated
by statute, local ordinance or court order.
(7)
SIGN, SCROLLING — A sign that contains text that changes
location on the sign in a progressive pattern.
(8)
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:687
SIGN, PROJECTING — A building sign that is mounted perpendicular to
the building face.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign that is constructed of materials that do
not provide long-term durability for the sign or its message, or any sign
that is intended for a limited period of display.
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of a lot by one
or more persons, which ownership is separate and distinct from that of
any adjoining property.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A scaled, graphic depiction of the
proposed development of a lot, parcel or tract of land describing all
covenants assigned, as well as accurately depicting the use, location
and bulk of all buildings and structures, intensity of use or density
of development, streets, driveways, rights-of-way, easements, parking
facilities, open space, public facilities and utilities, setbacks, heights of
buildings and structures and other such data necessary for municipal
officials to determine compliance with this chapter and appropriate
provisions of other such ordinances, as applicable.
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section, or any ground
whose surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are
usually expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet
per 100 feet of horizontal distance.
SOIL STABILIZATION — Chemical or structural treatment of a mass
of soil to increase or maintain its stability or otherwise to improve its
engineering properties.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials,
including but not limited to solid and liquid waste materials resulting
from municipal, industrial, commercial, agricultural and residential
activities. Such wastes shall not include biological excrement or
hazardous waste materials as defined in the Code of Federal
Regulations, Title 40, Chapter 1, Part 261, dated July 1, 1984, or as
amended.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection,
dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of solid wastes into or on the land
or water in a manner that the solid waste or constituent of the solid
waste enters the environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged
to the waters of the Township.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY — A lot, parcel or tract of land,
including but not limited to a sanitary landfill, where garbage, trash or
junk is disposed of or is processed or recycled for disposal or reuse.
Such use shall not include the disposal or processing of hazardous or
radioactive materials. A trash or solid waste transfer facility is a type of
solid waste disposal facility.
SOLID WASTE TRANSFER FACILITY — A place where solid waste
is disposed, brought, sorted, stored for less than four days and
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:688
transferred from one vehicle to another vehicle or to a rail car for the
purpose of transport to a permanent solid waste disposal facility.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use permitted pursuant to the provisions of
Articles XXVII and XVIII.
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communications towers, antennas and other facilities which render
them more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the
existing structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render
it minimally visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but
are not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas,
building-mounted antennas painted to match the existing structure and
facilities constructed to resemble trees, shrubs, and light poles.[Added
10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
STEEP SLOPE — Environmentally sensitive land areas exceeding 15%
in slope measured and presented in accordance with § 220-204 herein.
STORAGE, OUTDOOR — The keeping in an unroofed area of any goods,
junk, material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than
24 hours, excluding display areas as defined herein. Outdoor storage
shall include that which is contained within trailers or similar vehicles.
Outdoor storage shall not include junkyards as defined herein.
STORMWATER — The total amount of precipitation reaching the
ground surface.
STORMWATER DETENTION — Any storm drainage technique that
retards or detains runoff, including but not limited to a detention or
retention basin, parking lot storage, rooftop storage, porous pavement,
dry wells or any combination thereof.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES — Facilities designed to
reduce peak flows and/or volumes, such as stormwater management
ponds, underground storage, rooftop storage and pervious parking.
STORY — That portion of a building located between the surface of any
floor and the ceiling or roof above it.
STORY, HALF — A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which, on at least two opposite exterior walls, are not over
three feet above the finished floor of such story.
STREAM — A watercourse having a source and terminus, banks and a
channel through which waters flow at least periodically.
STREET — A public or private right-of-way which includes avenue,
boulevard, road, alley, lane, highway, freeway, parkway and viaduct and
any other ways used or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or
pedestrians, whether public or private.
STREET CENTER LINE — The center of the surveyed street right-ofway
or, where not surveyed, the center of the traveled cartway.
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:689
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A street intersecting a non-cul-de-sac or deadend
street at one end and terminating at the other in a vehicular
turnaround.
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon
which a lot fronts, or, in its absence, the established grade of the other
streets upon which the lot abuts, at the midpoint of the frontage of the
lot thereon. If there is no officially established grade, the existing grade
of the street at such midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.
STREET LINE — The right-of-way line of a public street or the cartway
line of a private street.
STREET, MAJOR —
STREET, MINOR OR LOCAL — A street used primarily for access to
abutting properties.
STREET WIDTH — The shortest distance between street lines,
measured at right angles to the center line of the street.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to
the land, including stormwater management facilities, or, for floodplain
management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas
or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured (mobile) home.
STUDIO — A building or portion of a building used as a place of work
by an artist, photographer or artisan or used for radio or television
broadcasting.
STUDIO, DANCING OR MUSIC — The use of a premises by a teacher
of music or dancing where students are taught these arts for a fee. This
term is synonymous with "dancing school" and "music school" and other
similar expressions.
ARTERIAL STREET — A major street or highway with fast or heavy
traffic of considerable continuity and which is used primarily as a
traffic artery for intercommunication among large areas.
(1)
COLLECTOR STREET — A major street or highway which carries
traffic from minor streets to arterial streets, including the principal
entrance streets of a residential development and streets for
circulation within such a development.
(2)
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY — A structure without any foundation
or footings and which is removed when the designated time period,
activity or use for which the temporary structure was erected has
ceased.
(1)
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING — See "nonconforming
structure."
(2)
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:690
SUBDIVIDER — The owner or authorized agent of the owner of a lot,
tract or parcel of land to be subdivided for sale or development under
the terms of this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or
lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of
land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not
involving any new street or easement of access or residential dwellings,
shall be exempted. (See also "land development.")
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision involving more than five lots,
parcels of land or other divisions of land, whether or not involving new
streets, additional utilities or other facilities, immediate or future.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — The subdivision of a single lot, tract or parcel
of land into five or fewer lots, tracts or parcels of land for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or of building
development, provided that lots, tracts or parcels of land thereby
created have frontage on an improved public street or streets and
provided, further, that there is not created by the subdivision any new
street, street easement, easements of access or need therefor.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE or SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — A
modification to an existing wireless communications facility
substantially changes the physical dimensions of a tower or base station
if it meets any of the following criteria:[Added 10-24-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-04]
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the Township Codes
Enforcement Officer and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:691
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the
Township Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required
improvements of which financial security was posted pursuant to
Section 509 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247,
as amended225) of those improvements required as a condition for final
approval have been completed in accordance with the approved plan so
that the project may be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
SURFACE DRAINAGE PLAN — A plan showing all present and
proposed grades and facilities for stormwater drainage.
SURFACE MINING — The extraction of minerals from the earth, from
waste or stockpiles or from pits or from banks by removing the strata
or material that overlies or is above or between them or otherwise
exposing and retrieving them from the surface, including but not
limited to strip mining, auger mining, dredging, quarrying and leaching
and all surface activity connected with surface or underground mining,
including but not limited to exploration, site preparation, entry, tunnel,
drift, slope, shaft and borehole drilling and construction and activities
related thereto, but it does not include those mining operations carried
out beneath the surface by means of shafts, tunnels or other
underground mine openings. The term does not include any of the
following:
For tower-based WCF outside the public rights-of-way, it increases
the height of the facility by more than 10%, or by the height
of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest
existing antenna, not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; for
tower-based WCF in the rights-of-way, it increases the height of the
facility by more than 10% or 10 feet, whichever is greater;
(1)
For tower-based WCF outside the public rights-of-way, it protrudes
from the edge of the WCF by more than 20 feet, or more than
the width of the tower structures at the level of the appurtenance,
whichever is greater; for those tower-based WCF in the public
rights-of-way, it protrudes from the edge of the structure by more
than six feet;
(2)
It involves installation of more than the standard number of new
equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed
four cabinets;
(3)
It entails any excavation of deployment outside the current site of
the tower-based WCF; or
(4)
It does not comply with conditions associated with prior approval
of construction or modification of the tower-based WCF unless the
noncompliance is due to an increase in height, increase in width, or
addition of cabinets.
(5)
225. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509.
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:692
SURVEYOR, PROFESSIONAL LAND — An individual licensed and
registered under the laws of this commonwealth to engage in the
practice of land surveying.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land, characterized as a depression,
used to carry surface water runoff.
SWIMMING POOL — Any structure intended for swimming or
recreational bathing that contains water over 24 inches deep. This
includes in-ground, aboveground and on-ground swimming pools, hot
tubs and spas.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC — An outdoor or indoor place used for
amateur, professional or recreative swimming or bathing, whether or
not a fee is charged for admission or for the use of the place, exclusive
of a bathing place at a private, single-family residence which is used
solely by the owner of the residence, family and their personal guests.
TEMPORARY — An arrangement established with no thought of
continuance or permanence, but with the idea of being changed soon.
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of
moving pictures or theatrical productions on a paid-admission basis.
TIMBER HARVESTING — See "forestry."
TOPOGRAPHIC MAP — A map showing the elevations of the ground by
contours or elevations.
The extraction of minerals by a landowner for his own
noncommercial use from land owned or leased by him.
(1)
The extraction of sand, gravel, stone, earth or fill from borrow pits
for highway construction purposes of the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation (PennDOT) or the extraction of minerals pursuant
to construction contracts with the Department if the work is
performed under a bond, contract and specifications that
substantially provide for and require reclamation of the area
affected in the manner provided by the Noncoal Surface Mining
Conservation and Reclamation Act, No. 1984-219, as amended.226
(2)
The handling, processing or storage of slag on the premises of a
manufacturer as a part of the manufacturing process.
(3)
Those dredging operations that are carried out in the rivers and
streams of the commonwealth and Lake Erie.
(4)
The extraction, handling, processing or storing of minerals from
any building construction excavation of the site of the construction
where the minerals removed are incidental to the building
construction excavation, regardless of the commercial value of the
minerals.
(5)
226. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 3301 et seq.
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:693
TOPOGRAPHY — The configuration of a surface area showing relative
elevations.
TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are
fertile soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus
debris. Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called the A
Horizon.
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (TOWERBASED
WCF) — A structure that is used for the purpose of supporting
one or more antennas, including, but not limited to, self-supporting
lattice towers, guy towers and monopoles.[Added 10-24-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-04]
TRUCK TERMINAL — An area and building where cargo is stored and
where trucks load and unload cargo on a regular basis.
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Any lot, tract or parcel of land which has not
been graded or in any other manner prepared for the construction of a
building.
UNIT — A part of the property, structure or building designed or
intended for any type of independent use, which has direct exit to a
public street or way or to an easement or right-of-way leading to a
public street or way and includes a proportionate undivided interest in
the common elements, which is assigned to the property, structure or
building.227
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designated,
arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be
deemed to include any nonconforming use.
USE PERMIT — A certificate issued and enforced by the Zoning Officer
upon completion of the construction of a new building or upon a change
(1) USE, NONCONFORMING — See "nonconforming use."
USE, PERMITTED — Any use allowed in a zoning district and
subject to the restrictions specific to the use and applicable to that
zoning district.
(2)
(3) USE, PRINCIPAL — The primary or predominant use of any lot.
USE, SIMILAR — A use that has the same characteristics as the
specifically cited uses in terms of the following: trip generation
and type of traffic, parking and circulation, utility demands,
environmental impacts, physical space needs and clientele.
(4)
USE, TEMPORARY — A use established for a fixed period of time
with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the
designated time period.
(5)
227. Editor’s Note: The definition of “unlicensed wireless service,” which immediately followed,
was repealed 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04.
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:694
or conversion of the structure or use of a building, which certifies that
all requirements and regulations as provided herein, as well as all other
applicable requirements, have been satisfied.
UTILITY FACILITY, BOX OR STRUCTURE — Transformers, switch
boxes, pedestals, poles, pumps, valves and similar devices.
UTILITY, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE — Includes:
UTILITY SERVICES — The generation, transmission and/or distribution
of electricity, gas, steam, communications and water; the collection
and treatment of sewage and solid waste; and the provision of mass
transportation.
VARIANCE — Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of Article XXVII.
In granting a variance in designated floodplain districts, additional
criteria set forth in Article XVIII shall also apply.
VEGETATIVE COVER — Consists of trees, shrubs, flowers, grass,
ground or bank cover or suitable pervious decorative substitute, but not
including gravel, stone or crushed rocks if not used in conjunction with
plant material.
VEHICLE — Every device in or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a street.
VEHICLE WASHING (CAR WASH) — A building on a lot, designed and
used primarily for the washing and polishing of vehicles.
VEHICLE WRECKING — The dismantling or wrecking of used
automobiles, trailers or similar vehicles, or the storage, sale or
dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked
vehicles or their parts.
VEHICULAR BODY SHOP — Any structure or any building or part
thereof that is used for the repair or painting of bodies, chassis, wheels,
fenders, bumpers and/or accessories of automobiles and other vehicles
of conveyance.
VEHICULAR FREIGHT TERMINAL — Land and buildings used as a
relay station for the transfer of a load from one vehicle to another or
one party to another. The terminal cannot be used for permanent or
long-term accessory storage for principal land uses at other locations.
The terminal facility may include storage areas for trucks and buildings
or areas for the repair of trucks associated with the terminal.
VEHICULAR GARAGE — A building on a lot designed and/or used
primarily for mechanical and/or body repairs, storage, rental, servicing
Any agency which, under public franchise or ownership or under
certificate of convenience and necessity, provides the public with
electricity, gas, heat, steam, communication, rail transportation,
water, sewage collection or other similar service.
(1)
A closely regulated private enterprise with an exclusive franchise
for providing a public service.
(2)
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:695
or supplying of gasoline or oil to automobiles, trucks or similar motor
vehicles.
VEHICULAR SALES ESTABLISHMENT — The use of any building, land
area or premises for the display, sale and leasing of new or used
automobiles, trucks or vans, trailers or recreational vehicles, including
boats and motorcycles, and including any warranty repair work and
other repair service conducted as an accessory use.
VEHICULAR SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — A building or lot or part
thereof supplying and selling gasoline or other equivalent fuel for motor
vehicles at retail cost, directly from pumps and storage tanks, and
which may include accessory facilities for rendering services, such as
lubrication, washing and minor repairs.
VETERINARY FACILITY — An establishment offering on-site veterinary
services.
WALL — A structure that is usually solid, that defines and sometimes
protects an area, or provides support to a soil embankment.
WAREHOUSE — A building used primarily for the storage of goods and
materials.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent stream, intermittent stream, river,
brook, creek or a channel or ditch for water, whether natural or manmade.
WBCA — Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S.
§ 11702.1 et seq.).[Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and
that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas.
WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT — A building or group of buildings
primarily used for the storage, transfer and distribution of products and
materials, which may include wholesale sales but not retail sales.
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves, including, but not
limited to, infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or
radio signals.[Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The antennas,
nodes, control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals,
electronics and other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting,
receiving, distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless
communications services.[Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICANT (WCF
APPLICANT) — Any entity that applies for a wireless communication
facility building permit, zoning approval and/or permission to use the
public right-of-way (ROW) or other Township-owned land or
property.[Added 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:696
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure that is
constructed for the primary purpose of supporting the placement or
installation of a WCF, or any other structure approved for such purpose
by the Township, or single antenna if approved by the Township.[Added
10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
WOODLAND — An area of plant material covering one acre or more and
consisting of 30% or more canopy trees having an eight-inch or greater
caliper, or more trees having a ten-inch or greater caliper. Trees shall
be measured at 4.5 feet from ground level.
YARD — An open space that lies between the principal building or
buildings and the nearest lot line. The minimum required yard per
district, as set forth in this chapter, is unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward, except as may be specifically provided for
herein.
MATURE WOODLAND — An area of plant material covering one
acre or more and consisting of 30% or more canopy trees having a
sixteen-inch or greater caliper, or any grove consisting of eight or
more trees having an eighteen-inch or greater caliper. Trees shall
be measured at 4.5 feet from ground level.
(1)
YOUNG WOODLAND — An area of plant material covering one
acre or more and consisting of 70% or more canopy trees having
a two-and-one-half-inch caliper or greater, or a tree plantation for
commercial or conservation purposes where 70% or more of the
canopy trees have a two-and-one-half-inch or greater caliper. Trees
shall be measured at 4.5 feet from ground level.
(2)
YARD, BUFFER — A strip of required yard space adjacent to the
boundary of a property or district, not less than the width
designated in this chapter, on which is placed (planted) year-round
shrubbery, hedges, evergreens or other suitable plantings of
sufficient height and density to constitute an effective screen and
give maximum protection and immediate screening to an abutting
property or district, and may include a wall, as provided for in this
chapter.
(1)
YARD, EXTERIOR — An open, unoccupied space between the
buildings of a dwelling group or its accessory building(s) and the
property boundary or street line.
(2)
YARD, FRONT — A yard encompassing the entire width of the lot
and situated between the front lot line and the building line nearest
to the front lot line.
(3)
YARD, INTERIOR — An open, unoccupied space between the
buildings of a dwelling group or its accessory building(s); not a
front, side or rear yard.
(4)
YARD, PERIMETER — An open space extending along the
boundaries or borders of a tract or parcel of land.
(5)
§ 220-6 (RESERVED) § 220-6
216:697
ZONING — The designation of specified districts within the Township,
reserving them for certain uses, together with limitations on lot size,
heights of structures and other stipulated requirements.
ZONING MAP — The map setting forth the boundaries of the zoning
districts of the Township, which shall be a part of this chapter.
ZONING OFFICER — The duly constituted Township official designated
to administer and enforce this chapter in accordance with its literal
terms.
ZONING PERMIT — A permit stating that the purpose for which a
building and/or structure or land is to be used is in conformity with the
uses permitted and all other requirements under this chapter for the
district in which it is or will be located.
YARD, REAR — A yard encompassing the entire width of the lot and
situated between the rear lot line and the building line nearest to
the rear lot line.
(6)
YARD, SIDE — A yard lying between the side lot line and the
building line nearest to the side lot line and extending from the
front yard to the rear yard or, in the absence of either of such front
or rear yards, to the front or rear lot lines.
(7)
§ 220-6 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-6
216:698
ARTICLE III
Designation of Districts
§ 220-7. Zoning districts. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-05]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Township is hereby divided into districts
which shall be designated as follows:
R-1 Single-Family Established Residential District
R-2 Single-Family Rural Residential District
R-3 Multifamily Residential District
MUN Mixed-Use Neighborhood
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
C-2 General Commercial District
C-3 Business Park District
C-4 Regional Commercial District
I-1 General Industrial District
I-2 Mineral Recovery District
I-3 Industrial/Commercial District
FW Floodway (Overlay) District
FF Flood-Fringe (Overlay) District
AHZ Airport Hazard Zone (Overlay) District
GN Groundwater Nonuse Overlay District
OSD Open Space Development Overlay District
TND Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District
NR Neighborhood Redevelopment Overlay District
§ 220-8. Zoning Map.
A. The boundaries of the above-designated districts shall be as shown
upon the map attached to and made a part of this chapter which shall
be designated "Zoning Map." Said map and all the notations, references
and other data shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference
into this chapter as if all were fully described herein.228
B. The boundaries of the FW and FF Districts shall serve as overlays to the
underlying districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map and as
specifically described in the Floodway Data Table and one-hundredyear-
flood delineation in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) prepared for
the Township by the Flood Insurance Administration (FIA), dated March
2009, and as may be amended. Said study and accompanying maps, all
228. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the office of the Township Secretary. Additional copies
are available from the Zoning Officer.
§ 220-7 (RESERVED) § 220-8
216:699
§ 220-9. District boundaries.
notations, references and other data shown thereon are hereby
incorporated by reference into this chapter as if all were fully described
herein.
C. The boundaries of the Airport Hazard Zone shall be that as described by
mapping completed as part of the Model Airport Zoning Ordinance for
Lower Allen Township, prepared by L. Robert Kimball and Associates,
1989, and as may be amended, and available from the Township office.
Such boundaries are referenced as an overlay to the Zoning Map and
are incorporated by reference into this chapter as if fully described
herein.
A. The boundaries between these districts are, unless otherwise indicated,
either the center lines of streets, alleys, rights-of-way, lot lines or such
lines extended or lines parallel thereto.
B. Where figures are shown on the Zoning Map between a street, alley,
right-of-way or lot line and a district boundary line, such figures
indicate that the district boundary line runs parallel to that line at a
distance therefrom equivalent to the number of feet so indicated.
C. Where district boundaries are not clearly fixed by the above methods,
such boundaries shall be determined by the use of the scale of the
Zoning Map.
D. Should any other uncertainty exist, the Zoning Officer shall interpret
the intent of this chapter and the Zoning Map as to the exact location of
district boundaries.
E. When a district boundary line divides a lot held in single and separate
ownership at the effective date of this chapter, the regulations of either
abutting district may be construed by the owner to be applicable to the
portion of such lot in the other abutting district for a distance of not
more than 50 feet beyond the district boundary line.
§ 220-8 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-9
216:700
ARTICLE IV
R-1 Single-Family Established Residential District
§ 220-10. Intent.
Consistent with the general purposes of this chapter and the goals and
objectives of the Lower Allen Township Comprehensive Plan, the specific
intent of this article is to preserve the integrity of established single-family
residential communities and future communities. Due to both the age and
design of these communities, unique and flexible standards and regulations
are proposed to bring the majority of dwelling units into conformance with
this chapter. It is the purpose of this district to provide these standards and
regulations.
§ 220-11. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses are as follows:
§ 220-12. Building height limit.
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Family-care facility.
C. Family day-care facility in accordance with § 220-162.
D. Accessory dwellings in accordance with § 220-149.
E. Home occupations in accordance with § 220-165.
F. Public parks, public playgrounds, public recreation areas and public
camping facilities.
G. Municipal buildings, public libraries and public museums.
H. Places of worship, including: one accessory residential unit; and
accessory preschool uses.
I. Cemeteries.
J. K-12 public and private schools, including accessory preschool uses.
K. Utility facilities, where operation requirements necessitate location
within the district, in accordance with § 220-180.
L. Signs, when erected and maintained in accordance with Article XXV
herein.
M. Accessory uses and structures on the same lot with and customarily
incidental to any of the above permitted uses in accordance with
§ 220-150.
A. No principal building shall be erected to a height in excess of 35 feet.
§ 220-10 (RESERVED) § 220-12
216:701
§ 220-13. Residential density, lot area and lot width.
§ 220-14. Impervious coverage.
Impervious coverage shall not exceed 50%.
§ 220-15. Yards.
B. No accessory structure shall be erected to a height in excess of 25 feet.
A. With public water and public sewer (public or private utility):
(1) The maximum permitted residential density shall be four dwelling
units per gross acre, excluding existing dedicated rights-of-way.
(2) The minimum lot area shall be 7,200 square feet.
(3) The minimum lot width shall be not less than 50 feet at the
dedicated right-of-way line.
B. With on-lot water supply and/or sewage disposal systems:
(1) The maximum permitted residential density shall be one dwelling
unit per gross acre, excluding existing dedicated rights-of-way.
(2) There shall be no minimum lot area. Lot area shall be based upon
required setbacks, impervious coverage, parking and loading/
unloading, on-lot water supply and sewage disposal system
requirements, floodplains/wetlands, steep slope requirements,
woodland preservation and other applicable criteria as set forth in
this chapter.
(3) The minimum lot width shall be not less than 50 feet at the
dedicated right-of-way line.
A. Yards of the following minimum depths shall be provided for residential
uses:
(1) Minimum front yard depth: 30 feet. On a corner lot, two front yards
shall be provided. If the abutting street right-of-way width is less
than 50 feet, front yard setback is measured in accordance with
§ 220-212A. Where existing principal buildings in the same block
have lawfully nonconforming front yard setbacks of less than 30
feet, an average setback may be used in accordance with
§ 220-212B.
(2) Minimum side yards shall total no less than 15 feet, with no one
side yard less than five feet in width. On a corner lot, two side yards
shall be provided along the interior lot lines.
(3) The minimum rear yard depth shall be 25 feet. On a corner lot, a
rear yard shall not be required.
§ 220-12 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-15
216:702
§ 220-16. Performance standards.
All uses must comply with performance standards as set forth within Article
XIX herein.
§ 220-17. Off-street parking.
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article XXIV.
B. Yards of the following minimum depths shall be provided for
nonresidential principal buildings:
(1) Minimum front yard depth: 30 feet. On multiple frontage lots, a
front yard shall be provided abutting each street frontage. If the
abutting street right-of-way width is less than 50 feet, front yard
setback is measured in accordance with § 220-212A.
(2) Minimum side yard: 15 feet.
(3) Minimum side yard for a nonresidential principal building abutting
a residential use: 50 feet.
(4) Minimum rear yard. 35 feet.
§ 220-15 (RESERVED) § 220-17
216:703

ARTICLE V
R-2 Single-Family Rural Residential District
§ 220-18. Intent.
Consistent with the general purposes of this chapter and the goals and
objectives of the Lower Allen Township Comprehensive Plan, the specific
intent of this article is to maintain the integrity of existing rural areas
through low-impact development techniques while still preserving the
existing rural character, environmentally sensitive areas and open space.
§ 220-19. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses are as follows:
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Family-care facilities.
C. Family day-care facilities, in accordance with § 220-162.
D. Accessory dwelling units, in accordance with § 220-149.
E. Nonintensive agriculture that may include horticulture, floriculture or
silviculture uses, in accordance with § 220-151.
F. Kennels, in accordance with § 220-167.
G. Public parks, public playgrounds, public recreation areas and public
camping facilities.
H. Municipal buildings, public libraries and public museums.
I. Cemeteries.
J. Utility facilities, where operation requirements necessitate location
within the district, in accordance with § 220-180.
K. Home occupations, in accordance with § 220-165.
L. Bed-and-breakfast establishments as a primary use, in accordance with
§ 220-156.
M. Places of worship, including one accessory residential unit.
N. Preschool and elementary-level schools.
O. Golf courses and country clubs, in accordance with § 220-163.
P. Signs, when erected and maintained in accordance with Article XXV.
Q. Accessory uses and structures on the same lot with and customarily
incidental to any of the above permitted uses, in accordance with
§ 220-150.
§ 220-18 (RESERVED) § 220-20
216:705
§ 220-20. Building height limit.
§ 220-21. Residential unit density.
The maximum permitted residential density shall be one dwelling unit per
gross acre, excluding existing dedicated rights-of-way.
§ 220-22. Lot area and width.
§ 220-23. Impervious coverage.
Impervious coverage shall not exceed 30%.
§ 220-24. Yard regulations.
A. No principal building shall be erected to a height in excess of 35 feet.
B. No accessory building shall be erected to a height in excess of 25 feet.
A. There shall be no minimum lot area. Lot area shall be based upon
required setbacks, impervious coverage, parking and loading/
unloading, on-lot well and septic system requirements, floodplains/
wetlands, steep slope requirements, woodland preservation and other
applicable criteria as set forth in this chapter.
B. The minimum lot width shall be not less than 50 feet at the dedicated
right-of-way line and not less than 100 feet at the building line.
A. Yards of the following minimum depths shall be provided for principal
residential buildings:
(1) Minimum front yard depth: 40 feet. On multiple frontage lots, a
front yard shall be provided abutting each street frontage. If the
abutting street right-of-way width is less than 50 feet, front yard
setback is measured in accordance with § 220-212A.
(2) Minimum side yards shall total no less than 20 feet, with no one
side yard less than five feet in width. On a corner lot, two side yards
shall be provided along the interior lot lines.
(3) The minimum rear yard depth shall be 40 feet. On a corner lot, a
rear yard shall not be required.
B. Yards of the following minimum depths shall be provided for
nonresidential principal buildings:
(1) Minimum front yard depth: 40 feet. On a corner lot, two front yards
shall be provided. If the abutting street right-of-way width is less
than 50 feet, front yard setback is measured in accordance with
§ 220-212A.
(2) Minimum side yard: 20 feet.
§ 220-20 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-24
216:706
§ 220-25. Performance standards.
All uses must comply with performance standards as set forth within Article
XIX herein.
§ 220-26. Off-street parking/access.
Off-street parking/access shall be provided in accordance with Article XXIV.
(3) Minimum side yard for a nonresidential principal building abutting
a residential use: 50 feet.
(4) Minimum rear yard. 40 feet.
§ 220-24 (RESERVED) § 220-26
216:707

ARTICLE VI
MUN Mixed-Use Neighborhood District
§ 220-27. Intent.
Consistent with the general purposes of this chapter and the goals and
objectives of the Lower Allen Township Comprehensive Plan, the specific
intent of this article is to allow for the establishment of a mixed-use
residential and commercial district in established areas served by public
water and public sewer.
§ 220-27.1. Applicability.
For the purposes of this Article VI, the words "parcel" or "lot," whether
singular or plural, shall encompass planned community units under the
Pennsylvania Uniform Planned Community Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A § 5101 et seq.,
as amended, and condominium units under the Pennsylvania Uniform
Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A § 3101 et seq., as amended, and the lot area,
lot width and yard standards of this Article VI shall apply to each such
planned community unit or condominium unit as if each unit constituted a
parcel or lot.
§ 220-28. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses are as follows:
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Single-family attached dwellings, in accordance with § 220-35.
C. Two-family attached dwellings.
D. Two-family side-by-side dwellings.
E. Multifamily dwellings.
F. Conversion apartment dwellings, permitted as a special exception only,
in accordance with § 220-154.
G. Accessory dwellings, in accordance with § 220-149.
H. Manufactured (mobile) home parks, in accordance with § 220-169.
I. Family-care facilities.
J. Group-care facilities, in accordance with § 220-162.
K. Boarding homes, in accordance with § 220-156.
L. Nursing homes.
M. Personal-care boarding homes.
N. Home occupations, in accordance with § 220-165.
§ 220-27 (RESERVED) § 220-28
216:709
O. Family day-care facilities, in accordance with § 220-162.
P. Group day-care facilities, in accordance with § 220-162.
Q. Day-care facilities, in accordance with § 220-160.
R. Additional nonresidential uses, no greater than 3,000 square feet in
gross floor area, shall be permitted in accordance with the NAICS as
follows, excluding drive-through facilities:
NAICS No. Category
22112 Electric Power Transmission, Control and Distribution
2212 Natural Gas Distribution
2213 Water, Sewage and Other Systems
23 Construction
323 Printing and Related Support Activities
334 Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing
44-45 Retail Trade, excluding Industry 4543, Direct Selling
Establishments, and excluding sexually oriented
business as defined by Chapter 59 of the Code of the
Township of Lower Allen. Refer to said chapter for
sexually oriented business regulations.
482 Rail Transportation
483 Water Transportation
485 Transit and Ground Passenger Transportation
486 Pipeline Transportation
491 Postal Service
492 Couriers and Messengers
51412 Libraries and Archives
52 Finance and Insurance
53 Real Estate and Rental and Leasing, excluding:
Industries 53113 (Lessors of Miniwarehouses and Self-
Storage Units); 5321 (Automotive Equipment Rental
and Leasing); and 5324 (Commercial and Industrial
Machinery and Equipment Rental and Leasing)
54 Professional, Scientific and Technical Services
55 Management of Companies and Enterprises
56 Administration and Support and Waste Management
and Remediation Services, except: Industry 5617
(Services to Buildings and Dwellings); and Subsector
562, Waste Management and Remediation Services
61 Educational Services
§ 220-28 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-28
216:710
§ 220-29. Building height limit.
§ 220-30. Residential unit density.
The maximum permitted density shall be 10 units per gross acre, excluding
existing dedicated rights-of-way.
§ 220-31. Lot area and width.
NAICS No. Category
62 Health Care and Social Assistance, except: Subsectors
622 (Hospitals) and 623 (Nursing and Residential Care
Facilities); and Industries 6242 (Community Food and
Housing, and Emergency and Other Relief Services)
and 6243 (Vocational Rehabilitation Services).
7113 Promoters of Performing Arts, Sports and Similar
Events
7114 Agents and Managers for Artists, Athletes, Entertainers
and Other Public Figures
7115 Independent Artists, Writers and Performers
722 Food Services and Drinking Places
8112 Electronic and Precision Equipment Repair and
Maintenance
8114 Personal and Household Goods Repair and
Maintenance
812 Personal and Laundry Service
813 Religious, Grantmaking, Civic, Professional and Similar
Organizations
92 Public Administration, except: Industry 92214
(Correctional Institutions).
S. Signs, when erected and maintained in accordance with Article XXV.
T. Accessory uses and structures on the same lot with and customarily
incidental to any of the above permitted uses, in accordance with
§ 220-150.
U. Parking lots as a primary use to provide required off-street parking for a
permitted use on another lot in the MUN District.
A. No principal building shall be erected to a height in excess of 35 feet.
B. No accessory building shall be erected to a height in excess of 25 feet.
A. There shall be no minimum lot area. Lot area shall be based upon
required setbacks, impervious coverage, parking and loading/
unloading, floodplains/wetlands, steep slope requirements, woodland
preservation and other applicable criteria as set forth in this chapter.
§ 220-28 (RESERVED) § 220-31
216:711
§ 220-32. Impervious coverage.
Impervious coverage shall not exceed 70%.
§ 220-33. Yards.
Unless otherwise stated herein, yards of the following minimum depths and
widths shall be provided as follows:
§ 220-34. Performance standards.
All uses must comply with performance standards as set forth within Article
XIX herein.
§ 220-35. Use limitations.
B. The minimum lot width shall be not less than 50 feet at the dedicated
right-of-way line, except for single-family attached dwellings, where the
lot width may be reduced to a minimum of 20 feet.
A. Minimum front yard depth: 30 feet. On multiple frontage lots, a front
yard shall be provided abutting each street frontage. If the abutting
street right-of-way width is less than 50 feet, front yard setback is
measured in accordance with § 220-212A. Where existing principal
buildings in the same block have lawfully nonconforming front yard
setbacks of less than 30 feet, an average setback may be used in
accordance with § 220-212B.
B. Minimum side yards shall total no less than 15 feet, with no one side
yard less than five feet in width, except as follows:
(1) A minimum side yard of 15 feet shall be provided for the
unattached sides of all side-by-side and attached dwellings.
(2) A minimum side yard of 15 feet shall be provided for all
nonresidential primary buildings.
(3) A minimum side yard of 15 feet shall be provided for each side of a
multifamily dwelling.
(4) On a corner lot, two side yards shall be provided along the interior
lot lines.
(5) No side yard shall be required for the attached side of side-by-side
and attached dwellings.
C. The minimum rear yard depth shall be 25 feet. On a corner lot, a rear
yard shall not be required.
A. No more than six dwelling units per building.
§ 220-31 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-35
216:712
§ 220-35.1. Site design standards.
In addition to performance standards contained within Article XIX, the
following site design standards are applicable for any new construction
within the MUN Mixed-Use Neighborhood District:
B. A vertical or horizontal visual structural offset or other deviation in
exterior architectural materials shall be provided for every other singlefamily
attached dwelling unit.
A. Off-street parking for nonresidential uses. Off-street parking/loading
and unloading areas shall be provided in accordance with provisions set
forth in Article XXIV herein.
B. Lighting.
(1) Lighting must be controlled in both height and intensity to maintain
neighborhood character.
(2) Light standards are restricted to a maximum of 20 feet in height.
(3) The light level from any use measured at a residential lot line may
not exceed 0.2 footcandle. To achieve this standard, luminaires
shall be shielded to prevent light shining beyond the lot lines onto
neighboring properties.
C. Screening and buffering. Where nonresidential uses abut residential
uses, screen parking lots and driveways from adjacent residential,
nonresidential and multifamily residential uses. Screening and
buffering shall be provided in accordance with §§ 220-201 and 220-202
herein.
§ 220-35 (RESERVED) § 220-35.1
216:713

ARTICLE VII
R-3 Multifamily Residential District
§ 220-36. Intent.
Consistent with the general purposes of this chapter and the goals and
objectives of the Lower Allen Township Comprehensive Plan, the specific
intent of this article is:
§ 220-36.1. Applicability.
For the purposes of this Article VII, the words "parcel" or "lot," whether
singular or plural, shall encompass planned community units under the
Pennsylvania Uniform Planned Community Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq.,
as amended, and condominium units under the Pennsylvania Uniform
Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq., as amended, and the lot area,
lot width and yard standards of this Article VII shall apply to each such
planned community unit or condominium unit as if each unit constituted a
parcel or lot.
§ 220-37. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses are as follows:
A. To provide reasonable standards for the development of higher-density,
multifamily residential uses.
B. To establish design standards that will avoid undue traffic congestion
on the streets, provide for the public convenience and harmonize with
adjoining residential uses.
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Two-family side-by-side dwellings.
C. Two-family attached dwellings.
D. Single-family attached dwellings, in accordance with § 220-35.
E. Multifamily dwellings.
F. Family day-care facilities, in accordance with § 220-162.
G. Group day-care facilities, in accordance with § 220-162.
H. Home occupations, in accordance with § 220-165.
I. Conversion apartments, in accordance with § 220-154.
J. Manufactured home parks.
K. Additional nonresidential uses shall be permitted in accordance with
the NAICS as follows:
§ 220-36 (RESERVED) § 220-37
216:715
§ 220-38. Building height limit.
No building shall be erected to a height in excess of 75 feet, provided that
an additional setback of one foot for all sides of the tract shall be required
for each foot exceeding 50 feet in height.
§ 220-39. Residential unit density.
The maximum permitted density shall be 15 units per gross acre, excluding
existing dedicated rights-of-way.
§ 220-40. Lot area and width.
NAICS No. Category
22112 Electric Power Transmission, Control and Distribution
2212 Natural Gas Distribution
2213 Water, Sewage and Other Systems
4812 Heliport, as a conditional use only
482 Rail Transportation
483 Water Transportation
51412 Libraries and Archives
621399 Offices of All Other Miscellaneous Health Practitioners
622 Hospitals
623 Nursing and Residential Care Facilities
6244 Child Day-Care Services
721191 Bed-and-Breakfast Inns
8131 Religious Organizations
L. Parking garages/decks and lots accessory to other permitted uses, in
accordance with Article XXIV.
M. Signs, when erected and maintained in accordance with Article XXV.
N. Accessory uses and structures on the same lot with and customarily
incidental to the above permitted residential and nonresidential uses, in
accordance with § 220-150.
A. There shall be no minimum lot area. Lot area shall be based upon
required setbacks, impervious coverage, off-street parking and loading/
unloading, floodplains/wetlands, steep slope requirements, woodland
preservation and other applicable criteria as set forth in this chapter.
B. The minimum lot width shall be not less than 50 feet at the dedicated
right-of-way line, except for single-family attached dwellings, where the
lot width may be reduced to a minimum of 20 feet.
§ 220-37 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-41
216:716
§ 220-41. Impervious coverage.
Impervious coverage shall not exceed 60%.
§ 220-42. Yards.
§ 220-43. Performance standards.
All uses must comply with performance standards as set forth within Article
XIX herein.
§ 220-44. Use limitations.
§ 220-45. Off-street parking.
Off-street parking, loading space and motor vehicle access shall be provided
in accordance with the provisions of Article XXIV.
A. Unless otherwise stated herein, yards of the following minimum depths
and widths shall be provided:
(1) Front yard setback: 30 feet.
(2) Side yard setbacks (for each side yard):
(a) Single-family detached dwellings: minimum side yards shall
total no less than 15 feet, with no one side yard less than five
feet, in width. On a corner lot, two side yards shall be provided
along the interior lot lines.
(b) Attached dwellings (including multifamily units): 15 feet.
(c) A nonresidential principal structure abutting a residential use:
50 feet.
(d) Nonresidential principal structures: 15 feet.
(e) No side yard shall be required for the attached side of side-byside
and attached dwellings.
(3) Rear yard setback: 35 feet.
B. An additional setback of one foot for all sides of the tract shall be
required for each foot of building exceeding 50 feet in height.
C. Buffer yards and screen plantings shall be provided in accordance with
§§ 220-201 and 220-202 herein.
A. No more than six single-family dwelling units shall be attached.
B. A vertical or horizontal visual structural offset or other deviation in
exterior architectural materials shall be provided for every other singlefamily
attached dwelling unit and between every four multifamily
dwelling units.
§ 220-41 (RESERVED) § 220-46
216:717
§ 220-46. Site design standards.
In addition to performance standards contained within Article XIX, the
following additional site design standards are applicable for any new
construction within the R-3 Multifamily Residential District:
A. Off-street parking. Off-street parking/loading and unloading areas shall
be provided in accordance with provisions set forth in Article XXIV
herein. Such parking shall only be located to the side or rear of
buildings.
B. Lighting.
(1) Lighting must be controlled in both height and intensity to maintain
neighborhood character.
(2) The light level from any use measured at a residential lot line may
not exceed 0.2 footcandle. To achieve this standard, luminaires
shall be shielded to prevent light shining beyond the lot lines onto
neighboring properties.
§ 220-46 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-46
216:718
ARTICLE VIII
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
§ 220-47. Intent.
Consistent with the general purposes of this chapter and the goals and
objectives of the Lower Allen Township Comprehensive Plan, the specific
intent of this article is:
§ 220-48. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses are as follows:
A. To provide standards for the development of commercial uses to serve
surrounding residential districts and uses.
B. To provide for smaller-scale neighborhood-oriented businesses so as to
reduce traffic flow to major commercial areas throughout the Township.
A. Nonresidential uses shall be permitted in accordance with the NAICS
as follows:
NAICS No. Category
22112 Electric Power Transmission, Control and Distribution
2212 Natural Gas Distribution
2213 Water, Sewage and Other Systems
334 Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing
44-45 Retail Trade, excluding Industry 4543, Direct Selling
Establishments, and excluding sexually oriented
business as defined by Chapter 59 of the Code of the
Township of Lower Allen. Refer to said chapter for
sexually oriented business regulations.
482 Rail Transportation
483 Water Transportation
51412 Libraries and Archives
52 Finance and Insurance
53 Real Estate and Rental and Leasing, excluding:
Industries 53113 (Lessors of Miniwarehouses and Self-
Storage Units); 5321 (Automotive Equipment Rental and
Leasing); and 5324 (Commercial and Industrial
Machinery and Equipment Rental and Leasing)
54 Professional, Scientific and Technical Services
55 Management of Companies and Enterprises
§ 220-47 (RESERVED) § 220-48
216:719
§ 220-49. Use limitations.
NAICS No. Category
56 Administration and Support and Waste Management and
Remediation Services, except: Industry 5617 (Services
to Buildings and Dwellings); and Subsector 562, Waste
Management and Remediation Services
61 Educational Services
62 Health Care and Social Assistance, except: Subsectors
622 (Hospitals) and 623 (Nursing and Residential Care
Facilities); and Industries 6242 (Community Food and
Housing, and Emergency and Other Relief Services) and
6243 (Vocational Rehabilitation Services)
7113 Promoters of Performing Arts, Sports and Similar Events
7114 Agents and Managers for Artists, Athletes, Entertainers
and Other Public Figures
7115 Independent Artists, Writers and Performers
722 Food Services and Drinking Places
8111 Automotive Repair and Maintenance
8112 Electronic and Precision Equipment Repair and
Maintenance
8114 Personal and Household Goods Repair and Maintenance
812 Personal and Laundry Service
813 Religious, Grantmaking, Civic, Professional and Similar
Organizations
92 Public Administration, except: Industry 92214
(Correctional Institutions).
B. Neighborhood-level shopping centers, in accordance with § 220-176.
C. Signs, when erected and maintained in accordance with Article XXV
herein.
D. Accessory uses and structures on the same lot with and customarily
incidental to any of the above permitted uses, in accordance with
§ 220-150.
A. All uses shall be provided for in accordance with performance
standards as contained within Article XIX herein.
B. No single use shall exceed 4,000 square feet in combined gross floor
area and outdoor display/sales area, unless as part of a neighborhood
shopping center, in which case the aggregate total of building and/or
outdoor display/sales area on any lot shall not exceed 40,000 square
feet of gross area.
§ 220-48 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-49
216:720
§ 220-50. Impervious coverage.
Impervious coverage shall not exceed 70% of the lot.
§ 220-51. Building height limit.
No building shall be erected to a height in excess of 35 feet.
§ 220-52. Lot area and width.
§ 220-53. Yards.
C. The retail sale of fuel shall be limited to a capacity to serve no more
than eight vehicles at one time.
D. Outdoor storage and display, when accessory to a permitted use, shall
be regulated as follows:
(1) Outdoor storage or display shall not occupy any part of the street
right-of-way and no other area intended or designed for pedestrian
use, required parking areas nor required front yard.
(2) Outdoor storage areas, excluding display areas, shall be shielded
from view from the public streets and adjacent residential uses in
accordance with § 220-201.
(3) Roadside produce and nursery stands shall be exempted from
outdoor storage limitations.
A. There shall be no minimum lot area. Lot area shall be based upon
required setbacks, impervious coverage, parking and loading/
unloading, floodplains/wetlands, steep slope requirements, woodland
preservation and other applicable criteria as set forth in this chapter.
B. The minimum lot width shall be not less than 50 feet at the dedicated
right-of-way line.
A. Yards of the following minimum depths and widths shall be provided:
(1) The minimum front yard depth shall be 20 feet, measured from the
dedicated right-of-way.
(2) The minimum side yard depth shall be 10 feet.
(3) The minimum rear yard depth shall be 35 feet.
B. The establishment of unlimited area buildings, as defined within
Chapter 70, Building Construction and Safety Standards, as amended,
may require yard depths and widths exceeding the minimum depths
and widths required by this article.
§ 220-49 (RESERVED) § 220-54
216:721
§ 220-54. Site design standards.
In addition to performance standards contained within Article XIX, the
following additional site design standards are applicable for any new
construction within the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District:
A. Off-street parking. Off-street parking/loading and unloading areas shall
be provided in accordance with provisions set forth in Article XXIV
herein.
B. Lighting.
(1) Lighting must be controlled in both height and intensity to maintain
neighborhood character.
(2) Light standards are restricted to a maximum of 20 feet in height.
(3) The light level from any use measured at a residential lot line may
not exceed 0.2 footcandle. To achieve this standard, luminaires
shall be shielded to prevent light shining beyond the lot lines onto
neighboring properties.
C. Screening and buffering. Where nonresidential uses abut residential
uses, screening and buffering shall be provided in accordance with
§§ 220-201 and 220-202 herein.
§ 220-54 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-54
216:722
ARTICLE IX
C-2 General Commercial District
§ 220-55. Intent.
Consistent with the general purposes of this chapter and the goals and
objectives of the Lower Allen Township Comprehensive Plan, the specific
intent of this article is:
§ 220-56. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses are as follows:
A. To provide standards for the development of a variety of general
commercial uses.
B. To establish these districts in existing commercial areas and to allow for
the reasonable expansion of such uses.
C. To develop standards designed to minimize traffic congestion and to
provide for public conveniences.
A. Nonresidential uses shall be permitted in accordance with the NAICS
as follows: [Amended 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
NAICS No. Category
111 Crop Production, limited to indoor growing facilities
11251 Aquaculture, limited to indoor growing facilities
22112 Electric Power Transmission, Control and Distribution
2212 Natural Gas Distribution
2213 Water, Sewage and Other Systems
23 Construction
3219 Other Wood Product Manufacturing, excluding Industry
32199, All Other Wood Product Manufacturing
323 Printing and Related Support Activities
334 Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing
337 Furniture and Related Product Manufacturing
339 Miscellaneous Manufacturing
42 Wholesale Trade
44-45 Retail Trade, excluding Industry 4543, (Direct Selling
Establishments), and excluding sexually oriented
business as defined by Chapter 59 of the Code of the
Township of Lower Allen. Refer to said chapter for
sexually oriented business regulations.
482 Rail Transportation
483 Water Transportation
§ 220-55 (RESERVED) § 220-56
216:723
§ 220-57. Use limitations.
NAICS No. Category
485 Transit and Ground Passenger Transportation
486 Pipeline Transportation
487 Scenic and Sightseeing Transportation
488 Support Activities for Transportation
491 Postal Service
492 Couriers and Messengers
51 Information
52 Finance and Insurance
53 Real Estate and Rental and Leasing
54 Professional, Scientific and Technical Services
55 Management of Companies and Enterprises
56 Administration and Support and Waste Management and
Remediation Services, except: Subsector 562, Waste
Management and Remediation Services
61 Educational Services
62 Health Care and Social Assistance
71 Arts, Entertainment and Recreation, except: Industries
7131 (Amusement Parks and Arcades) and 7132
(Gambling Industries)
72 Accommodation and Food Services, except: Industry
721191 (Bed-and-Breakfast Inns
81 Other Services (except Public Administration)
92 Public Administration, except: Industry 92214
(Correctional Institutions)
B. Signs, when erected and maintained in accordance with Article XXV.
C. Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses, in accordance with § 220-150.
D. Parking lots as a principal use.
A. All uses shall be provided for in accordance with performance
standards as contained within Article XIX herein.
B. Outdoor storage and display, when accessory to a permitted use, shall
be regulated as follows:
(1) Outdoor storage or display shall not occupy any part of the street
right-of-way and no other area intended or designed for pedestrian
use, required parking areas nor required front yard.
§ 220-56 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-57
216:724
§ 220-58. Impervious coverage.
Impervious coverage shall not exceed 70% of the lot.
§ 220-59. Building height limit. [Amended 9-10-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-08]
No building shall be erected to a height in excess of 75 feet. When adjacent
to a residential district or use, two feet in additional setbacks along the
adjacent property lines shall be provided for every foot that the building
height exceeds 50 feet.
§ 220-60. Lot area and width.
§ 220-61. Yards.
(2) Outdoor storage areas, excluding display areas, shall be shielded
from view from the public streets and adjacent residential uses in
accordance with § 220-201.
(3) Roadside produce and nursery stands shall be exempted from
outdoor storage limitations.
C. Stores, shops and businesses shall be conducted within an enclosed
building, except as otherwise permitted in accordance with Article XIX
herein.
D. There shall be no manufacturing, compounding, processing or
treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental and
essential to a retail store and when all such products are sold on the
premises.
A. There shall be no minimum lot area. Lot area shall be based upon
required setbacks, impervious coverage, off-street parking and loading/
unloading, floodplains/wetlands, steep slope requirements, woodland
preservation and other applicable criteria as set forth in this chapter.
B. The minimum lot width shall be not less than 50 feet at the dedicated
right-of-way line.
A. Yards of the following minimum depths and widths shall be provided:
(1) The minimum front yard depth shall be 30 feet at the dedicated
right-of-way.
(2) The minimum side yard depth shall be 10 feet. [Amended
9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-08]
(3) The minimum rear yard depth shall be 35 feet.
B. The establishment of unlimited area buildings, as defined within
Chapter 70, Building Construction and Safety Standards, as amended,
§ 220-57 (RESERVED) § 220-61
216:725
§ 220-62. Off-street parking, loading and unloading areas and
access drives.
Off-street parking, loading areas and access shall be provided in accordance
with Article XIX.
may require yard depths and widths exceeding the minimum depths
and widths required by this article.
§ 220-61 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-62
216:726
ARTICLE X
C-3 Business Park District
§ 220-63. Intent.
The intent of this district is to provide for the orderly and integrated
development of a campus-like professional business park consisting of a
variety of light industrial and office facilities and uses for local residents, as
well as the general public, encompassing uses which will:
§ 220-64. Permitted uses.
In this district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be
erected which is arranged, intended to be used or designed to be used for
other than one or more of the following permitted uses in accordance with
all other provisions of this chapter:
A. Encourage the construction on and continued use of land for a variety
of nonresidential uses that are generally less intensive than uses
permitted within the C-2 General Commercial District and are
compatible with abutting residential areas.
B. Provide reasonable performance standards for the establishment of
structures and uses that will permit continued economic development,
yet conserve the value of abutting residential areas. Such performance
standards shall manage the type and intensity of uses permitted and
minimize impact upon abutting residential areas.
C. Provide for and create a transition zone between residential districts
and other more intensive commercial and industrial districts.
A. Planned business centers, as a conditional use only, in accordance with
§ 220-157.
B. Nonresidential uses shall be permitted in accordance with the NAICS
as follows: [Amended 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
NAICS No. Category
111 Crop Production, limited to indoor growing facilities
11251 Aquaculture, limited to indoor growing facilities
22112 Electric Power Transmission, Control and Distribution
2212 Natural Gas Distribution
2213 Water, Sewage and Other Systems
334 Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing
335 Electrical Equipment, Appliance and Component
Manufacturing
337 Furniture and Related Product Manufacturing
339 Miscellaneous Manufacturing
§ 220-63 (RESERVED) § 220-64
216:727
§ 220-65. Use limitations.
NAICS No. Category
42 Wholesale Trade
4812 Heliport, as a conditional use only
482 Rail Transportation
483 Water Transportation
485 Transit and Ground Passenger Transportation
486 Pipeline Transportation
487 Scenic and Sightseeing Transportation
491 Postal Service
492 Couriers and Messengers
493 Warehousing and Storage
51 Information
52 Finance and Insurance
53 Real Estate and Rental and Leasing
54 Professional, Scientific and Technical Services
55 Management of Companies and Enterprises
56 Administration and Support and Waste Management and
Remediation Services, except: Subsector 562, Waste
Management and Remediation Services
61 Educational Services
62 Health Care and Social Assistance, except: Subsectors
622 (Hospitals) and 623 (Nursing and Residential Care
Facilities); and Industries 6242 (Community Food and
Housing, and Emergency and Other Relief Services) and
6243 (Vocational Rehabilitation Services)
71 Arts, Entertainment and Recreation, except: Industries
7131 (Amusement Parks and Arcades), and 7132
(Gambling Industries)
72 Accommodation and Food Services, except: Industry
721191 (Bed-and-Breakfast Inns)
81 Other Services (except Public Administration), except:
Industry 8111 (Automotive Repair and Maintenance)
92 Public Administration, except: Industry 92214
(Correctional Institutions)
C. Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses, in accordance with § 220-150.
A. All uses shall be provided for in accordance with performance
standards as contained within Article XV herein.
§ 220-64 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-65
216:728
§ 220-66. Building height limit.
No building shall be erected to a height in excess of 75 feet. When adjacent
to a residential district, two feet in additional setbacks along the adjacent
property lines shall be provided for every foot over 50 feet.
§ 220-67. Impervious coverage.
Impervious coverage shall not exceed 65% of the lot.
§ 220-68. Lot area and width.
§ 220-69. Yards.
B. Outdoor storage and display, when accessory to a permitted use, shall
be regulated as follows:
(1) Outdoor storage or display shall not occupy any part of the street
right-of-way and no other area intended or designed for pedestrian
use, required parking areas nor required front yard.
(2) Outdoor storage areas, excluding display areas, shall be shielded
from view from the public streets and adjacent residential uses in
accordance with § 220-201.
A. There shall be no minimum lot area. Lot area shall be based upon
required setbacks, impervious coverage, off-street parking and loading/
unloading, floodplains/wetlands, steep slope requirements, woodland
preservation and other applicable criteria as set forth in this chapter.
B. The minimum lot width shall be not less than 50 feet at the dedicated
right-of-way line.
A. Yards of the following minimum depths and widths shall be provided:
(1) The minimum front yard depth shall be 30 feet at the dedicated
right-of-way.
(2) The minimum side yard depth shall be 10 feet. When adjacent to a
residential district, two feet in additional setbacks along the
adjacent property lines shall be provided for every foot over 50
feet.
(3) The minimum rear yard depth shall be 35 feet.
(4) Interior yards. Minimum open space between separate principal
buildings on the same lot shall be 35 feet.
B. The establishment of unlimited area buildings, as defined within
Chapter 70, Building Construction and Safety Standards, as amended,
may require yard depths and widths exceeding the minimum depths
and widths required by this article.
§ 220-65 (RESERVED) § 220-70
216:729
§ 220-70. Site design standards.
In addition to performance standards contained within Article XIX, off-street
parking requirements contained within Article XXIV and sign provisions
contained within Article XXV, the following site design standards are
applicable for any new construction within the C-3 Business Park District:
A. Off-street parking requirements.
(1) All or part of the off-street parking spaces required within the C-3
Business Park District for two or more uses may be provided in
common parking garages/decks or parking lots, provided that:
(a) The number of spaces is not less than the sum of the spaces
required for each use individually;
(b) The parking facility must be located within the C-3 District.
(2) Cross-access easements for adjacent lots with interconnecting
parking areas shall be required in a format suitable to the
Township.
(3) Shared parking areas are preferred and encouraged. Two or more
uses may provide for required parking in a common parking lot if
the total space provided is not less than the sum of the spaces
required for each use individually.
(4) Parking lot layout shall take into consideration pedestrian
circulation and shall provide marked crosswalks and walkways
interconnected into the pedestrian circulation system. Such
crosswalks and walkways shall provide safe access from buildings
to parking areas, adjacent properties and sidewalks. The
crosswalks and walkways shall be integrated with existing
sidewalks and paths.
B. Pedestrian access.
(1) Paths and lanes.
(a) A pedestrian access system shall be provided throughout the
development adjacent to and interconnecting all businesses so
as to promote pedestrian activity throughout the development,
as well as neighboring developments, and may include
gathering/sitting areas with benches, landscaping and other
street furniture, as appropriate.
(b) The pedestrian access system shall consist of interconnected
pedestrian/biking paths located along rear or side property
lines and clearly marked pedestrian/biking lanes located on
one side of the existing cartway, linking such lanes with said
paths. Such paths and lanes shall be no less than six feet wide.
Paths shall be constructed of asphalt or similar durable
material as approved by the Township Engineer. Ramps for the
§ 220-70 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-70
216:730
physically challenged shall be provided at intersections and
crosswalks.
(c) Walking and biking paths linking businesses and neighboring
residential areas shall be provided where possible. Such paths
shall be a minimum of six feet wide and may use asphalt
paving.
(d) An agreement shall be required for signature between affected
property owners, outlining responsibilities and costs
associated with the continued maintenance of said pedestrian
access system.
§ 220-70 (RESERVED) § 220-70
216:731

ARTICLE XI
C-4 Regional Commercial District
§ 220-71. Intent.
Consistent with the general purposes of this chapter and the goals and
objectives of the Lower Allen Township Comprehensive Plan, the specific
intent of this article is:
§ 220-72. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses are as follows:
A. To provide standards for the development of a variety of regional
commercial uses.
B. To establish these districts in existing commercial areas and to allow for
the reasonable expansion of such uses.
C. To develop standards designed to minimize traffic congestion and to
provide for public conveniences.
A. Nonresidential uses shall be permitted in accordance with the NAICS,
as follows:
NAICS No. Category
22112 Electric Power Transmission, Control and Distribution
2212 Natural Gas Distribution
2213 Water, Sewage and Other Systems
323 Printing and Related Support Activities
44-45 Retail Trade
482 Rail Transportation
483 Water Transportation
485 Transit and Ground Passenger Transportation
486 Pipeline Transportation
491 Postal Service
492 Couriers and Messengers
51412 Libraries and Archives
52 Finance and Insurance
53 Real Estate and Rental and Leasing, except: Industries
53113 (Lessors of Miniwarehouses and Self-Storage
Units); 5321 (Automotive Equipment Rental and
Leasing); and 5324 (Commercial and Industrial
Machinery and Equipment Rental and Leasing)
54 Professional, Scientific and Technical Services
55 Management of Companies and Enterprises
§ 220-71 (RESERVED) § 220-72
216:733
§ 220-73. Use limitations.
NAICS No. Category
56 Administration and Support and Waste Management and
Remediation Services, except: Industry 5617 (Services
to Buildings and Dwellings); and Subsector 562, (Waste
Management and Remediation Services)
61 Educational Services
62 Health Care and Social Assistance, except: Subsectors
622 (Hospitals) and 623 (Nursing and Residential Care
Facilities); and Industries 6242 (Community Food and
Housing, and Emergency and Other Relief Services) and
6243 (Vocational Rehabilitation Services)
71 Arts, Entertainment and Recreation
72 Accommodation and Food Services, except: Industry
721191 (Bed-and-Breakfast Inns)
81 Other Services (except Public Administration), except:
Industries 8113 (Commercial and Industrial Machinery
and Equipment (except Automotive and Electronic)
Repair and Maintenance); and 8114 (Personal and
Household Goods Repair and Maintenance)
92 Public Administration, except: Industry 92214
(Correctional Institutions)
B. Signs, when erected and maintained in accordance with Article XXV.
C. Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses, in accordance with § 220-150.
D. Parking lots as a principal use.
A. All uses shall be provided for in accordance with performance
standards as contained within Article XIX herein.
B. Outdoor storage and display, when accessory to a permitted use, shall
be regulated as follows:
(1) Outdoor storage or display shall not occupy any part of the street
right-of-way and no other area intended or designed for pedestrian
use, required parking areas nor required front yard.
(2) Outdoor storage areas, excluding display areas, shall be shielded
from view from the public streets and adjacent residential uses in
accordance with § 220-201.
(3) Roadside produce and nursery stands shall be exempted from
outdoor storage limitations.
§ 220-72 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-73
216:734
§ 220-74. Impervious coverage.
Impervious coverage shall not exceed 70% of the lot.
§ 220-75. Building height limit. [Amended 9-10-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-08]
No building shall be erected to a height in excess of 75 feet. When adjacent
to a residential district or use, two feet in additional setbacks along the
adjacent property lines shall be provided for every foot that the building
height exceeds 50 feet.
§ 220-76. Lot area and width.
§ 220-77. Yards.
C. Stores, shops and businesses shall be conducted within an enclosed
building, except as otherwise permitted in accordance with Article XIX
herein.
D. There shall be no manufacturing, compounding, processing or
treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental and
essential to a retail store and when all such products are sold on the
premises.
A. There shall be no minimum lot area. Lot area shall be based upon
required setbacks, impervious coverage, off-street parking and loading/
unloading, floodplains/wetlands, steep slope requirements, woodland
preservation and other applicable criteria as set forth in this chapter.
B. The minimum lot width shall be not less than 50 feet at the dedicated
right-of-way line.
A. Yards of the following minimum depths and widths shall be provided:
(1) The minimum front yard depth shall be 30 feet at the dedicated
right-of-way.
(2) The minimum side yard depth shall be 10 feet. [Amended
9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-08]
(3) The minimum rear yard depth shall be 35 feet.
B. The establishment of unlimited area buildings, as defined within
Chapter 70, Building Construction and Safety Standards, as amended,
may require yard depths and widths exceeding the minimum depths
and widths required by this article.
§ 220-73 (RESERVED) § 220-78
216:735
§ 220-78. Off-street parking, loading and unloading areas and
access drives.
Off-street parking, loading areas and access shall be provided in accordance
with Article XXIV.
§ 220-78 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-78
216:736
ARTICLE XII
I-1 General Industrial District
§ 220-79. Intent.
Consistent with the general purposes of this chapter and the goals and
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan, the specific intent of this article is:
§ 220-80. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses are as follows:
A. To encourage the construction on and continued use of the land for
industrial purposes.
B. To prohibit any use which should substantially interfere with the
development, continuation or expansion of industrial uses in the I-1
General Industrial District.
C. To establish reasonable standards for buildings and other structures,
the areas and dimensions of yards and other open spaces and the
provision of facilities and operation of industries to minimize air
pollution, noise, glare, heat, vibration, fire, safety hazards, etc.
D. To establish these districts in areas of the Township which have
adequate infrastructure, including access to a major transportation
corridor, public water and a public sewer.
E. To provide increased employment opportunities for the citizens of the
Township and surrounding communities.
A. Nonresidential uses shall be permitted in accordance with the NAICS
as follows: [Amended 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
NAICS No. Category
111 Crop Production, limited to indoor growing facilities
11251 Aquaculture, limited to indoor growing facilities
22112 Electric Power Transmission, Control and Distribution
2212 Natural Gas Distribution
2213 Water, Sewage and Other Systems
23 Construction
31-33 Manufacturing
42 Wholesale Trade
4543 Direct Selling Establishments
4812 Heliport, as a conditional use only
482 Rail Transportation
483 Water Transportation
§ 220-79 (RESERVED) § 220-80
216:737
§ 220-81. Use limitations.
NAICS No. Category
484 Truck Transportation
485 Transit and Ground Passenger Transportation
486 Pipeline Transportation
487 Scenic and Sightseeing Transportation
488 Support Activities for Transportation
491 Postal Service
492 Couriers and Messengers
493 Warehousing and Storage
51 Information
52 Finance and Insurance
53 Real Estate and Rental and Leasing
54 Professional, Scientific and Technical Services
55 Management of Companies and Enterprises
56 Administration and Support and Waste Management and
Remediation Services, except: Industries 5616
(Investigation and Security Services) and 5619 (Other
Support Services)
6244 Child Day Care Services
7111 Performing Arts Companies
7112 Spectator Sports
712 Museums, Historical Sites and Similar Institutions
7139 Other Amusement and Recreation Industries
811 Repair and Maintenance
812 Personal and Laundry Services
92 Public Administration
B. Accessory dwellings for watchmen or caretakers employed on the
premises.
C. Junkyards, in accordance with § 220-166.
D. Landfill operations, in accordance with § 220-168.
E. Signs, in accordance with Article XXV.
F. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to the
above permitted uses, in accordance with § 220-150.
A. All uses shall be provided for in accordance with performance
standards as contained within Article XIX herein.
§ 220-80 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-81
216:738
§ 220-82. Building height limit.
No building shall exceed a height of 75 feet.
§ 220-83. Impervious coverage.
Impervious coverage shall not exceed 70% of the lot.
§ 220-84. Lot area and width.
§ 220-85. Yards.
B. Outdoor storage and display, when accessory to a permitted use, shall
be regulated as follows:
(1) Outdoor storage or display shall not occupy any part of the street
right-of-way and no other area intended or designed for pedestrian
use, required off-street parking areas nor required front yard.
(2) Outdoor storage areas, excluding display areas, shall be shielded
from view from adjacent residential uses in accordance with
§ 220-201.
C. Screening required in accordance with § 220-201.
D. Buffering required in accordance with § 220-202.
A. There shall be no minimum lot area. Lot area shall be based upon
required setbacks, impervious coverage, off-street parking and loading/
unloading, floodplains/wetlands, steep slope requirements, woodland
preservation and other applicable criteria as set forth in this chapter.
B. The minimum lot width shall be not less than 50 feet at the dedicated
right-of-way line.
A. Yards of the following minimum depths and widths shall be provided:
(1) The minimum front yard depth shall be 30 feet at the dedicated
right-of-way.
(2) The minimum side yard depth shall be 10 feet.
(3) The minimum rear yard depth shall be 35 feet.
(4) Interior yards: open space between separate principal buildings on
the same lot, minimum 35 feet.
B. The establishment of unlimited area buildings, as defined within
Chapter 70, Building Construction and Safety Standards, as amended,
may require yard depths and widths exceeding the minimum depths
and widths required by this article.
§ 220-81 (RESERVED) § 220-85
216:739
§ 220-86. Off-street parking, loading and unloading areas and
access drives.
Off-street parking, loading and unloading areas and access drives shall be
provided in accordance with Article XXIV.
C. When adjacent to a residential district, two feet in additional setbacks
along the adjacent property lines shall be provided for every foot over
50 feet in building height.
§ 220-85 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-86
216:740
ARTICLE XIII
I-2 Mineral Recovery District
§ 220-87. Intent.
The specific intent of the this article is:
§ 220-88. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses are as follows:
§ 220-89. Application.
A. To identify an area or district where recovery of minerals from the earth
is a permitted use.
B. To recognize that in certain cases federal and state regulations apply to
the recovery of minerals.
C. To provide additional safeguards deemed necessary to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township.
A. Nonresidential uses shall be permitted in accordance with the NAICS
as follows:
NAICS No. Category
21 Mining
22112 Electric Power Transmission, Control and Distribution
2212 Natural Gas Distribution
2213 Water, Sewage and Other Systems
23 Construction
324 Petroleum and Coal Products Manufacturing
327 Nonmetallic Mineral Product Manufacturing
562 Waste Management and Remediation Services
8113 Commercial and Industrial Machinery and Equipment
(except Automotive and Electronic) Repair and
Maintenance
B. Timbering, processing, sales and restoration.
C. Accessory dwellings for watchmen or caretakers employed on the
premises.
D. Public and private parks and recreation areas and appurtenant
buildings and improvements, when they are compatible with all other
authorized uses on the site and the reclamation of the site.
E. Agricultural uses.
F. Signs, in accordance with Article XXV.
§ 220-87 (RESERVED) § 220-89
216:741
§ 220-90. Lot area and width.
§ 220-91. Lot coverage and open space.
A. An application shall be filed with the Zoning Officer prior to the
issuance of a use or zoning permit for the establishment or expansion of
the following uses:
(1) Surface mining, processing, sales and restoration.
(2) Storage, stockpiling, distribution and sale of minerals.
(3) Installation and operation of plants or apparatus for rock crushing
or cement treatment of base materials and appurtenant screening,
blending, washing, loading and conveyer facilities.
(4) Concrete batching plants and mixing plants for either portland
cement or asphalt concrete.
(5) Manufacture of concrete and clay products and precast structural
units.
B. Such application shall include the following:
(1) An application fee in such amount as shall be determined by the
Board of Commissioners Fee Schedule.229
(2) A copy of all applications, plans, maps and related information filed
with any regulatory agency or body having jurisdiction and all
permits issued with respect thereto for review by the Planning
Commission and the Board of Commissioners.
(3) The applicant shall post security, as permitted in the Surface
Mining Conservation and Reclamation Act,230 in the amount of
$1,000 per acre. If such security has been posted with another
regulatory agency or body having jurisdiction, naming the
Township as additional obligee, an additional bond shall not be
required.
C. Prior to the issuance of a use or zoning permit for the establishment or
expansion of permitted uses, excluding permitted uses listed above
within Subsection A, a building and/or zoning permit and other
applicable state and federal permits shall be obtained by the
appropriate agency.
A. The minimum lot area shall be five acres.
B. The minimum lot width at the building line shall be 200 feet.
229. Editor's Note: Current Fee Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
230. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 3301 et seq.
§ 220-89 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-91
216:742
§ 220-92. Yards.
Yards of the following minimum depths and widths shall be provided, except
as provided in § 220-212:
§ 220-93. Special setback regulations.
Unless otherwise provided for by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, the following special setback regulations shall
apply to uses as contained within § 220-88:
§ 220-94. Performance standards.
A. Principal and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 50% of the
lot area.
B. Not less than 20% of the lot area shall be covered with lawn and
plantings.
A. The minimum front yard depth shall be 50 feet.
B. The minimum side yard width shall be 25 feet.
C. The minimum rear yard depth shall be 50 feet.
A. Activities shall not be nearer than 100 feet to any property line or public
street.
B. Activities shall not be nearer than 300 feet to an occupied dwelling unit
or commercial or industrial building, unless released by the owner
thereof.
C. Activities shall not be nearer than 300 feet to a public building, school,
or institutional building or a public park.
D. Activities shall not be nearer than 100 feet to a cemetery.
E. Activities shall not be nearer than 100 feet to a bank of a perennial or
intermittent watercourse.
F. All activities shall be protected by a fence or wall six feet high and shall
have openings no larger than six inches.
G. Quarry walls shall not be readily visible from public streets or adjacent
developed properties, except for ingress and egress roads.
A. In addition to special setback requirements for certain uses as provided
for within § 220-93, all uses must comply with performance standards
as set forth within Article XIX herein.
B. All activities must be undertaken in compliance with the Noncoal
Surface Mining Conservation and Reclamation Act of 1984, as
amended.231
§ 220-91 (RESERVED) § 220-95
216:743
§ 220-95. Off-street parking, loading and unloading areas and
access drives.
Off-street parking, loading and unloading areas and access drives shall be
provided in accordance with Article XXIV.
§ 220-95.1. Building height limit. [Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-08]
No building shall exceed a height of 75 feet. When adjacent to a residential
district or use, two feet in additional setbacks along the adjacent property
lines shall be provided for every foot that the building height exceeds 50
feet. This building height limit does not apply to unoccupied processing or
manufacturing equipment and structures associated with permitted mineral
recovery district uses.
231. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 3301 et seq.
§ 220-95 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-95.1
216:744
ARTICLE XIV
I-3 Industrial/Commercial District
§ 220-96. Intent.
The intent of this district is to provide for the orderly and integrated
development of existing and future service establishments, industrial uses,
offices and a mix of commercial uses, including wholesale and retail
establishments, exclusive of incompatible industries and high trafficgenerating
uses. The intent of this article is to:
§ 220-97. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses are as follows:
A. Encourage the construction on and continued use of land for a variety
of nonresidential uses that complements and serves the local
community.
B. Encourage the construction of new buildings and establishment of new
uses at a scale consistent with existing buildings, uses and development
patterns.
C. Encourage and direct uses that will utilize existing facilities, such as
public sewer, public water, public transit, roadways and the existing
railroad system.
D. Provide reasonable performance standards for the establishment of
structures and uses that will permit continued economic development,
yet conserve the value of abutting residential areas. Such performance
standards shall manage the type and intensity of uses permitted and
minimize impacts upon abutting residential areas.
A. Nonresidential uses shall be permitted in accordance with the NAICS
as follows: [Amended 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
NAICS No. Category
111 Crop Production, limited to indoor growing facilities
11251 Aquaculture, limited to indoor growing facilities
22112 Electric Power Transmission, Control and Distribution
2212 Natural Gas Distribution
2213 Water, Sewage and Other Systems
23 Construction
31-33 Manufacturing
42 Wholesale Trade
44-45* Retail Trade, excluding Industry 4543, (Direct Selling
Establishments)
4812 Heliport, as a conditional use only
§ 220-96 (RESERVED) § 220-97
216:745
NAICS No. Category
482 Rail Transportation
483 Water Transportation
484 Truck Transportation
485 Transit and Ground Passenger Transportation
486 Pipeline Transportation
487 Scenic and Sightseeing Transportation
488 Support Activities for Transportation
491 Postal Service
492 Couriers and Messengers
493 Warehousing and Storage
51 Information
52 Finance and Insurance
53 Real Estate and Rental and Leasing
54 Professional, Scientific and Technical Services
55 Management of Companies and Enterprises
56 Administration and Support and Waste Management and
Remediation Services, except: Subsector 562, Waste
Management and Remediation Services
61 Educational Services
62 Health Care and Social assistance
71 Arts, Entertainment and Recreation, except Industries
7131 (Amusement Parks and Arcades) and 7132
(Gambling Industries)
72 Accommodation and Food Services, except: Industry
721191 (Bed-and-Breakfast Inns).
81 Other Services (except Public Administration)
92 Public Administration, except Industry 92214
(Correctional Institutions)
NOTE:
* No proposed retail use or combination of retail uses occupying an
existing building or proposed for a new building shall exceed 30,000
square feet of floor area. No single building, existing or proposed, shall
be occupied by more than 30,000 square feet of floor area of retail use
or combination of retail uses described by NAICS Sectors 44 and 45.
B. Parking lots as a principal use.
C. Accessory dwellings for watchmen or caretakers employed on the
premises.
§ 220-97 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-97
216:746
§ 220-98. Use limitations.
§ 220-99. Building height limit.
No building shall exceed a height of 75 feet. When adjacent to a residential
district or use, two feet in additional setbacks along the adjacent property
lines shall be provided for every foot that the building height exceeds 50
feet.
§ 220-100. Impervious coverage.
Impervious coverage shall not exceed 70% of the lot.
§ 220-101. Lot area and width.
§ 220-102. Yards.
D. Signs, when erected and maintained in accordance with Article XXV.
E. Accessory uses and structures on the same lot with and customarily
incidental to any of the above permitted uses, in accordance with
§ 220-150.
A. All uses shall be provided for in accordance with performance
standards as contained within Article XIX herein.
B. Outdoor storage and display, when accessory to a permitted use, shall
be regulated as follows:
(1) Outdoor storage or display shall not occupy any part of the street
right-of-way and no other area intended or designed for pedestrian
use, required off-street parking areas or required front yard.
(2) Outdoor storage areas, excluding display areas, shall be shielded
from view from adjacent residential uses, and from view from
public streets if storage is located between a building and the
public street, in accordance with § 220-201.
C. Permitted uses shall be conducted within an enclosed building, except
as otherwise permitted within Article XIX herein.
A. There shall be no minimum lot area. Lot area shall be based upon
required setbacks, impervious coverage, off-street parking and loading/
unloading, floodplains/wetlands, steep slope requirements, woodland
preservation and other applicable criteria as set forth in this chapter.
B. The minimum lot width shall not be less than 50 feet at the dedicated
right-of-way line.
A. Yards of the following minimum depths and widths shall be provided:
(1) The minimum front yard depth shall be 30 feet at the dedicated
right-of-way.
§ 220-97 (RESERVED) § 220-102
216:747
§ 220-103. Screening and buffering.
Screening and buffering shall be provided pursuant to §§ 220-201 and
220-202.
§ 220-104. Off-street parking, loading and unloading areas and
access drives.
Off-street parking, loading and unloading areas and access drives shall be
provided in accordance with Article XXIV.
(2) The minimum side yard depth shall be 10 feet.
(3) The minimum rear yard depth shall be 35 feet. The rear yard may
be reduced to 15 feet when it abuts a railroad or limited-access
highway right-of-way.
(4) Interior yards. Open space between separate principal buildings on
the same lot, minimum 35 feet.
B. An additional setback of two feet for all sides of the tract shall be
required for each foot of building exceeding 50 feet in height.
C. The establishment of unlimited area buildings, as defined within
Chapter 70, Building Construction and Safety Standards, as amended,
may require yard depths and widths exceeding the minimum depths
and widths required by this article.
§ 220-102 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-104
216:748
ARTICLE XV
Open Space Development (OSD) Overlay District232
§ 220-105. Intent. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05]
The OSD Overlay District is primarily intended to:
§ 220-106. Applicability.
A. Promote a detailed analysis of development parcels so as to locate and
coordinate appropriate areas for development and for conservation;
B. Avoid development that could cause inefficient patterns of
development;
C. Encourage a blend of recreation areas and a mix of housing at a
medium density to serve various age groups and types of housing;
D. Provide for reasonably safe and convenient pedestrian, bicycle and
vehicle circulation, with an emphasis on connecting residential and
recreational areas;
E. Provide greater design flexibility and efficiency in the siting of homes,
services and infrastructure, including the opportunity to reduce the
length of streets and utility facilities;
F. Preserve rural characteristics through the permanent preservation of
meaningful open space and sensitive natural resources;
G. Encourage the creation of a sense of place and community spirit;
H. Promote the goals and objectives of the Lower Allen Township
Comprehensive Plan Update, 2006, as amended;
I. Make efficient use of available public water and sewer services and
other infrastructure; and
J. Avoid excessive improvement costs and future Township maintenance
costs for each new home by minimizing the amount of street and utility
length per home.
A. The OSD Overlay District applies to R-1 Single-Family Established
Residential and R-2 Single-Family Rural Residential Zoning Districts.
[Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05]
B. OSD developments are a permitted use by right in the R-1 and R-2
Zoning Districts. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05]
C. For the purposes of this article, the words "parcel" or "lot," whether
singular or plural, shall encompass planned community units under the
Pennsylvania Uniform Planned Community Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et
232. Editor's Note: The title of this article was changed from Conservation Subdivision (CS)
Overlay District 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05.
§ 220-105 (RESERVED) § 220-106
216:749
§ 220-107. Minimum requirements.
§ 220-108. Infrastructure requirements.
seq., as amended, and condominium units under the Pennsylvania
Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq., as amended,
and the lot area, lot width and yard standards of this article shall apply
to each such planned community unit or condominium unit as if each
unit constituted a parcel or lot.
A. A minimum tract size of five acres is required for an OSD development.
[Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05]
B. Each residential lot shall be within 300 feet walking distance of either
public recreation land or common open space.
(1) Perimeter setbacks:
(a) For single-family detached and side-by-side twin dwelling
units, no additional perimeter setback other than required
yards shall be required.
(b) For all other permitted uses, a fifty-foot-wide perimeter
setback shall be required for uses in the OSD development
from existing residential uses. Screen planting shall be
provided in the setback in accordance with §§ 220-201 and
220-202. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05]
A. All proposed development within any OSD shall be served by either
public water or suitable private wells. If water supply other than public
water is proposed, applicant shall provide a hydrogeologic study
demonstrating the availability of adequate water supply. The study shall
be submitted with the preliminary plan. [Amended 10-25-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-05]
B. All proposed development within any OSD shall be served by either
public sewer or a community sewage disposal system. [Amended
10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05]
C. Traffic from an OSD of 20 acres or more shall have access to a major
collector road, a minor arterial road or a local road, as identified in the
Township Comprehensive Plan Update, 2006, as amended. Primary
access from an OSD of 20 acres or more from a minor Township road
shall not be permitted. Where primary access to an OSD of 20 acres or
more is via a major collector road or a local road, the primary route of
travel from the OSD to a principal arterial shall be identified. This
primary route of travel shall not contain deficiencies identified in the
Township Comprehensive Plan Update, 2006, as amended. [Amended
10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05]
D. Single-family detached and side-by-side twin dwelling unit lots are
permitted to front only minor Township or local streets. All other
§ 220-106 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-108
216:750
§ 220-109. Permitted uses.
In addition to those uses permitted in the underlying zoning district, the
following uses shall be permitted by right:
§ 220-110. Building height limit.
Refer to the requirements in the underlying zoning district.
§ 220-111. Residential density. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-05]
permitted uses are permitted to front on minor Township, local or major
collector street.
E. All OSD developments shall include provisions for constructing trails
within and through the development. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-05]
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Townhouses.
C. Side-by-side twin dwellings.
D. Publicly owned recreation uses; recreation uses and open space owned
by a property owners association.
E. Nature preserves.
A. Maximum density for a OSD shall be determined as follows:
(1) Determine land area available for development after deleting:
existing rights-of-way of existing streets and railroads, and lands
continuously covered with water.
(2) Multiply the resulting acreage by the following number to result in
the number of permitted dwelling units (DU) within the residential
sections of the OSD.
(a) Underlying Zoning District R-1: six.
(b) Underlying Zoning District R-2: two.
B. The densities achieved in Subsection A may be increased by not more
than two DU per acre, resulting in a maximum R-1 density of eight DU
per acre and a maximum R-2 density of four DU per acre by applying
the following methodology:
(1) One bonus DU per acre if the developer provides at least 125% of
the required open space or required recreation land, or 125% of
the fee in lieu of (FILO) dedicated recreation land, if deemed
acceptable per the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
(SLDO).233
§ 220-108 (RESERVED) § 220-111
216:751
§ 220-112. Lot area and width.
§ 220-113. Impervious coverage. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-05]
The overall impervious coverage for an OSD shall not exceed 40% in the R-1
District and shall not exceed 30% in the R-2 District.
§ 220-114. Yards.
Yards shall be provided as follows:
(2) Two bonus DU per acre if the developer provides at least 150% of
the required open space or required recreation land, or 150% FILO
dedicated recreation land, if deemed acceptable per SLDO.
(3) Two bonus DU per acre if the developer provides at least 125% of
the required open space and required recreation land, or 125%
FILO dedicated recreation land, if deemed acceptable per SLDO.
A. For single-family detached dwellings:
(1) The minimum lot area shall be 6,000 square feet.
(2) The minimum lot width at the building setback line shall be 40 feet.
B. For side-by-side twin dwelling:
(1) The minimum lot area shall be 5,000 square feet.
(2) The minimum lot width at the building setback line shall be 30 feet.
C. For townhouse dwelling units:
(1) The minimum lot area shall be 2,000 square feet.
(2) The minimum lot width and dwelling unit width at the front of the
enclosed dwelling unit shall be 20 feet.
D. For all other permitted uses:
(1) There shall be no minimum lot area. Lot area shall be based on
required setbacks, impervious coverage, parking, environmental
limitations and other applicable criteria.
(2) The minimum lot width shall be not less than 50 feet at the
dedicated right-of-way line, and not less than 100 feet at the
building line.
A. On a multiple frontage lot, a front yard shall be provided abutting each
street frontage.
233. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 192, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 220-111 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-114
216:752
§ 220-115. Residential development criteria.
B. For single-family detached, side-by-side twin and townhouse dwellings:
[Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05]
(1) Minimum front yard depth: five feet.
(2) Maximum front yard depth: 25 feet.
(3) Minimum rear yard for principal building: 25 feet.
C. For single-family detached dwelling: Minimum side yards shall total no
less than 15 feet, with no one side less than five feet, in width. On a
corner lot, two side yards shall be provided along the interior lot lines.
D. For side-by-side twin dwellings:
(1) One side yard shall be provided, with a minimum width of 10 feet.
E. For townhouse dwellings:
(1) No side yard shall be required for interior units, if alley or
easement access is provided to the rear yard.
(2) For each end unit, one side yard shall be provided, with a minimum
width of 10 feet.
F. For all other permitted uses, refer to the requirements in the underlying
zoning district.
G. An unenclosed porch, deck or patio may intrude into a required front,
side or rear yard a maximum of 50% of the required setback or 10 feet,
whichever is less.
H. Chimneys, roof overhangs, rain gutters, building footings, window wells
and similar features may intrude up to two feet into a required setback.
I. Detached accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of five feet
from a side or rear lot line. Accessory buildings shall not be permitted
within a front yard.
A. A minimum percentage of 60% of total allowable dwelling units within
any OSD must be detached single-family dwellings. [Amended
10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05]
B. For townhouse dwelling units:
(1) No more than six townhouse units shall be attached. [Amended
10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05]
(2) A vertical or horizontal visual structural offset or other deviation in
exterior architectural materials shall be provided for every other
unit.
§ 220-114 (RESERVED) § 220-116
216:753
§ 220-116. Open space requirements.
§ 220-117. Ownership and preservation of common open space.
A. In addition to required public recreation land, a minimum of 25% of the
gross area of an OSD development shall be retained as common open
space reserved for passive recreational use. [Amended 10-25-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-05]
B. A minimum of 50% of the designated common open space shall not be
regraded as part of development of the site.
C. Common open space shall be available for use by residents of the OSD
and their guests free of charge, except for areas of nonintensive
agriculture, horticulture, floriculture or silviculture. An annual
maintenance fee assessed to all property owners for maintenance of
common open space shall not be considered a charge for use of the
space. [Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05]
D. Common open space may be made available for use by the general
public. This shall not be cause to reduce the requirements for
dedication of public recreation land.
E. A pedestrian access and trail construction plan shall be required to
provide accessibility to the common open space.
F. Commercial uses shall not be permitted in common open space, except
for community events approved by the owner of the common open
space.
G. Any area designated as common open space shall be no smaller than
four times the area of the smallest residential lot within the OSD
development, except for designated trails. [Amended 10-25-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-05]
A. Applicant must supply documentation showing proposed plan for
ownership and perpetual maintenance and protection of common open
space (COS). Available methods are as follows:
(1) COS ownership retained by applicant.
(2) COS offered for dedication to the Township. The Board of
Commissioners may accept dedication to the Township at their
discretion, but there is no obligation to do so.
(3) Ownership by a qualified conservation or preservation
organization.
(4) Ownership by a homeowners' association or condominium
association.
B. A conservation easement shall be provided to ensure that all common
open space shall remain open in perpetuity.
§ 220-116 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-117
216:754
ARTICLE XVI
Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) Overlay District
§ 220-118. Intent.
The TND Overlay District is primarily intended to:
§ 220-119. Applicability.
A. Encourage new development to occur in a manner consistent with
traditional patterns and scale of development, and mix of uses, that
occurred prior to newer suburban development patterns;
B. Promote a mix of diverse but compatible types of neighborhood
development;
C. Avoid development that could cause inefficient patterns of
development;
D. Encourage a blend of recreation areas and a mix of housing at a
medium density to serve various age groups and types of housing;
E. Provide for reasonably safe and convenient pedestrian, bicycle and
vehicle circulation, with an emphasis on avoiding conflicts with vehicles
backing out of garages across sidewalks;
F. Encourage persons to work, shop, attend religious services and enjoy
recreation in the neighborhood within which they live;
G. Encourage the creation of a sense of place and a community spirit that
promotes social interaction and volunteerism;
H. Service the purposes that are provided in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, for traditional
neighborhood development;
I. Promote the goals and objectives of the Lower Allen Township
Comprehensive Plan Update, 2006, as amended;
J. Make efficient use of available public water and sewer services and
other infrastructure; and
K. Avoid excessive improvement costs and future Township maintenance
costs for each new home by minimizing the amount of street and utility
length and width per home.
A. The Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) Overlay District
applies to R-1 Single-Family Established Residential, R-2 Single-Family
Rural Residential, and R-3 Multifamily Residential Zoning Districts.
B. Except as provided for in Subsection C, a TND development is a
conditional use in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts.
§ 220-118 (RESERVED) § 220-119
216:755
C. A TND development is permitted by right in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zoning
Districts, provided that:
(1) At least 50% of the TND is located within an opportunity site as
identified in the Township's Comprehensive Plan Update, 2006, as
amended; and
(2) The TND provides direct access onto at least one road that is
owned or maintained by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; and
(3) The TND does not include outside of the core neighborhood any of
the nonresidential uses listed in § 220-124A(20).
D. For the purposes of this Article XVI, the words "parcel" or "lot," whether
singular or plural, shall encompass planned community units under the
Pennsylvania Uniform Planned Community Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et
seq., as amended, and condominium units under the Pennsylvania
Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq., as amended,
and the lot area, lot width and yard standards of this Article XVI shall
apply to each such planned community unit or condominium unit as if
each unit constituted a parcel or lot. Planned community units and
condominium units that do not encompass any ground areas outside of
the walls of a building shall not be deemed to be a parcel or lot.
[Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-05]
E. For purposes of this Article XVI, the following articles specifically apply
to TNDs: [Added 7-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03234]
(1) Article I, General Provisions;
(2) Article II, Terminology;
(3) Article III, Designation of Districts;
(4) Article XVIII, Use Standards, excluding §§ 220-150 and 220-170;
(5) Article XIX, Performance Standards, excluding § 220-193A(1),
§§ 220-199 through § 220-200, § 220-201A(4), § 220-201C and
§§ 220-202 through 220-204;
(6) Article XX, General Standards, excluding §§ 220-212 through
220-213, §§ 220-214B and 220-215B(1);
(7) Article XXI, Nonconforming Buildings, Structures and Uses;
(8) Article XXII, Airport Hazard Zoning Provisions;
(9) Article XXIII, Groundwater Nonuse Overlay District;
(10) Article XXIV, Off-Street Parking;
(11) Article XXVI, Amendments;
234. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection E as Subsection F.
§ 220-119 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-119
216:756
§ 220-120. Minimum requirements.
§ 220-121. Infrastructure requirements.
(12) Article XXVII, Administration and Enforcement; and
(13) Article XXVIII, Floodplain Districts.
F. In addition to any standard, provision or requirement outside of Article
XVI that is specifically referenced in Article XVI, the standards,
provisions and requirements of Article XVI shall be the only standards,
provisions and requirements of the Zoning Ordinance that apply to
TNDs.
A. A minimum gross land area of 50 acres is required for a TND
development.
B. A TND development shall include at least one core neighborhood. A
TND may require more than one core neighborhood in order to comply
with Subsection D.
C. Each parcel containing a dwelling unit shall be within a walking
distance of 1,000 feet from either public recreation land or common
open space.
D. Each parcel containing a dwelling unit shall be within a walking
distance of 2,000 feet from the core neighborhood.
E. Each core neighborhood shall consist of a minimum of 10% of the
overall TND gross land area. The core neighborhood, or the combined
areas of all core neighborhoods if the TND includes more than one core
neighborhood, shall consist of a maximum of 40% of the overall TND
gross land area.
F. A minimum of 15% of the sum total of acreage required to satisfy
recreation requirements or common open space requirements must be
located within the core neighborhoods. This must include an area
designed as a central public space. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-05]
A. All proposed development within any TND shall be served by public
water and public sewer.
B. A TND development shall provide at least one, full-turning-movement
street that directly connects to a major collector road or a minor
arterial road, as identified in the Township Comprehensive Plan
Update, 2006, as amended. Primary access from a TND to an existing
local road or a minor Township road as identified in the Township
Comprehensive Plan Update, 2006, as amended, shall not be permitted.
For the purposes of this § 220-121, "primary access" means any street
of a TND that is intended and designed to accommodate more than 50%
of the trips generated by the TND.
§ 220-119 (RESERVED) § 220-121
216:757
§ 220-122. Conditional use requirements.
§ 220-123. Overall Master Plan (OMP).
C. Where primary access to a TND is via a major collector road, the
primary route of travel from the TND to a principal arterial shall be
identified. Upon completion of the proposed TND, this primary route of
travel shall not contain deficiencies identified in the Township
Comprehensive Plan Update, 2006, as amended. Existing deficiencies
may be mitigated with proposed improvements included in the Overall
Master Plan.
D. Access to single-family detached, side-by-side twin and townhouse
dwelling unit lots is permitted only from new or existing minor
Township or local streets or alleys. Access for all other permitted uses is
permitted from new or existing minor Township, local or major collector
streets.
A. Except as provided in § 220-119C, applicant shall submit a conditional
use (CU) application for any proposed TND.
B. The CU application shall be processed in accordance with § 220-266.1
of this chapter.
C. In addition to the requirements of § 220-266.1, the applicant shall:
(1) Demonstrate conformance with the goals and objectives of the
Lower Allen Township Comprehensive Plan Update, 2006, as
amended;
(2) Provide a traffic impact study showing the impacts of the proposed
development, and proposed measures to mitigate those impacts;
and
(3) Demonstrate that the proposed development will be adequately
served by public safety services and public utilities.
A. Applicant shall submit an Overall Master Plan (OMP) with the
conditional use application required under § 220-119. If a CU
application is not required pursuant to § 220-119C, then all of the
information required in § 220-123 shall be submitted with an
application for a preliminary subdivision or land development plan for
the TND.
B. The OMP shall:
(1) Show existing features, including but not limited to: roads; bridges;
culverts; railroads; rights-of-way; easements; utilities; and
pipelines; and the proposed changes to these features.
(2) Show areas and percentage of total land area designated for public
recreation land;
§ 220-121 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-123
216:758
(3) Show areas and percentage of total land area designated for
common open space;
(4) Show areas designated for stormwater management facilities;
(5) Show the designated core neighborhood;
(6) Show the general layout of streets, alleys, sidewalks and trails. This
shall include traffic circulation diagrams demonstrating adequate
access for emergency and routine service vehicles to all areas of
the proposed TND;
(7) Show in general terms how the TND will be served by utility and
transportation services;
(8) Provide an assessment of the impact of the TND on applicable
public school systems;
(9) Include documentation showing proposed plan for ownership and
perpetual maintenance and protection of common open space;
(10) Include typical design details for streets, alleys, sidewalks, trails,
public recreation facilities and common open space facilities.
C. The OMP shall include a phasing plan and schedule for implementation
of the TND. The schedule shall be developed to show: [Amended
8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-05]
(1) The square footage of nonresidential uses that are to be
constructed before 50% of the residential units outside the core
neighborhood are constructed.
(2) The percentage of residential units outside the core neighborhood
that are to be constructed before 25% of the square footage of the
nonresidential uses in the core neighborhood is constructed.
(3) The square footage of nonresidential uses in the core neighborhood
that are to be constructed before 75% of the residential units
outside the core neighborhood are constructed.
(4) The percentage of residential units outside the core neighborhood
that are to be constructed before 75% of the square footage of the
nonresidential uses in the core neighborhood is constructed.
D. Architectural standards and guidelines.
(1) The OMP submitted with the conditional use application,
preliminary subdivision plan or preliminary land development plan
shall include a set of proposed architectural standards and
guidelines (ASG), to be applied consistently throughout the entire
TND.
(2) The ASG shall, at a minimum, address the following:
§ 220-123 (RESERVED) § 220-123
216:759
§ 220-124. Permitted uses.
(a) Architectural guidelines. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-05]
(b) Building materials, proportions, massing and detailing.
(c) Roof style and pitches.
(d) Window and door type, size and location.
(e) Front porch type, size and location.
A. The following uses shall be permitted by right, provided that, if
conditional use (CU) approval is required under § 220-119, such
approval is granted; and the proposed uses are consistent with the
Overall Master Plan:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Side-by-side twin dwellings and two-family attached dwellings.
[Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-05]
(3) Townhouses, in accordance with § 220-35.
(4) Places of worship, including: one accessory residential dwelling
unit per each place of worship; and one accessory preschool use
per each place or worship.
(5) Libraries.
(6) Schools, from preschool through grade 12.
(7) Family care facility.
(8) Family day-care facility in accordance with § 220-162.
(9) Home occupations in accordance with § 220-165.
(10) Multifamily dwellings.
(11) Accessory dwellings, in accordance with § 220-149.
(12) Accessory uses and structures on the same lot with and customarily
incidental to any of the permitted uses. [Amended 7-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-03]
(13) Publicly owned recreation uses and open space; recreation uses
and open space owned by a property owners' association.
(14) Nature preserves.
(15) Municipal facilities.
(16) Signs, in accordance with § 220-132.2. [Amended 7-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-03]
§ 220-123 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-124
216:760
(17) Live-work units, only permitted within the core neighborhood,
unless such specific uses are identified on the OMP and approved
as part of the conditional use approval, preliminary subdivision
plan approval or preliminary land development plan approval..
(18) Farms and farm related occupations, with a maximum size of 20
acres.
(19) Utility facilities, where operation requirements necessitate
location within the district, in accordance with § 220-180. Any
utility-related structure must be in compliance with the
architectural standards and guidelines approved for the TND.
(20) Additional nonresidential uses in the NAICS shall be permitted as
follows: [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-05]
NAICS No. Category
22 Utilities
44-45* Retail trade, excluding Industries 4411 (Automobile
Dealers) and 4412 (Other Motor Vehicle Dealers),
and excluding sexually oriented business as defined
by Chapter 59 of the Code of the Township of Lower
Allen. Refer to said chapter for sexually oriented
business regulations.
485 Transit and Ground Passenger Transportation
491 Postal Service
492 Couriers and Messengers
51 Information
52 Finance and Insurance
53 Real Estate and Rental and Leasing, excluding:
Industries 53113 (Lessors of Miniwarehouses and
Self-Storage Units); 5321 (Automotive Equipment
Rental and Leasing); and 5324 (Commercial and
Industrial Machinery and Equipment Rental and
Leasing)
54 Professional, Scientific and Technical Services
55 Management of Companies and Enterprises
56 Administration and Support and Waste Management
and Remediation Services, except: Industry 5617
(Services to Buildings and Dwellings); and Subsector
562, Waste Management and Remediation Services
6116 Other Schools and Instruction
621 Ambulatory Health Care Services
6231 Nursing Care Facilities
6233 Community Care Facilities for the Elderly
§ 220-124 (RESERVED) § 220-124
216:761
§ 220-125. Building height limit.
§ 220-126. Residential density.
NAICS No. Category
624 Social Assistance
71 Arts, Entertainment and Recreation
721191 Bed-and-Breakfast Inns
722 Food Services and Drinking Places, excluding drivethrough
facilities
81 Other Services (Except Public Administration),
except: Industries 8113 (Commercial and Industrial
Machinery and Equipment [except Automotive and
Electronic] Repair and Maintenance); and 812332
(Industrial Launderers)
92 Public Administration, except: Industry 92214
(Correctional Institutions)
B. The nonresidential uses listed in § 220-124A(20) shall only be permitted
within the core neighborhood, unless such specific uses are identified
on the OMP and approved as part of the conditional use approval.
A. Maximum building height for principal buildings: 40 feet, except that
buildings containing multifamily dwellings and/or live-work units may
have a maximum building height of 50 feet.
B. Maximum building height for accessory buildings: 25 feet.
A. Maximum density for a TND shall be determined as follows:
(1) Determine land area of the overall TND site after deleting; existing
rights-of-way of existing streets and railroads, and lands
continuously covered with water.
(2) Multiply the resulting acreage by four dwelling units per acre to
result in the number of permitted dwelling units within the
residential sections of the TND.
B. The maximum residential density may be increased by one additional
dwelling unit per acre for each of the following incentives, but in no
case shall the maximum residential density be greater than eight
dwelling units per acre: [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-05]
(1) The maximum residential density may be increased by one
additional dwelling unit per acre if more than 125% of the open
space required by this article is provided, or by two additional
dwelling units per acre if more than 150% of the open space
required by this article is provided.
§ 220-124 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-126
216:762
§ 220-127. Residential development criteria.
(2) The maximum residential density may be increased by one
additional dwelling unit per acre if more than 125% of the
recreation requirements of Chapter 192, Subdivision and Land
Development, is provided, or by two additional dwelling units per
acre if more than 150% of the recreation requirements of Chapter
192, Subdivision and Land Development, is provided.
(3) In no case shall the maximum residential density be greater than
eight dwelling units per acre.
C. For purposes of calculating residential density, live-work units in a core
neighborhood and any other dwelling unit located above a
nonresidential use in a core neighborhood shall count as 0.5 dwelling
unit.
A. Lot area and width: [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-05]
(1) For single-family detached dwellings:
(a) The minimum lot area shall be 4,000 square feet.
(b) The minimum lot width shall be 40 feet.
(2) For side-by-side twin dwellings and two-family attached dwellings:
(a) The minimum lot area shall be 4,000 square feet.
(b) The minimum lot width shall be 30 feet.
(3) For townhouse dwelling units:
(a) The minimum lot area shall be 1,560 square feet.
(b) The minimum lot width and dwelling unit width at the front of
the enclosed dwelling unit shall be 20 feet.
(4) For all other permitted uses:
(a) There shall be no minimum lot area. Lot area shall be based on
required setbacks, impervious coverage, parking,
environmental limitations and other applicable criteria.
(b) The minimum lot width shall be not less than 50 feet at the
dedicated right-of-way line, and not less than 100 feet at the
building setback line.
B. Location of residential units: [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-05]
(1) A maximum of 15% of residential units that are shown on the OMP
as being located outside of core neighborhoods may be structures
comprised of multifamily residential units.
§ 220-126 (RESERVED) § 220-127
216:763
(2) A maximum of 10% of residential units may be live-work units,
designed to accommodate one residential unit and one business
use within a single unit. The total gross floor area of a live-work
unit may not exceed 5,000 square feet.
(3) A maximum of 5% of residential uses may be accessory dwelling
units, located on the same lot with a primary single-family dwelling
unit. On each side of the street in any block, the number of
accessory dwelling units shall not exceed 10% of the total number
of principal dwelling units.
C. A minimum of 40% and a maximum of 85% of residential units shall be
single-family detached dwellings. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-05]
D. Residential yards. Yards shall be provided as follows: [Amended
8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-05]
(1) For single-family detached, side-by-side twin, two-family attached
and townhouse dwellings:
(a) Minimum front yard depth for principal building space: five
feet.
(b) Maximum front yard depth: 25 feet.
(c) Minimum rear yard depth for principal building: 25 feet, or five
feet if the building is served by rear alley access. [Amended
7-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
(d) Attached or detached garages shall not be located closer to the
front property line than any other portion of the dwelling that it
serves. A minimum of 10% of attached or detached garages
shall have a front yard setback that is at least five feet greater
than the dwelling that it serves.
(2) For single-family detached and two-family attached dwellings:
(a) Minimum side yards shall total no less than 10 feet, with no
one side less than five feet, in width. On a corner lot, two side
yards shall be provided along the interior lot lines.
(3) For side-by-side twin dwellings:
(a) One side yard shall be provided, with a minimum width of five
feet.
(4) For townhouse dwellings:
(a) No side yard shall be required for interior units, and an alley,
easement or other right of pedestrian access to the rear yard
shall be provided.
§ 220-127 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-127
216:764
(b) For each end unit, one side yard shall be provided, with a
minimum width of eight feet.
(5) For multifamily dwellings:
(a) Minimum front yard depth for principal building: five feet.
(b) Minimum rear yard depth for principal building: 25 feet.
(6) For live/work units: [Added 7-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03235]
(a) Minimum rear yard depth for principal building: five feet, if the
building is served by rear alley access, and there is no parking
permitted in the alley or rear yard.
(7) For all other permitted residential uses refer to the yard
requirements in the underlying zoning district.
E. An unenclosed porch or deck may intrude into a required front, side or
rear yard a maximum of 50% of the required setback or 10 feet,
whichever is less.
F. Chimneys, roof overhangs, rain gutters, building footings, window wells
and similar features may intrude up to two feet into a required setback.
G. Detached accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of five feet
from a side or rear lot line. Accessory buildings shall not be permitted
within a front yard.
H. For townhouse dwelling units: [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-05]
(1) No more than 10 townhouse units shall be attached.
(2) A vertical or horizontal visual structural offset or other deviation in
exterior architectural materials shall be provided for every four
units.
I. A minimum of 90% of residential lots within the TND shall be deeper
than they are wide. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-05]
J. All uses other than single-family detached residential units shall
provide a minimum building setback of 60 feet along the perimeter
boundary of the TND when the adjacent parcel contains a residential
use.
K. If portions of the TND are designed with more than one primary
building on a lot, the buildings shall be located such that yard
requirements would be met if property lines are established.
L. No building shall contain more than 60 residential units. Buildings that
contain 60 or fewer residential units each may be connected through
235. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection D(6) as Subsection
D(7).
§ 220-127 (RESERVED) § 220-127
216:765
§ 220-128. Nonresidential development criteria.
architectural features, enclosed or unenclosed walkways or
breezeways, or other similar features that are not occupied as living
space within a dwelling unit. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-05]
A. Lot area and width. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-05]
(1) For large single-use commercial lots:
(a) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(b) Maximum lot area: 150,000 square feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at the right-of-way line: 80 feet.
(d) Maximum lot width at the right-of-way line: 300 feet.
(2) For standard single-use commercial lots:
(a) Minimum lot area: 7,200 square feet.
(b) Maximum lot area: 75,000 square feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at the right-of-way line: 40 feet.
(d) Maximum lot width at the right-of-way line: 150 feet.
(3) For single-use lots designed and constructed as an integral part of
a continuous commercial frontage:
(a) Minimum lot area: 2,000 square feet.
(b) Maximum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at the right-of-way line: 20 feet.
(d) Maximum lot width at the right-of-way line: 150 feet.
(4) For multiple-use lots: no minimum requirements for lot area or
width.
(5) Within a core neighborhood, one village courtyard lot shall be
permitted.
(a) The village courtyard is intended to serve as a central retail or
commercial area in which only the following nonresidential
uses shall be permitted:
§ 220-127 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-128
216:766
NAICS No. Category
44-45* Retail trade, excluding Industries 4411
(Automobile Dealers) and 4412 (Other Motor
Vehicle Dealers), and excluding sexually
oriented business as defined by Chapter 59 of
the Code of the Township of Lower Allen. Refer
to said chapter for sexually oriented business
regulations.
491 Postal Service
54 Professional, Scientific and Technical Services
55 Management of Companies and Enterprises
71 Arts, Entertainment and Recreation
722 Food Services and Drinking Places, excluding
drive-through facilities
(b) The village courtyard lot may be a single-use or multiple-use
lot and have a maximum lot area of 15 acres.
(c) The village courtyard lot shall be designed and constructed to
include a village courtyard area consisting of benches or other
seating areas and landscaping so as to contribute to a park-like
setting. The village courtyard may include outdoor cafes.
(d) The village courtyard shall have a minimum area of one acre
and shall include a system of sidewalks and/or pedestrian
pathways to provide safe and convenient pedestrian access to
the courtyard from nonresidential uses on the village courtyard
lot and other areas within the core neighborhood.
B. Location of uses. A maximum of 30% of the land area within the core
neighborhood may be established as large single-use commercial lots.
[Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-05]
C. Yards.
(1) Minimum front yard depth: zero, provided that:
(a) Required parking is provided in the rear or side yard only.
(b) Primary access to the use is at the front property line.
(c) Front access is part of a coordinated pedestrian access system,
connecting the subject use with: other commercial uses;
parking spaces for the subject use; public open space.
(2) Minimum front yard depth for principal building space: five feet.
(3) Maximum front yard depth: 15 feet, if there is no parking in the
front yard.
§ 220-128 (RESERVED) § 220-128
216:767
(4) Maximum front yard depth: 90 feet, if there is parking in the front
yard. A maximum front yard depth shall not apply to village
courtyard lots. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-05]
(5) Minimum rear yard depth for principal building: 35 feet.
(6) Minimum rear yard depth for principal building (including a
building that includes a mix of residential and nonresidential uses):
five feet, if the building is served by rear alley access, and there is
no parking permitted in the alley or rear yard. [Amended
8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-05; 7-27-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-03]
(7) Minimum side yard depth: zero, if designed and constructed as an
integral part of a continuous commercial frontage.
(8) Minimum side yards shall total no less than 20 feet, with no one
side less than 10 feet in width. On a corner lot, two side yards shall
be provided along the interior lot lines.
(9) Minimum side yard depth. For end units, one side yard shall be
provided, with a minimum width of 10 feet.
D. All uses other than single-family detached residential units shall
provide a minimum building setback of 60 feet along the perimeter
boundary of the TND when the adjacent parcel contains a residential
use. Screen planting shall be provided in the setback in accordance
with §§ 220-201 and 220-202.
E. If portions of the TND are designed with more than one primary
building on a lot, the buildings shall be located such that yard
requirements would be met if property lines are established.
F. Size limitations on nonresidential uses: [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-05]
(1) Buildings on large single-use commercial lots (other than village
courtyard lots) shall not exceed 15,000 square feet in gross floor
area per floor.
(2) For multiple-use lots other than village courtyard lots:
(a) No single occupant or business shall exceed 10,000 square feet
in gross floor area per floor.
(b) No more than 50% of nonresidential uses shall exceed 4,000
square feet in gross floor area per floor.
(3) The total gross floor area of all buildings on a village courtyard lot
shall not exceed 150,000 square feet per floor.
G. Building setback requirements of the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code may impact the required construction of building
walls.
§ 220-128 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-128
216:768
§ 220-129. Impervious coverage.
The overall impervious coverage for a TND development shall not exceed
50%.
§ 220-130. Parking.
In addition to the requirements of Article XXIV, the following apply to a
TND:
§ 220-131. Open space requirements.
H. Refer to § 220-132.2 for specific requirements regarding projecting
signs within the right-of-way. [Amended 7-27-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-03]
A. No more than 10% of residential units shall have required parking
areas within the front yard.
B. No more than 30% of the required parking in the core neighborhood
shall be within front yards. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-05]
C. Within the core neighborhood, up to 50% of the required parking may
be attained with on-street parking spaces.
D. Within the core neighborhood, required parking may be reduced up to
15% if it is demonstrated through the conditional use process that
shared parking spaces of different primary uses will have different peak
demand times for parking, and that adequate parking will be available
during the peak demand periods for all uses.
A. In addition to required public recreation land, a minimum of 15% of the
gross area of a TND project shall be retained as common open space
reserved for passive and/or active recreational use. [Amended
8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-05]
B. A minimum of 50% of the designated common open space that
constitutes a steep slope or woodland shall not be regraded as part of
development of the site. [Amended 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-05]
C. Common open space shall be available for use by residents of the TND
and their guests free of charge, except for areas of nonintensive
agriculture, horticulture, floriculture or silviculture . An annual
maintenance fee assessed to all property owners for maintenance of
common open space shall not be considered a charge for use of the
space.
D. Common open space may be made available for use by the general
public. This shall not be cause to reduce the recreation requirements of
Chapter 192, Subdivision and Land Development. [Amended
8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-05]
§ 220-128 (RESERVED) § 220-131
216:769
§ 220-132. Ownership and preservation of common open space.
§ 220-132.1. Modification of design standards.
E. A pedestrian access and trail construction plan shall be required to
provide accessibility to the common open space.
F. Commercial uses shall not be permitted in common open space, except
for community events approved by the owner of the common open
space.
G. Any area designated as common open space shall be no smaller than
four times the area of the smallest residential lot within the TND,
except for designated trails.
A. Applicant must supply documentation showing proposed plan for
ownership and perpetual maintenance and protection of common open
space (COS). Available methods are as follows:
(1) COS ownership retained by applicant.
(2) COS offered for dedication to the Township. The Board of
Commissioners may accept dedication to the Township at their
discretion, but there is no obligation to do so.
(3) Ownership by a qualified conservation or preservation
organization.
(4) Ownership by a homeowners' association or condominium
association
B. A conservation easement shall be provided to ensure that all common
open space shall remain open in perpetuity.
A. The Board of Commissioners may, by conditional use approval, permit
the modification of the provisions of this Article XVI, and any provision
of the Zoning Ordinance that is referenced in Article XVI, in order to
encourage traditional neighborhood development. A landowner
desiring to obtain such conditional use approval shall make such
application concurrently with an application for CU approval for the
TND development if such approval is required under § 220-119. If CU
approval for the TND development is not required under § 220-119,
then such CU approval for modification of the provisions of this Article
XVI shall be made prior to approval of a subdivision or land
development plan for any portion of TND development that does not
comply with the provision(s) sought to be modified. Any CU to permit
modification of the requirements of this Article XVI shall be subject to
the following standards:
(1) Such modifications are consistent with the purpose and intent of
this Article XVI.
§ 220-131 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-132.1
216:770
§ 220-132.2. Signs. [Added 7-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
In addition to the requirements of §§ 220-245 through 220-252, and
§ 220-254, the following sign regulations apply to TND developments:
(2) Such modifications of design standards will not result in any
danger to the public health or welfare or in adverse impact to
adjoining properties or future inhabitants within the TND
development.
(3) Such modifications of design standards will not result in an
increase in residential densities permitted for the TND
development.
(4) Such modifications will not result in configuration of lots or street
systems that are impractical or detract from the appearance of the
TND development; and
(5) Such modifications will allow for equal or better results and
represent the minimum amount of relief necessary.
A. Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this
§ 220-132.2, shall have the meaning given to each herein and shall
supersede definitions as contained in Article II of this chapter, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
BUILDING WALL SIGN — A building sign that is mounted parallel to
the building wall.
DEVELOPMENT IDENTIFICATION SIGN — An off-premises or onpremises
identification sign, located in a TND development, that
primarily indicates the names of the core neighborhoods, specific
residential neighborhoods inside and outside of core neighborhoods,
and for the TND development.
INCIDENTAL SIGN — An on-premises sign, located in a TND
development, that primarily indicates instructional information that is
primarily oriented to pedestrians, cyclists and motor vehicle operators
who have entered a property from a street or alley. Signs indicating
whether an establishment is "open" or "closed" may be visible from
the street or alley. Examples include parking and building entrance
instructions.
LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY ORIENTED IDENTIFICATION/
MARKETING SIGN — A sign, located in a TND development, adjacent
to, and intended to primarily be viewed from the Pennsylvania Turnpike
(I-76) or other limited access highway, that combines the functions of
an identification sign with a marketing sign for the various elements,
activities and functions of the TND development. Examples include
the name(s) of the TND development, core neighborhoods, specific
residential neighborhoods outside of core neighborhoods, businesses,
uses and nonresidential destinations within the TND development.
§ 220-132.1 (RESERVED) § 220-132.2
216:771
NONRESIDENTIAL IDENTIFICATION SIGN — An on-premises sign
that indicates the name of the owner or occupant of a property, the
address of a building, the name of a building or building development
or the business conducted on a nonresidential property.
NONRESIDENTIAL MARKETING SIGN — An on-premises sign that
displays information about activities, products or services offered on a
nonresidential property where the sign is located.
RESIDENTIAL IDENTIFICATION SIGN — An on-premises sign that
indicates the name of the owner or occupant of a property, the address
of a building, the name of a building or building development or the
business conducted on a residential property.
WAY-FINDING SIGN — An off-premises or on-premises sign, located in
a TND development, that primarily provides way-finding information
such as distances or orientation information to residential
neighborhoods, core neighborhoods, businesses, uses, and other
nonresidential destinations in a TND development, from a street or
alley.
B. Purpose of sign regulations by specific areas in TND developments.
(1) Residential neighborhoods and areas outside of core
neighborhoods. The purpose of these regulations is to allow signs
that are customary and reasonable for the variety of dwelling unit
types permitted outside of core neighborhoods, and to allow signs
for permitted nonresidential uses that sufficiently identify these
uses in a manner that is compatible with predominant residential
uses.
(2) Core neighborhoods. The purpose of these regulations is to provide
adequate signage for the mix of residential and nonresidential uses
that are permitted to coexist in core neighborhoods. Nonresidential
uses are provided with adequate opportunities for identification
that also minimize the impact upon adjacent residential uses.
C. Maximum number of sign types. Unless specified and limited in the
following tables, all of the specific sign types (i.e., freestanding signs,
building wall signs, window signs, projecting signs) for the specific sign
message classifications (i.e., residential identification signs,
nonresidential identification signs and nonresidential marketing signs,
development identification signs, way-finding signs, incidental signs
and regulatory notice signs, limited access highway oriented
identification/marking signs) shall be permitted to be installed in
addition to any other specific sign type for the same specific sign
message classification that may be permitted.
D. Identification signs and marketing signs. See the following tables.236
236. Editor's Note: The tables referenced in Subsection D(1) and (2) are included in an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 220-132.2 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-132.2
216:772
(1) Residential identification signs. See the following table.
(2) Nonresidential identification signs and nonresidential marketing
signs. See the following table.
E. Development identification signs. See the following table.237
F. Way-finding signs. See the following table.238
G. Incidental signs and regulatory notice signs. See the following table.239
H. Limited access highway oriented identification/marketing signs. See
the following table.240
I. Memorial signs. See the following table.241
J. Portable signs. Permitted as temporary signs and shall comply with
temporary sign placement provisions contained in § 220-254.
K. Changeable message signs. Nonresidential uses outside of a core
neighborhood may install changeable message sign in accordance with
other provisions of this § 220-132.2 and Article XXV, provided that
activation of message change is by manual means. Changeable message
signs may be either electrically or manually activated in core
neighborhoods. Electrical activation may include projection or rotation
of sign copy, or electronically programmed message changes. Scrolling
message changes are permitted, but flashing and animated signs, as
defined in § 220-6, are prohibited.
L. Opinion and election campaign signs. Signs on a residential lot shall
comply with residential identification sign standards of this
§ 220-132.2. Signs on a nonresidential lot shall comply with
nonresidential identification sign standards of this § 220-132.2.
237. Editor's Note: Said table is included in an attachment to this chapter.
238. Editor's Note: Said table is included in an attachment to this chapter.
239. Editor's Note: Said table is included in an attachment to this chapter.
240. Editor's Note: Said table is included in an attachment to this chapter.
241. Editor's Note: Said table is included in an attachment to this chapter.
§ 220-132.2 (RESERVED) § 220-132.2
216:773

ARTICLE XVII
Neighborhood Redevelopment (NR) Overlay District
§ 220-133. Intent.
The NR Overlay District is primarily intended to:
§ 220-134. Applicability.
A. Encourage redevelopment to occur in a manner consistent with
traditional patterns and scale of development, and mix of uses, that
occurred prior to newer suburban development patterns;
B. Promote a mix of diverse but compatible types of neighborhood
development;
C. Avoid development that could cause inefficient patterns of
development;
D. Provide for reasonably safe and convenient pedestrian, bicycle and
vehicle circulation, with an emphasis on avoiding conflicts with vehicles
backing out of garages across sidewalks;
E. Encourage persons to work, shop, attend religious services and enjoy
recreation in the neighborhood within which they live;
F. Encourage the creation of a sense of place and a community spirit that
promotes social interaction and volunteerism;
G. Service the purposes that are provided in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, for traditional
neighborhood development;
H. Promote the goals and objectives of the Lower Allen Township
Comprehensive Plan Update, 2006, as amended;
I. Make efficient use of available public water and sewer services and
other infrastructure; and
J. Promote adaptive use and convenient reuse of land and buildings.
A. The Neighborhood Redevelopment (NR) Overlay District applies to R-3
Multifamily Residential, MUN Mixed-Use Neighborhood, and C-1
Neighborhood Commercial and I-3 Industrial/Commercial Zoning
Districts.
B. A NR development is a conditional use in the aforementioned zoning
districts.
C. For the purposes of this Article XVII, the words "parcel" or "lot,"
whether singular or plural, shall encompass planned community units
under the Pennsylvania Uniform Planned Community Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 5101 et seq., as amended, and condominium units under the
Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq., as
§ 220-133 (RESERVED) § 220-134
216:775
§ 220-135. Minimum requirements.
§ 220-136. Infrastructure requirements.
§ 220-137. Conditional use requirements.
§ 220-138. Overall Master Plan (OMP).
amended, and the lot area, lot width and yard standards of this Article
XVII shall apply to each such planned community unit or condominium
unit as if each unit constituted a parcel or lot.
A. A minimum tract size of five acres is required for a NR development.
B. A minimum of 35% of the proposed development area shall be occupied
by permitted uses in the underlying zoning district.
C. A minimum of 15% of the proposed development area shall be
designated as common open space.
A. All proposed development within any NR shall be served by public
water and public sewer.
B. Single-family detached, side-by-side twin and townhouse dwelling unit
lots are permitted to front only minor Township or local streets. All
other permitted uses are permitted to front on minor Township, local or
major collector street.
A. Applicant shall submit a conditional use (CU) application for any
proposed NR.
B. The CU application shall be processed in accordance with § 220-266.1
of this chapter.
C. In addition to the requirements of § 220-266.1A, the applicant shall:
(1) Demonstrate conformance with the goals and objectives of the
Lower Allen Township Comprehensive Plan Update, 2006, as
amended;
(2) Provide a traffic impact study showing the impacts of the proposed
development, and proposed measures to mitigate those impacts;
and
(3) Demonstrate that the proposed development will be adequately
served by public safety services.
A. Applicant shall submit an Overall Master Plan (OMP) with the
conditional use application.
B. The OMP shall:
§ 220-134 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-138
216:776
(1) Show existing features, including but not limited to: roads; bridges;
culverts; railroads; rights-of-way; easements; utilities; and
pipelines; and the proposed changes to these features;
(2) Show areas designated for stormwater management facilities;
(3) Show the general layout of streets, alleys, sidewalks and trails. This
shall include traffic circulation diagrams demonstrating adequate
access for emergency and routine service vehicles to all areas of
the proposed NR;
(4) Show in general terms how the NR will be served by utility and
transportation services;
(5) Include documentation showing proposed plan for ownership and
perpetual maintenance and protection of any common open space;
(6) Include typical design details for streets, alleys, sidewalks, trails,
public recreation facilities and common open space facilities.
C. The OMP shall include a phasing plan and schedule for implementation
of the NR. The schedule shall be developed to show that:
(1) No more than 25% of the residential units will be constructed until
at least 10% of the square footage of the nonresidential uses is
constructed.
(2) No more than 25% of the square footage of the nonresidential uses
is constructed until at least 10% of the residential units are
constructed.
(3) No more than 75% of the residential units will be constructed until
at least 50% of the square footage of the nonresidential uses is
constructed.
(4) No more than 75% of the square footage of the nonresidential uses
is constructed until at least 50% of the residential units are
constructed.
D. Architectural standards and guidelines.
(1) The OMP submitted with the conditional use application shall
include a set of proposed architectural standards and guidelines
(ASG), to be applied consistently throughout the entire NR.
(2) The ASG shall, at a minimum, address the following:
(a) Architectural style of building.
(b) Building materials, proportions, massing and detailing.
(c) Roof style and pitches.
(d) Window and door type, size and location.
§ 220-138 (RESERVED) § 220-138
216:777
§ 220-139. Permitted uses.
After a NR conditional use has been approved, the following uses in addition
to those in the underlying zoning district shall be permitted by right,
provided the uses are consistent with the approved overall master plan:
(e) Front porch type, size and location.
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Side-by-side twin dwellings.
C. Townhouses.
D. Places of worship, including: one accessory residential unit; and
accessory preschool uses.
E. Libraries.
F. Schools, from preschool through grade 12.
G. Family care home.
H. Family day-care home in accordance with § 220-162.
I. Home occupations in accordance with § 220-165.
J. Multifamily dwellings.
K. Accessory dwellings, in accordance with § 220-149.
L. Accessory uses and structures on the same lot with and customarily
incidental to any of the permitted uses in accordance with § 220-150.
M. Publicly owned recreation uses; recreation uses and open space owned
by a property owners' association.
N. Nature preserves.
O. Municipal facilities.
P. Signs, in accordance with Article XXV.
Q. Additional nonresidential uses shall be permitted in accordance with
the NAICS as follows:
NAICS No. Category
22 Utilities
44-45* Retail trade, excluding Industries 4411 (Automobile
Dealers) and 4412 (Other Motor Vehicle Dealers), and
excluding sexually oriented business as defined by
Chapter 59 of the Code of the Township of Lower Allen.
Refer to said chapter for sexually oriented business
regulations.
§ 220-138 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-139
216:778
§ 220-140. Building height limit.
Maximum building height for principal and accessory buildings: as
permitted in the underlying zoning district.
§ 220-141. Residential density.
NAICS No. Category
485 Transit and Ground Passenger Transportation
491 Postal Service
492 Couriers and Messengers
51 Information
52 Finance and Insurance
53 Real Estate and Rental and Leasing, excluding:
Industries 53113 (Lessors of Miniwarehouses and Self-
Storage Units); 5321 (Automotive Equipment Rental and
Leasing); and 5324 (Commercial and Industrial
Machinery and Equipment Rental and Leasing)
54 Professional, Scientific and Technical Services
55 Management of Companies and Enterprises
56 Administration and Support and Waste Management and
Remediation Services, except: Industry 5617 (Services
to Buildings and Dwellings); and Subsector 562, Waste
Management and Remediation Services
6111 Elementary and Secondary Schools
6116 Other Schools and Instruction
621 Ambulatory Health Care Services
624 Social Assistance
71 Arts, Entertainment and Recreation
721191 Bed-and-Breakfast Inns
722 Food Services and Drinking Places
81 Other Services (Except Public Administration), except:
Industries 8113 (Commercial and Industrial Machinery
and Equipment [except Automotive and Electronic]
Repair and Maintenance); and 812332 (Industrial
Launderers)
92 Public Administration, except: Industry 92214
(Correctional Institutions)
A. Maximum density for a NR shall be determined as follows:
(1) Determine land area for development after deleting existing rightsof-
way of existing streets, railroads, utilities, pipeline easements;
area of lands within the one-hundred-year floodplain; delineated
§ 220-139 (RESERVED) § 220-141
216:779
§ 220-142. Residential development criteria.
wetlands; lands continuously covered with water; twenty-five-foot
wide riparian buffer from the top of bank of any stream channel;
and 85% of existing mature woodlands.
(2) Delete 50% of lands with an average slope greater than 25% from
"a".
(3) Multiply the resulting acreage by five dwelling units per acre to
result in the number of permitted dwelling units within the NR.
B. Residential density bonus may be approved by the Board of
Commissioners through the conditional use process as follows:
(1) The maximum residential density may be increased by a maximum
of one additional dwelling unit per acre if the developer provides
150% of the common open space required by ordinance.
(2) In no case shall the maximum residential density be greater than
six dwelling units per acre.
A. Lot area and width:
(1) For single-family detached dwellings:
(a) The minimum lot area shall be 6,000 square feet.
(b) The minimum lot width at the building setback line shall be 40
feet.
(2) For side-by-side twin dwelling:
(a) The minimum lot area shall be 5,000 square feet.
(b) The minimum lot width at the building setback line shall be 30
feet.
(3) For townhouse dwelling units:
(a) The minimum lot area shall be 2,000 square feet.
(b) The minimum lot width and dwelling unit width at the front of
the enclosed dwelling unit shall be 20 feet.
(4) For all other permitted uses:
(a) There shall be no minimum lot area. Lot area shall be based on
required setbacks, impervious coverage, parking,
environmental limitations and other applicable criteria.
(b) The minimum lot width shall be not less than 50 feet at the
dedicated right-of-way line, and not less than 100 feet at the
building line.
§ 220-141 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-142
216:780
B. Location of residential units:
(1) A maximum of 10% of residential units may be live-work units,
designed to accommodate one residential unit and one business
use within a single unit. The total gross square footage of a livework
unit may not exceed 5,000 square feet.
(2) A maximum of 10% of residential units may be located within
multistory mixed-use structures, with nonresidential uses on the
first floor and residential units above the first-floor uses.
(3) A maximum of 5% of residential uses may be accessory dwelling
units, located on the same lot with a primary single-family dwelling
unit. On each side of the street in any block, the number of
accessory dwelling units shall not exceed 10% of the total number
of units.
C. Residential yards. Yards shall be provided as follows:
(1) For single-family detached, side-by-side twin and townhouse
dwellings:
(a) Minimum front yard depth for principal building space: five
feet.
(b) Maximum front yard depth: 25 feet.
(c) Minimum rear yard depth for principal building: 25 feet.
(d) Minimum front yard depth for attached or detached garage: 20
feet from front property line, and a minimum of 15 feet more
than the principal building space.
(2) For single-family detached dwelling: Minimum side yards shall total
no less than 15 feet, with no one side less than five feet in width. On
a corner lot, two side yards shall be provided along the interior lot
lines.
(3) For side-by-side twin dwellings: one side yard shall be provided,
with a minimum width of 10 feet.
(4) For townhouse dwellings:
(a) No side yard shall be required for interior units, if alley or
easement access is provided to the rear yard.
(b) For each end unit, one side yard shall be provided, with a
minimum width of 10 feet.
(5) For all other permitted uses, refer to the requirements in the
underlying zoning district.
§ 220-142 (RESERVED) § 220-142
216:781
§ 220-143. Nonresidential development criteria.
D. An unenclosed porch or deck may intrude into a required front, side or
rear yard a maximum of 50% of the required setback or 10 feet,
whichever is less.
E. Chimneys, roof overhangs, rain gutters, building footings, window wells
and similar features may intrude up to two feet into a required setback.
F. Detached accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of five feet
from a side or rear lot line. Accessory buildings shall not be permitted
within a front yard.
G. For townhouse dwelling units:
(1) No more than 10 townhouse units shall be attached.
(2) A vertical or horizontal visual structural offset or other deviation in
exterior architectural materials shall be provided for every other
unit.
H. A minimum of 90% of residential lots within the NR shall be deeper than
they are wide by a minimum ratio of 2:1.
I. All uses other than residential units shall provide a minimum building
setback of 60 feet along the perimeter boundary of the NR when the
adjacent parcel contains a residential use.
J. If portions of the NR are designed with more than one primary building
on a lot, the buildings shall be located such that yard requirements
would be met if property lines are established.
K. No building shall contain more than 48 residential units.
A. Lot area and width.
(1) For standard single-use commercial lots:
(a) Minimum lot area: 7,200 square feet.
(b) Maximum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at the right-of-way line: 40 feet.
(d) Maximum lot width at the right-of-way line: 80 feet.
(2) For single-use lots designed and constructed as an integral part of
a continuous commercial frontage:
(a) Minimum lot area: 2,000 square feet.
(b) Maximum lot area: 7,200 square feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at the right-of-way line: 20 feet.
§ 220-142 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-143
216:782
(d) Maximum lot width at the right-of-way line: 80 feet.
(3) For multiple-use lots: no minimum requirements for lot area or
width.
B. Yards.
(1) Minimum front yard depth: zero, provided that:
(a) Required parking is provided in the rear or side yard only.
(b) Primary access to the use is at the front property line.
(c) Front access is part of a coordinated pedestrian access system,
connecting the subject use with other commercial uses;
parking spaces for the subject use; public open space.
(2) Minimum front yard depth for principal building space: five feet.
(3) Maximum front yard depth: 15 feet, if there is no parking in the
front yard.
(4) Maximum front yard depth: 80 feet, if there is parking in the front
yard.
(5) Minimum rear yard depth for principal building: 35 feet.
(6) Minimum rear yard depth for principal building: 15 feet, if the
building is served by rear alley access, and there is no parking
permitted in the alley or rear yard.
(7) Minimum side yard depth: zero, if designed and constructed as an
integral part of a continuous commercial frontage.
(8) Minimum side yards shall total no less than 20 feet, with no one
side less than ten feet, in width. On a corner lot, two side yards
shall be provided along the interior lot lines.
(9) Minimum side yard depth: For end units, one side yard shall be
provided, with a minimum width of 10 feet.
C. All uses other than residential units shall provide a minimum building
setback of 60 feet along the perimeter boundary of the NR when the
adjacent parcel contains a residential use. Screen planting shall be
provided in the setback in accordance with §§ 220-201 and 220-202.
D. If portions of the NR are designed with more than one primary building
on a lot, the buildings shall be located such that yard requirements
would be met if property lines are established.
E. Size limitations on nonresidential uses.
(1) For multiple-use lots:
(a) No single use shall exceed 8,000 square feet.
§ 220-143 (RESERVED) § 220-143
216:783
§ 220-144. Impervious coverage.
The overall impervious coverage for a NR development shall not exceed
70%.
§ 220-145. Parking.
In addition to the requirements of Article XXIV, the following apply to a NR:
§ 220-146. Open space requirements.
(b) No more than 50% of nonresidential uses shall exceed 4,000
square feet.
F. Building setback requirements of the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code may impact the required construction of building
walls.
G. Refer to § 220-252F for specific requirements regarding projecting
signs within the public right-of-way.
A. No more than 10% of residential units shall have required parking
areas within the front yard.
B. No more than 10% of the required parking for nonresidential units shall
be within front yards.
C. Up to 50% of the required parking for nonresidential uses may be
attained with on-street parking spaces.
D. Required parking may be reduced up to 15% if it is demonstrated
through the conditional use process that shared parking spaces of
different primary uses will have different peak demand times for
parking, and that adequate parking will be available during the peak
demand periods for all uses.
A. In addition to required public recreation land, a minimum of 15% of the
gross area of a NR project shall be retained as common open space
reserved for passive recreational use.
B. Common open space shall be available for use by residents of the NR
and their guests free of charge, except for areas of nonintensive
agriculture, horticulture, floriculture or silviculture . An annual
maintenance fee assessed to all property owners for maintenance of
common open space shall not be considered a charge for use of the
space.
C. Common open space may be made available for use by the general
public. This shall not be cause to reduce the requirements for
dedication of public recreation land.
D. A pedestrian access and trail construction plan shall be required to
provide accessibility to the common open space.
§ 220-143 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-146
216:784
§ 220-147. Ownership and preservation of common open space.
E. Commercial uses shall not be permitted in common open space, except
for community events approved by the owner of the common open
space.
F. Any area designated as common open space shall be no smaller than
four times the area of the smallest residential lot within the NR, except
for designated trails.
A. Applicant must supply documentation showing proposed plan for
ownership and perpetual maintenance and protection of common open
space (COS). Available methods are as follows:
(1) COS ownership retained by applicant.
(2) COS offered for dedication to the Township. The Board of
Commissioners may accept dedication to the Township at their
discretion, but there is no obligation to do so.
(3) Ownership by a qualified conservation or preservation
organization.
(4) Ownership by a homeowners' association or condominium
association.
B. (Reserved)
C. A conservation easement shall be provided to ensure that all common
open space shall remain open in perpetuity.
§ 220-146 (RESERVED) § 220-147
216:785

ARTICLE XVIII
Use Standards
§ 220-148. Intent.
The following regulations shall qualify or supplement the district
regulations appearing elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 220-149. Accessory dwellings.
Where permitted, an accessory dwelling may be created in a single-family
detached dwelling that is owned and occupied by the permit applicant,
provided that:
§ 220-150. Accessory structures.
Accessory structures shall comply with the following provisions:
A. The accessory dwelling is designed as a separate and complete
housekeeping unit with living, sleeping, cooking and bathroom areas
that can be isolated from the remaining original dwelling unit.
B. Only one accessory dwelling may be created within a single-family
detached dwelling unit.
C. The original single-family detached dwelling unit or the accessory
dwelling shall serve as the owner's principal place of residence, except
for bona fide temporary absences.
D. The accessory dwelling shall be designed so that, to the degree feasible,
the appearance of the building remains that of a single-family detached
dwelling unit, and any new entrances are located to the sides and/or
rear of the building.
E. The proposed additions and alterations to the existing building shall
conform to all applicable state and Township codes, and to regulations
of the Lower Allen Township Authority regarding connection of and fees
payable for an additional dwelling unit.
F. The total floor area of additions and alterations that are proposed to
create an accessory dwelling are limited to 10% of the floor area
existing at the time of permit application.
G. The accessory dwelling shall not be greater than 30% of the building's
total floor area.
H. A minimum of 360 square feet of habitable floor area shall be required
for the accessory dwelling unit.
I. No application for an accessory dwelling shall be approved if the
habitable floor area of the single-family detached dwelling has been
increased within three years of the application date.
§ 220-148 (RESERVED) § 220-150
216:787
§ 220-151. Nonintensive agricultural uses, including horticulture,
floriculture and silviculture.
Nonintensive agricultural uses shall comply with the following provisions:
§ 220-152. Intensive agricultural uses.
Intensive agricultural uses shall comply with the following provisions:
A. An accessory structure shall not be erected or an existing accessory
building shall not be substantially altered within any front yard setback.
B. Any accessory structure may be erected within one of the side yard
setbacks or within the rear yard setback, provided that:
(1) Structures accessory to a residential use shall be located within the
rear yard or side yard setback of the principal building or structure
no less than five feet from any rear or side lot line. Private garages
with entrances fronting an alley or access drive shall be located not
less than 10 feet from the alley.
(2) Structures accessory to a nonresidential use shall not be located
less than 15 feet from any lot line.
(3) No side yard setback shall be required where two or more garages
are designed to abut for single-family attached and two-family
dwellings.
C. No more than two storage/utility sheds may be located on a lot used for
residential purposes.
A. No agricultural building shall be constructed closer than 75 feet to any
property line.
B. All grazing or pasture areas utilized for agricultural purposes shall be
fenced.
C. Commercial composting is prohibited. Any on-site composting shall be
limited for use on the premises on which such compost is made and
produced.
A. No agricultural building shall be constructed closer than 75 feet to any
property line.
B. All properties for such uses shall have a minimum area of 10 acres.
C. A fence shall be maintained around all areas in which animals are kept
outside buildings.
D. Solid and liquid waste shall be disposed of in a manner to avoid creating
insect or rodent problems.
E. No discharge of liquid waste and/or sewage shall be permitted into a
reservoir, sewage or stormwater system, holding pond, stream or other
§ 220-150 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-152
216:788
§ 220-153. Radio and television antennas.
open body of water or into the ground unless treated so that the
discharge is in total compliance with the standards approved by the
appropriate local, state and federal regulatory bodies and/or agencies.
F. All organic materials to be used in on-site composting shall be stored
and processed on an impervious surface under a roof to prevent
stormwater runoff from the materials.
A. Satellite dish antennas.
(1) No such antenna shall be located in any front yard setback, unless
permitted by the Zoning Officer upon presentation of evidence that
an antenna placed within said front yard is the only feasible method
of obtaining reception due to physical characteristics of the
property and the location of existing structures.
(2) The maximum diameter of any antenna for residential use shall be
eight feet.
(3) The maximum height of any freestanding antenna shall be 15 feet.
(4) No part of any freestanding antenna shall be located any closer
than 10 feet to any property line.
(5) No such antenna shall be located on the roof of any accessory
building such as detached garages or sheds.
(6) Roof-mounted antennas greater than two feet in diameter shall not
be permitted in any residential district nor located on the front
roofline, unless permitted by the Zoning Officer upon presentation
of evidence that a roof-mounted antenna is the only feasible method
of obtaining reception due to physical characteristics of the
property and the location of existing structures.
(7) Roof-mounted antennas shall not exceed 12 feet in height.
B. Other radio and television antennas subject to licensing and/or
regulation by the Federal Communications Commission.
(1) Antennas and associated structures which do not exceed 30 feet in
height shall be located at least 15 feet from any property line.
Antennas which exceed 30 feet in height shall provide an additional
one foot of clearance for every one foot of height in excess of 30
feet.
(2) Antennas shall not be permitted within any front yard setback.
(3) The antenna and associated structures shall be securely anchored
in a fixed position on the ground, and the applicant shall provide
qualified evidence that the proposed structure will withstand wind
and other forces.
§ 220-152 (RESERVED) § 220-153
216:789
§ 220-154. Conversion apartments.
Where permitted, any building existing at the effective date of this chapter
may be converted to a dwelling for more than one family, provided that:
(4) The antenna and its associated supports, such as guy wires, or the
yard area containing the structure shall be protected and secured
to guarantee the safety of the general public. Associated supports
and guy wires shall not be located any closer than five feet to any
property line.
C. General development standards.
(1) Antenna installation shall meet all manufacturer's specifications.
(2) Whenever it is necessary to install an antenna near power lines or
where damage would be caused by its falling, a separate safety
wire must be attached to the antenna mast or tower and secured in
a direction away from the hazard. Antennas and guy wires must be
kept at least four feet clear of telephone or electric wires.
(3) All antennas shall be permanently and effectively grounded.
(4) Installation of any antenna shall comply with the Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code.
(5) All antennas shall be maintained in good condition and in
accordance with all requirements of this section.
(6) All antennas shall be subject to periodic reinspection. No additions,
changes or modifications shall be made to an antenna unless the
addition, change or modification is in conformity with Township
codes and the zoning permit.
A. The proposed conversion shall conform to the regulations for the
district in which it is located. The minimum habitable floor area of such
converted dwelling unit shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
70 of the Lower Allen Township Code.
B. There is no exterior evidence of change in the building except as
required by state or Township building or housing codes or regulations.
C. Fire escapes, where required, shall be in the rear of the building and
shall not be located on any wall facing a street, unless permitted by the
Zoning Officer upon presentation of evidence that such location is the
only feasible alternative.
D. If an apartment conversion results in a total of three or more units, it
shall be considered a land development plan, and shall be acted upon in
accordance with Chapter 192, Subdivision and Land Development, as
amended.
§ 220-153 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-155
216:790
§ 220-155. Drive-through service facilities.
The required space for the drive-through line shall be separated, to the
maximum extent feasible, from parking spaces for non-drive-through
customers and from pedestrian walkways and shall be incorporated into an
overall circulation plan for the site.
§ 220-156. Boarding homes.
Where permitted, boarding homes (including rooming/lodging houses and
bed-and-breakfast establishments as a principal use) may be established
subject to the following conditions:
§ 220-157. Planned Business Center (PBC).
It is the purpose of this section to provide for the orderly and integrated
development of a campus-like office park consisting of a variety of office
facilities and uses for local residents, as well as the general public. Where
permitted, planned business centers may be established subject to the
following requirements:
A. Accommodations shall be limited to no more than 10 guest rooms for
rent.
B. Not more than 20 guests may be accommodated at any one time.
C. Meals for compensation shall be provided only to boarding home
guests. No cooking facilities shall be provided or permitted in the
individual guest rooms.
D. Guest rooms shall contain a minimum of 100 square feet of habitable
floor area per unit.
E. The minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be no less than 25
feet.
A. Applicant shall submit an overall master plan (OMP) for the PBC which
shall:
(1) Show existing features, including but not limited to roads; bridges;
culverts; railroads; rights-of-way; easements; utilities; pipelines;
and the proposed changes to these features.
(2) Show areas designated for stormwater management facilities.
(3) Show the general layout of streets, sidewalks and trails. This shall
include traffic circulation diagrams demonstrating adequate access
for emergency and routine service vehicles to all areas of the PBC.
(4) Show in general terms how the PBC will be served by utility and
transportation services.
(5) Include typical design details for streets, sidewalks and trails.
§ 220-155 (RESERVED) § 220-157
216:791
(6) Include a phasing plan and schedule for implementation.
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows:
(1) All uses permitted in the C-3 Business Park District, as designated
within Article X.
(2) Parking garages/decks and lots accessory to other permitted uses
in accordance with Article XXIV.
(3) Retail sales and service; provided that such retail uses shall not
exceed 5,500 square feet gross floor area for each unit of not less
than 10 acres of land area or portion thereof of each PBC. It shall
be part of, compatible with and incidental to other permitted uses.
Such retail establishments shall not include motor vehicle service
stations or garages, motor vehicle sales areas or buildings or adult
businesses.
C. Minimum requirements.
(1) Sewer and water. Public sewer and public water service are
required.
(2) Access. The proposed tract must abut and have access to a
collector street or arterial street as identified by the Township.
(3) Minimum PBC area. Ten acres of contiguous area; following
approval of the Overall Master Plan, can be subdivided into
separate lots in accordance with the requirements of the applicable
zoning district.
(4) Interior yards; open space between separate principal buildings on
the same lot.
(a) When front to front, rear to rear, or front to rear, parallel
buildings shall have 50 feet between faces of the building. If
the front or rear faces are obliquely aligned, the above
distance may be decreased by as much as 10 feet at one end if
increased by similar or greater distance at the other end.
(b) An interior yard of 50 feet is required between end walls of
buildings. If the buildings are at right angles to each other, the
distance between the corners of the end walls of the buildings
may be reduced to a minimum of 25 feet.
(c) An interior yard of 50 feet is required between end walls and
front or rear faces of buildings.
(5) All permitted uses shall comply with performance standards as set
forth within Article XIX herein.
(6) Covenants and restrictions. As a condition of approval of the PBC
use, there shall be provided a declaration of covenants and
restrictions pertaining to the maintenance of all shared facilities,
§ 220-157 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-157
216:792
§ 220-158. Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations.
Where permitted, clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations and similar uses
shall meet the following requirements:
§ 220-159. Convenience stores; fuel sales.
The following shall apply to convenience stores; fuel sales:
§ 220-160. Day-care facilities.
Where permitted, day-care facilities may be established subject to the
following:
§ 220-161. Drive-through eating establishments.
The following shall apply to drive-through eating establishments:
including private streets, private sidewalks or walkways and
common areas. After approval of the PBC use, said declaration of
covenants and restrictions shall be recorded. Such declaration of
covenants and restrictions shall be supplemented as necessary by
recorded agreements to provide for maintenance and shared use
of private streets, access drives, sidewalks, walkways and common
areas.
A. Uses shall be restricted to those not conducted primarily for gain,
although a dining room/banquet facility may be rented, leased or
operated for the benefit of club members, provided that no permanent
sign advertising the sale of food or beverages shall be permitted.
A. A site circulation plan shall be devised that separates those patrons
awaiting fueling service from those patrons awaiting other services. At
a minimum, parking shall not be permitted between the main entrance
of the establishment and the refueling bays. Where the area between
the main entrance and the parking bays is paved, a no-parking lane
shall be established.
A. Operators are responsible for compliance with all Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare licensing/registration requirements and
any other local, state or federal regulations.
B. Outdoor play areas shall be located in the rear yard and shall be
surrounded by a safety fence or natural barrier.
C. Outside play shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m.
A. Vehicular stacking areas for drive-through services shall be provided in
accordance with § 220-240.
B. The required space for the drive-through line shall be separated, to the
maximum feasible extent, from parking spaces for non-drive-through
§ 220-157 (RESERVED) § 220-161
216:793
§ 220-162. Family day-care facilities; group day-care facilities.
Where permitted, family day-care and group day-care homes may be
established subject to the following conditions:
§ 220-163. Golf courses.
Where permitted, golf courses and accessory uses and structures shall
comply with the following:
§ 220-164. Golf driving ranges.
Where permitted, golf driving ranges and accessory uses and structures
shall comply with the following:
customers and from pedestrian walkways and shall be incorporated into
an overall circulation plan for the site.
A. A minimum of 100 square feet of usable outdoor play space and 40
square feet of usable indoor space must be provided for each child
present at the facility, including resident children.
B. Outside play shall be limited to the rear yard of such facility, during the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
C. Operators are responsible for compliance with all Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare licensing/registration requirements and
any other local, state or federal regulations.
A. The minimum lot area shall be 50 acres for a golf course.
B. The course shall not be designed to require a golf ball to be driven
across any building, road or parking lot.
C. There shall be a minimum setback of 100 feet from the field of play to
any adjacent residentially zoned property.
D. Any points where the golf course crosses a road shall be signed,
warning motorists and pedestrians.
E. No outdoor storage of maintenance equipment or golf carts shall be
permitted.
F. Dining facilities shall be permitted only in the golf course clubhouse as
noted in the definition in § 220-6.
G. No dining facilities on a golf course shall provide drive-through
facilities.
H. A golf course may also include a swimming pool, tennis courts, driving
range, miniature golf course and other customary accessory uses and
structures.
A. The minimum lot area shall be 15 acres for a golf driving range.
§ 220-161 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-164
216:794
§ 220-164.1. Heliports.
Where permitted, heliports shall be designed, constructed and maintained
in accordance with applicable state and federal regulations, and the
International Fire Code.
§ 220-165. Home occupations.
Within the R-1, R-2, R-3 and MUN Districts, home occupations may be
established in a lawfully existing residential dwelling, subject to the
following conditions:
B. The driving range shall not be designed to allow a golf ball to be driven
across any building, road or parking lot.
C. There shall be a minimum setback of 100 feet from the field of play to
any adjacent residentially zoned property.
D. Safety netting shall be provided where necessary to prevent golf balls
from exiting the property.
E. No outdoor storage of maintenance equipment or golf carts shall be
permitted.
F. Outdoor lighting requirements contained in § 220-193.
A. A home occupation that will be administered or conducted without
customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian,
pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess
of those normally associated with residential use, shall be considered a
"no-impact home-based business." Such uses shall be permitted by
right and do not require a zoning permit, except that such permission
shall not supersede any deed restriction, covenant or agreement
restricting the use of land, nor any master deed, bylaw or other
document applicable to a common interest ownership community. The
business or commercial activity must satisfy the following
requirements:
(1) The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of
the property and surrounding residential uses.
(2) The business shall employ no employees other than family
members residing in the dwelling.
(3) There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling
or inventory of a substantial nature.
(4) There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including
but not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
(5) The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or
electronic interference, including interference with radio or
§ 220-164 (RESERVED) § 220-165
216:795
television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood, and
all business activities shall conform with performance standards
contained in Article XIX.
(6) The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
the residential use in the neighborhood.
(7) The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling
and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
(8) The business may not involve any illegal activity.
B. A home occupation that does not meet all the requirements of a noimpact
home-based business may only be established by special
exception granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. Such home
occupations with impact may only deviate from the requirements to
establish a no-impact home-based business in the following manner:
(1) A barber or beauty shop shall not include any nonresident
employees, and all other home occupations with impact shall be
limited to one nonresident employee. Where more than one home
occupation with impact is proposed within a residential dwelling,
there shall be no more than one employee for the sum of all home
occupations.
(2) Sale of retail goods may not involve any display of goods visible
outside of the dwelling.
(3) Changes to the outside appearance of the home are limited to
provision of required off-street parking, in accordance with Article
XXIV of this chapter, erection of signs by special exception, in
accordance with Article XXV of this chapter, and means of egress
lighting, in accordance with Chapter 70, Building Construction and
Safety Standards.
(4) Any sewage discharge which deviates from the volume or type
which is normally associated with a residential use shall be
permitted if the residential property is served by a public sewer
system, subject to approval and conditions imposed by the
authority having jurisdiction over the sewer system.
(5) The business activity may not occupy more than 25% of the gross
floor area of the dwelling. Where more than one home occupation
with impact is proposed within a residential dwelling, the total floor
area used for all such uses shall be contained within the twentyfive-
percent limit specified herein.
(6) Bed-and-breakfast establishments meeting the following criteria
shall be considered home occupations:
(a) Sleeping accommodations shall be located only within the
principal dwelling and shall be limited to no more than five
§ 220-165 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-165
216:796
§ 220-166. Junkyards.
Where permitted, junkyards may be established in accordance with the
following provisions:
§ 220-167. Kennels.
Where permitted, an animal kennel may be established in accordance with
performance standards as set forth in Article XIX and the following
provisions:
rooms for rent, with a total size not to exceed 35% or 1,250
square feet of the dwelling, whichever is less.
(b) No more than 10 adult guests may be accommodated at any
one time. The length of stay per guest is limited to 15
consecutive days.
(c) Meals for compensation shall be provided only to guests of the
bed-and-breakfast establishment.
(d) No more than one bed-and-breakfast establishment is
permitted per lot.
C. Applicants for a special exception to establish a home occupation shall
demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of § 220-165A
and B and § 220-269D.
A. Junk/salvage shall be stored in piles not exceeding eight feet in height
and shall be arranged so as to permit easy access for fire-fighting
purposes.
B. No open burning shall be permitted.
C. Operations shall be conducted in compliance with the performance
standards of Article XIX and other applicable standards established
herein.
D. All junkyards shall meet the licensing and screening requirements of
Pennsylvania Act 4 of Special Session Number 3 of 1966,242 prohibiting
junk from being located within 1,000 feet of the right-of-way of any
interstates or primary roads (roads conveying traffic from one
municipality to another).
E. Stored materials shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any lot
line.
A. All kennels shall be licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Code, Title 7, Part II, Chapter 21, General Provisions;
Kennels; Licensure; Dog-Caused Damages, as amended.
242. Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 2719.4.
§ 220-165 (RESERVED) § 220-167
216:797
§ 220-168. Landfills.
Where permitted, a landfill may be established in accordance with the
following provisions:
§ 220-169. Manufactured home parks and subdivisions.
Where permitted, manufactured home parks shall be subject to the
following provisions:
B. All runs shall be located at least 200 feet from all lot lines.
C. All buildings in which animals are housed shall be adequately
soundproofed so that sounds generated within the buildings cannot be
perceived at the lot line.
D. Outdoor runs may be provided if screened in accordance with § 220-201
herein. No animal shall be permitted to use the outdoor runs from 8:00
p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
A. Landfills shall be constructed, licensed and operated in accordance
with the Cumberland County Solid Waste Plan and/or all applicable
local, county and commonwealth laws and regulations.
B. Operations shall be conducted in compliance with performance
standards of Article XIX and other applicable standards established
herein.
A. A manufactured home park shall be developed and approved in
accordance with regulations as set forth herein and other applicable
Township regulations.
B. The maximum permitted density shall be eight units per acre, excluding
existing rights-of-way.
C. The minimum building setback line from the cartway line of a private
street shall be 20 feet.
D. Detached accessory structures shall be located on the lot no closer than
five feet to a manufactured (mobile) home and shall comply with the
required front, side and rear building setback lines.
E. Lots shall be served by both public water supply and sanitary sewerage
collection systems.
F. Not less than 10% of the total land area shall be provided for usable
open space in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) Open space areas shall be developed to complement and enhance
the man-made environment. In the selection of the location of such
area, consideration shall be given to the preservation of natural
and man-made features which will enhance the attractiveness and
value of the remainder of the property to be subdivided or
§ 220-167 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-169
216:798
§ 220-170. Mixed uses.
When two or more principal uses occupy the same lot, either within one
structure or multiple structures, off-street parking, lot area, lot width,
building setbacks/placement standards, height and building area
requirements shall be provided so that the requirements pertaining to each
use will be met in full.
developed, including floodplains, streams and ponds, wetlands,
slopes equal to or greater than 25%, natural permanent vegetation,
historical amenities and other community assets.
(2) The area shall be so located and designed that it is easily accessible
to all residents, including handicapped persons. Safe and easy
access to common open space areas shall be provided either by
adjoining road frontage, easements and/or paths.
(3) Whenever possible, common open space areas shall be designed as
a continuous system of usable area, which is interspersed among
groupings of dwelling units; provided, however, that in those
instances in which the total minimum required open space is less
than two acres in size, such areas shall be located in one parcel.
(4) Such areas specifically designed for open space shall be fully
usable and suitable for that purpose and shall be set aside by deed
restriction.
(5) Sanitary sewer treatment facilities shall not be considered as part
of open space.
(6) Accessways to the site shall be of a sufficient width so that
maintenance equipment shall have reasonable convenient access to
such areas. In all instances, such open space areas shall be
maintained in accordance with applicable ordinances..
G. The minimum tract area for a manufactured home park shall be 10
acres.
H. The minimum side yard setback per lot shall be five feet, provided that
no manufactured (mobile) home shall be within 15 feet of any other
manufactured home or building.
I. The minimum rear yard setback shall be 15 feet.
J. The total area of all impervious surfaces shall not exceed 60% of the
gross area of the manufactured home park.
K. All manufactured home parks/subdivisions shall comply with design and
improvement standards as set forth in Chapter 192, Subdivision and
Land Development.
§ 220-169 (RESERVED) § 220-171
216:799
§ 220-171. Motels and hotels.
Where permitted, motels/hotels shall be subject to the following:
§ 220-172. Public and private nursery schools.
See § 220-160, Day-care centers.
§ 220-173. Resource recovery and recycling facilities.
Where permitted, resource recovery and recycling facilities shall be subject
to the following safeguards and regulations:
§ 220-174. Riparian buffers.
A. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided for the motel/
hotel, in addition to that which is required for other accessory facilities
developed as part of the motel/hotel premises, in accordance with
Article XXIV herein.
B. Every unit shall be provided with complete bathroom facilities.
C. The minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be no less than 25
feet.
D. Interior yards between structures shall be provided in accordance with
§ 220-212 herein.
A. All facilities shall be operated and licensed in accordance with
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection rules and
regulations.
B. All operations shall comply with performance standards as contained
within Article XIX herein.
C. Off-street loading/unloading spaces shall be provided on site for three
vehicles or the anticipated peak customer load, whichever is greater, to
circulate and to deposit recyclable materials. All loading spaces shall be
designed in accordance with Article XXIV herein.
D. Containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials
shall be located at least 50 feet from any property zoned, occupied or
planned for residential use, shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction,
shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, shall
be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials and shall be
clearly marked to identify the type of materials that may be deposited
within them.
E. Stockpiled materials and processing activities shall be set back a
minimum of 25 feet from any lot line.
A. Regulated riparian buffers shall consist of the area measuring 50 feet
from the top of stream bank, measured perpendicularly, landward.
§ 220-171 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-174
216:800
§ 220-175. Self-service storage facilities.
Where permitted, self-service storage facilities shall comply with the
following:
B. Riparian buffers shall be located on both sides of all perennial and
intermittent streams.
C. Riparian buffers shall be undisturbed by construction activities and be
vegetated, except as otherwise provided for herein.
D. The following uses are permitted within riparian buffers:
(1) Trails, paved or unpaved.
(2) Stream crossings.
(3) Underground utility facilities.
(4) Maintenance and restoration of the buffer, including revegetation
with appropriate native species.
(5) Projects to improve, stabilize, restore or enhance the stream bank,
channel floodplain or watershed hydrology.
(6) Private recreational uses by the property owner that do not include
installation of structures.
E. Riparian buffers shall be established and maintained in accordance
with Township landscape standards.
A. The use shall comply with performance standards as set forth in Article
XIX herein.
B. Yards of the following minimum depths and widths shall be provided:
(1) The minimum front yard depth shall be 30 feet at the dedicated
right-of-way line.
(2) The minimum side yard depth shall be 30 feet.
(3) The minimum rear yard depth shall be 35 feet.
C. Minimum building access requirements.
(1) Paved access for fire apparatus must be provided to all buildings.
(2) Access drives which provide loading/unloading space on only one
side shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width.
(3) Access drives which provide loading/unloading space on both sides
shall be a minimum of 26 feet in width.
D. Maximum area of any individual storage unit shall be 500 square feet.
§ 220-174 (RESERVED) § 220-175
216:801
§ 220-176. Shopping centers.
E. No off-street parking spaces are required for the storage units. Offstreet
parking shall be provided in accordance with Article XXIV herein
for accessory uses (i.e., office, manager's residence) of the self-storage
facility.
F. Landscape screening shall be required in all yards. For every 20 feet of
property line where screening is required, an evergreen or deciduous
tree of at least two inches in caliper shall be planted and incorporated
into the screening material.
G. Outdoor storage, including the outdoor storage of vehicles, shall not be
permitted.
H. Lighting of exterior areas shall be required. Such lighting may be
provided through the use of light fixtures on either a pole or a building
and shall comply with performance standards set forth in Article XV
herein.
I. A security fence shall be installed around the perimeter of the facility.
The fence shall be a minimum of six feet in height and shall not be
located in any yard. A solid building wall with no storage unit access
openings may be considered a security fence.
J. Perimeter building walls.
(1) Perimeter building walls facing the front yard(s) of the lot shall be
constructed of brick, split-face architectural blocks, natural stone,
manufactured stone, exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS)
type exterior finish system or similar materials, either alone or in
combination.
(2) Perimeter walls facing the side and rear yard(s) of the lot shall be
constructed using a minimum of 35% of the materials listed in
Subsection J(1) above.
(3) In no event shall any portion of any wall or storage unit door facing
the perimeter of the lot be constructed of unfinished metal or
unfinished concrete masonry units.
(4) Wall openings required for doors and windows shall not be included
in calculating the building wall construction material requirements
specified in this section.
A. A shopping center shall contain a minimum of six separate business
establishments.
B. Parking lots shall be designed in accordance with Article XXIV, with an
easily discernible circulation pattern, and shall meet the following
additional requirements:
§ 220-175 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-176
216:802
§ 220-177. Solar collectors and related equipment.
§ 220-178. Solid waste storage facilities.
All multifamily, commercial and manufacturing/industrial buildings or other
nonresidential uses shall include adequate facilities on site for the proper
storage of solid waste and recyclable material in accordance with the
provisions of the Township solid waste regulations243 and as hereinafter
provided.
§ 220-179. Swimming pools.
Swimming pools shall be permitted as an accessory use in any district and
shall comply with the following conditions and requirements:
(1) Terminal islands shall be installed at both ends of each row of
parking. Terminal islands shall be a minimum of 15 feet long and a
minimum of five feet wide. The terminal islands shall be landscaped
in accordance with § 220-200.
(2) The minimum distance between the sidewalk adjacent to the main
entrances of establishments and the parking area shall be 30 feet.
Sufficient space shall be provided between the sidewalk and the
parking area to allow two-way traffic and a pickup/fire lane.
Parking shall not be permitted in the required pickup/fire lane.
A. Solar collectors and related equipment shall be permitted in any district
as an appurtenance to a building or as an accessory structure.
B. Initial and continued access to solar energy shall be the sole
responsibility of the homeowner and/or occupant of the building or
accessory structure.
A. Such storage areas shall comply with performance standards as
contained within Article XIX herein.
B. Pavement of loading areas shall be of concrete at least eight inches
thick or a 50% increase in base and paving thereon.
C. Storage areas shall be located such that collection vehicles will not
obstruct the public street or otherwise violate Township regulations
while parked for collection of refuse and shall be provided with
accessways facilitating ready deposit and collection of refuse.
D. Storage areas shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the container
capacity required to store the refuse accumulation between collections
but shall not be less than four feet by eight feet in size or of other
dimensions providing an approved equal space.
E. Screening and buffering in accordance with §§ 220-201 and 220-202.
243. Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Solid Waste.
§ 220-176 (RESERVED) § 220-179
216:803
§ 220-180. Utility facilities.
Utility facilities shall be permitted in any district without regard to the
use and area regulations; provided, however, that buildings or equipment
erected for such utilities shall be subject to the regulations of the Zoning
District in which the facility is located, and to the following:
§ 220-181. Uses not provided for.
A. Pools shall not be located over an on-lot sewage disposal system.
B. All swimming pools hereafter constructed, installed or established or
shall comply with the Pennsylvania UCC, as amended, and maintained
in accordance with the International Property Maintenance Code.
C. All public pools must comply with the applicable regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Health.
D. Water may not be discharged from a swimming pool directly onto
adjacent properties or rights-of-way.
E. Pools must comply with applicable regulations pertaining to accessory
structures.
F. Outdoor lighting, if any, shall be shielded and/or reflected away from
adjoining properties so that no beam of light, other than diffused or
reflected light, enters adjoining properties, in accordance with
performance standards as set forth in Article XIX herein.
G. Pools shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from any property line.
Pumps, filters and other appurtenances must be setback a minimum of
five feet from any property line.
A. Equipment and facilities not housed within a building shall be enclosed
within a chain link fence a minimum of six feet in height, and screen
planting shall be installed in accordance with § 220-201.
B. When equipment is totally enclosed within a building, no fence or
screen planting shall be required.
C. The facility shall comply with performance standards as contained
within Article XIX herein.
D. The external design of the building shall be in character with existing
buildings in the respective district.
E. Bus shelters are intended to be in public rights-of-way and do not
therefore require minimum setbacks.
F. Exemptions. The following criteria are specific to utility facilities, and
supersede the general zoning district requirements:
(1) Facilities, equipment and buildings shall be set back a minimum of
five feet from any property line.
§ 220-179 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-181
216:804
§ 220-182. Vehicular body shop.
Where permitted, vehicular body shops may be established in accordance
with the following:
§ 220-183. Vehicular freight terminals.
Where permitted, vehicular freight terminals shall comply with
performance standards as set forth in Article XIX herein, in addition to the
following provisions:
A. Whenever under this chapter a use is neither specifically permitted nor
denied in any zoning district, an applicant may make application for
such use to the Zoning Hearing Board to hear and decide such a
request as a special exception. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have
the authority to permit or deny the use. The use may be permitted if it is
similar to and compatible with the permitted uses within the district in
which subject property is located; it is not permitted in any other
district under the terms of this chapter; and it in no way is in conflict
with the general purposes and intent of this chapter. The burden of
proof shall be upon the applicant to demonstrate that the proposed use
meets the foregoing criteria and will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood.
B. Such use shall comply with all applicable area and bulk regulations and
other applicable standards for comparable uses specifically listed in the
district.
A. The use shall comply with performance standards as set forth in Article
XIX and § 220-201 herein.
B. All repair and paint work shall be performed within a structure.
C. Outdoor storage of vehicles shall not exceed 60 days from the date of
arrival, unless respective repair parts are documented to be unavailable
within such time period. Said documentation shall be provided to the
Zoning Officer for approval.
A. The layout of improvements shall provide for convenient forward
movement of vehicles leaving and entering the site.
B. Adequate space shall be provided for parked and loading/unloading
vehicles that does not interfere with the maneuvering space.
C. All parking, loading, maneuvering and storage areas shall be paved and
site drainage shall be provided in accordance with design and
improvement standards of Chapter 192 Subdivision and Land
Development, and Chapter 184, Stormwater Management.
D. A vehicular freight terminal shall only be permitted where all public
streets used to access said terminal have been designed and
§ 220-181 (RESERVED) § 220-183
216:805
§ 220-184. Vehicular service stations.
Such uses, where permitted, shall comply with the following:
§ 220-185. Veterinary facilities.
Veterinary facilities and accessory kennels shall comply with performance
standards contained in Article XIX and § 220-167, in addition to the
following:
constructed with a pavement structure adequate for the anticipated
traffic loading.
A. The use shall comply with performance standards as set forth in Article
XIX herein.
B. No equipment for the service of motor vehicles shall be closer than 25
feet to any side or rear property line.
C. Canopies shall comply with § 220-150, Accessory structures, except
that canopies may be located no less than 10 feet from the right-of-way
line.
D. Fuel pumps shall be located at least 10 feet from any public right-of-way
or 50 feet from the street center line, whichever is greater.
E. Outdoor storage of vehicles shall not exceed 60 days from the date of
arrival, unless respective repair parts are documented to be unavailable
within such time period. Said documentation shall be provided to the
Zoning Officer for approval.
F. The use shall comply with the requirements of § 220-201.
G. The use shall comply with all applicable requirements of the
International Fire Code.
A. All animal boarding buildings that are not wholly enclosed and any
outdoor animal pens, stalls or runways shall be located within the rear
yard.
B. All animal boarding buildings that are not wholly enclosed and any
outdoor animal pens or stalls shall be a minimum of 100 feet from all
property lines and shall be screened from all adjacent properties.
C. All outdoor pasture areas shall be enclosed to prevent the escape of the
animals. All such enclosures shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet
from all property lines.
D. All animal wastes shall be regularly cleaned up and disposed of
properly.
E. Animals shall be restricted from using kennel areas not fully enclosed in
a building from 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
§ 220-183 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-185
216:806
ARTICLE XIX
Performance Standards
§ 220-186. Intent.
The following performance standards shall apply to all commercial and
industrial uses located throughout the Township, unless more stringent
provisions are contained within a specified zoning district. Where
applicable, in determining the best practical control methods, the Township
shall not require any method which would result in an arbitrary and
unreasonable taking of property or in the practical closing of any lawful
business or activity if such would be without corresponding public benefit.
§ 220-187. Noise.
A. Sound levels shall be measured with a sound-level meter using the Aweighting
decibel network and associated octave band filter
manufactured according to standards prescribed by the American
National Standards Institute. The level so read shall be designated
"dB(A)." Measurements shall be made using the flat network of the
sound-level meter. Impulsive-type noises shall be subject to the
prescribed performance standards, provided that such noises shall be
capable of being accurately measured with such equipment. Noises
able to be so measured, for the purpose of this chapter, shall be those
noises which cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of the sound-level
meter with a variation of no more than plus or minus two decibels.
Noises not able to be so measured, such as those of an irregular and
intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance
to adjacent uses.
B. The sound-pressure level (other than background noise not directly
under the control of the operator) abutting upon a residential or
commercial use shall not exceed the decibel limits in the octave band
designated in the following table:
Octave Band
Frequency
(cycles per second)
Decibel Limits
Along Residential
Use Boundaries
Decibel Limits Along
Commercial Use
Boundaries
0 to 75 72 79
75 to 150 67 74
150 to 300 59 66
300 to 600 52 59
600 to 1,200 46 53
1,200 to 2,400 40 47
2,400 to 4,800 34 41
4,800 and over 32 39
§ 220-186 (RESERVED) § 220-187
216:807
§ 220-188. Vibration.
Every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration inherently and
recurrently generated is not perceptible, without instruments, at any point
of any property line of the lot on which the use is located. Vibrations
from temporary construction and vehicles (trucks, trains, airplanes and
helicopters) which leave the lot are excluded.
§ 220-189. Particulate matter.
Particulate material emitted by a use shall not exceed such limits as
contained within the National Primary and Secondary Ambient Air Quality
Standards, 40 CFR 50.6, including Appendix J, and 40 CFR 50.12, including
Appendix G.
§ 220-190. Toxic and noxious material.
A person/business entity shall not conduct a use causing toxic or noxious
material emissions across a property line that exceed applicable federal and
commonwealth standards.
C. Sounds of short duration, as from forge hammers, punch presses and
metal shears, which cannot be measured accurately with the soundlevel
meter shall be measured with the impact noise filter as
manufactured by the General Radio Company or its equivalent in order
to determine the peak value of the impact. For sounds so measured, the
sound-pressure level as set forth in Subsection B above shall be
increased by six decibels.
D. Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Warning devices necessary for the protection of public safety,
including but not limited to police, fire and ambulance sirens and
train horns.
(2) Occasional outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows and sporting
and entertainment events, including regularly scheduled school
athletic events.
(3) Temporary construction/demolition activities.
(4) Stationary nonemergency signaling devices.
(5) Motor vehicles operating on a public right-of-way.
(6) Township-permitted parades, civic functions or gatherings.
(7) Federal- or commonwealth-preempted activities, to the extent that
regulations herein have been preempted by commonwealth or
federal law.
§ 220-187 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-191
216:808
§ 220-191. Flammable and explosive materials.
The storage and/or use of flammable and explosive materials shall be in
accordance with the Pennsylvania UCC standards as adopted by the
Township.
§ 220-192. Noxious odorous material.
§ 220-193. Outdoor lighting.
A. In any district, no odor shall be permitted at any lot line exceeding the
lowest amount set forth in Table III, Odor Thresholds, of Chapter 5,
Physiological Effects, of the Air Pollution Abatement Manual of the
Manufacturing Chemists Association, according to the latest edition of
such table for the compounds therein described. For compounds not
described in said Table III, odor thresholds may be established by
methods indicated in Chapter 5 of the manual, and no odor shall be
permitted at any lot line exceeding the amount determined by the
application of such methods.
B. When the source is a manufacturing process or agricultural operation,
no violation of the above Subsection A shall be cited by the Township,
provided that the best practical treatment, maintenance and control
currently available shall be utilized in order to maintain the lowest
possible emission of odorous gases.
A. Where light fixtures are installed to provide exterior illumination,
excluding overhead streetlighting and warning, emergency or traffic
signals, the following restrictions shall apply:
(1) No glare or direct illumination may be in excess of 0.5 footcandle
when measured at a residential use and/or residential zoning
district.
(2) Such illumination shall not interfere with the vision of motor
vehicle operators.
(3) Pole-mounted lamps shall be placed directly above the area to be
illuminated and shielded at the top and sides; or positioned near
the perimeter of a property and aimed toward the area requiring
illumination, subject to applicable yard setback provisions.
(4) The installation or erection of any lighting which may be confused
with warning signals, emergency signals or traffic signals shall not
be permitted.
B. When a property owner is notified by the Zoning Officer that a violation
of these provisions exists, the glare or illumination problem shall be
abated within 15 days of receipt of the violation notice.
§ 220-191 (RESERVED) § 220-194
216:809
§ 220-194. Heat.
Any operation producing intense heat perceptible to normal senses across
the property line shall be performed within a completely enclosed building
in such a manner so as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along such
property lines.
§ 220-195. Radiation hazards.
No activity shall emit radioactivity at any point in violation of applicable
commonwealth and federal regulations.
§ 220-196. Electromagnetic interference.
In all districts, no use, activity or process shall be conducted which
produces electric and/or magnetic fields which adversely affect public
health, safety and welfare, including but not limited to interference with
normal radio, television and/or telecommunications reception from off the
premises where the activity is conducted.
§ 220-197. Limestone hazard areas.
In areas within the limestone formation, best management practices shall
be employed to avoid groundwater contamination and structural collapse.
All stormwater shall be discharged to pipes and/or existing natural
drainageways which discharge into waters of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 220-198. Outdoor storage and disposal of waste.
A. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that such may be transported off the lot by natural causes or
forces.
B. All materials or wastes having the potential to cause fumes or dust, to
constitute a fire hazard or to be edible by or otherwise to be attractive
to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers
in accordance with applicable Lower Allen Township codes.
C. No flammable gases or solids, combustible or flammable liquids or
explosives shall be stored in bulk above ground, in accordance with
applicable Lower Allen Township codes, except that:
(1) Railroad locomotive fueling, fuel tanks for energy/heating products
and tanks containing compressed natural gas operated in
association with a permitted use may utilize aboveground tanks,
provided that they are located a minimum of 1,000 feet from a
residential district.
(2) Vaulted tanks, as approved by the Township Code Official, may be
located above ground.
§ 220-194 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-198
216:810
§ 220-199. Loading operations.
Truck or railroad loading/unloading operations located within 200 feet of
or abutting a residential district shall not be conducted between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. or else shall be conducted entirely within an
enclosed structure.
§ 220-200. Landscaping requirements.
(3) The parking of railroad tank cars containing explosive or flammable
materials shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from a
residential district.
D. Storage and disposal of all materials shall be in compliance with the
applicable requirements of the International Fire Code.
A. Front yard landscaping. In the front yard of any nonresidential or
multifamily development, at least 5% of that area shall be landscaped,
unless otherwise provided for within the specific zoning district. For
purposes of this subsection, the "front yard area" is defined as that area
between the front facade of the structure and the edge of the public
right-of-way. The composition of the landscaping material and its
placement on the lot shall be at the discretion of the developer/
applicant. At a minimum, these landscaped areas shall contain
evergreen and/or deciduous trees at least 1 1/2 inches in caliper,
evergreen and/or deciduous shrubs one foot to three feet in height and
continuous ground cover.
B. Parking area landscaping. Parking areas shall be suitably landscaped to
minimize noise, glare and other nuisance characteristics, as well as to
improve the environment of the site and surrounding area in
accordance with the following provisions. Parking lots containing more
than 50 parking spaces shall be divided into sections, as appropriate for
the type and size of the development. Sections shall be separated by
landscaped dividing strips, berms and similar elements.
(1) Amount required. At least 5% of the interior parking area shall be
landscaped with plantings, including one tree per every 10 parking
spaces. Planting required within the parking lot is exclusive of
other planting and screening requirements.
(2) Location. Landscaping shall be located within protected areas at
the discretion of the developer/applicant, such as along walkways,
in center islands, at the ends of bays or between parking stalls. All
landscaping in parking areas and along street frontage shall be
placed so that it will not obstruct sight distance nor interfere with
overhead utility lines.
(3) Plant type. A mixture of hardy flowering and/or decorative
evergreen and deciduous trees is preferred. The evergreens should
be used along the perimeter of the lot as part of the screening
§ 220-198 (RESERVED) § 220-200
216:811
§ 220-201. Screening requirements.
requirements and the deciduous trees for shading of the lot. The
areas between trees shall be mulched, planted with shrubs or
ground cover or covered with a paving material. Any area that will
be under the overhang of vehicles shall be mulched or covered with
paving material. Plantings shall avoid overhanging onto adjacent
properties.
C. Maintenance. The owner and tenant of any property where landscaping
is required shall be jointly and severally responsible for the
maintenance of all required plant material and continued compliance
with this section.
A. A fence, wall, landscaping, earth berm, existing vegetation area or any
combination thereof shall be provided to obscure certain uses or
portions of a specific use which, by their nature, are unsightly or which,
by scale or design, represent the potential to negatively impact
adjacent properties. The following specific uses or features shall be
screened from adjacent properties and from public view from a public
street:
(1) Dumpster and trash-handling areas.
(2) Service entrances, mechanical equipment and utility facilities.
(3) Outdoor storage of any material stocks or equipment, including but
not limited to motor vehicles, farm or construction equipment or
other similar items.
(4) Commercial and industrial uses, when located adjacent to
residential uses and/or residential districts.
B. Screening standards. Where required, screening shall consist of an
area containing any materials as defined above to visually screen land
uses. The composition of the screening material and its placement on
the lot shall be at the discretion of the developer/applicant of the lot as
long as the purpose and requirements of this section are fulfilled. The
following standards apply:
(1) Maximum height of solid screening (fences, walls and earthen
berms).
(a) Front yard: six feet.
(b) Rear and side yards: eight feet.
(2) The minimum height of any screening shall be that which is
sufficient to visually separate uses within the subject property from
adjoining properties or public streets.
§ 220-200 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-201
216:812
§ 220-202. Buffering requirements.
(3) The height of any screening material, natural or man-made, shall
not interfere with clear sight distance at driveways or street
intersections.
(4) For every 50 feet of property line where screening is required, an
evergreen or deciduous tree of at least two inches in caliper shall
be planted and incorporated into the screening material. This shall
not apply when fencing or a wall is used to fulfill the screening
requirement.
(5) Any earthen berm used to fulfill the requirements of this subsection
shall be stabilized to prevent erosion and landscaped with grasses,
shrubs or other ground covers.
(6) Shrubs used as screening materials shall be of evergreen varieties
and shall be at least three feet in height and placed no further than
six feet apart when planted. Possible planting arrangements
include planting in parallel, serpentine or broken rows. Shrubs
shall be of a variety providing for an average height of five feet to
six feet within two years from the time of planting.
C. Screening and buffering requirements for parking areas located
adjacent to residential uses. The following standards shall apply for
nonresidential parking areas located adjacent to residential uses:
(1) A front yard setback for any parking area equal to at least 1/2 of
that required for the adjacent residential use, but in no case less
than 10 feet, shall be provided.
(2) A wall, hedge or earthen berm shall be placed along the perimeter
of the parking area adjacent to the residential use, within a buffer
yard of five feet, in addition to the required yard setbacks.
D. Maintenance. The owner and tenant of any property for which
screening or buffering is required shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the maintenance of all required plant material and
continued compliance with this subsection. Such planting material shall
be maintained so as not to project past property lines.
E. In addition to the above standards, screening shall be designed,
installed and maintained in accordance with Township landscape
standards.
A. Buffering standards. Where required, buffering shall consist of an area
no less than five feet in width, unless otherwise stated within the
specific zoning district, containing an area to visually buffer land uses.
The following standards apply:
(1) Where nonresidential uses and multifamily and single-family
attached dwellings abut residential uses within the same zoning
§ 220-201 (RESERVED) § 220-202
216:813
§ 220-203. Woodland preservation.
The following provisions shall apply to woodlands as defined herein:
district, excluding such uses located within the MUN Mixed-Use
Neighborhood and C-1 Neighborhood Commercial Districts, a
buffer yard of 25 feet shall be provided, unless otherwise indicated
herein.
(2) A buffer yard of 100 feet shall be provided for nonresidential uses
located within the I-1 General Industrial, I-3 Industrial/
Commercial, C-4 Regional Commercial and C-3 Planned Business
Center Districts when abutting a residential district.
(3) Required buffer yards may be combined with a utility or other
easement, so long as all landscape requirements can be provided in
accordance with any existing or proposed easement agreements.
Vehicles or other objects shall not overhang or otherwise intrude
upon the required buffer yard more than 2 1/2 feet, and wheel stops
or curbs shall be required.
(4) Where residential subdivisions abut collector or arterial streets,
adjacent lots shall front on minor Township or local streets, and a
landscaped buffer yard shall be provided along the property line
abutting the collector or arterial street. The buffer yard shall be a
minimum of 25 feet in width and shall include trees and shrubs in
accordance with screening requirements as stated herein.
B. In addition to the above standards, screening shall be designed,
installed and maintained in accordance with Township landscape
standards.
A. No more than 15% of any mature woodland may be cleared or
developed. The remaining 85% shall be maintained as open space. No
more than 30% of any woodlands not identified as a mature or young
woodland in accordance with definitions herein may be cleared or
developed. The remaining 70% shall be maintained as permanent open
space. No more than 60% of any young woodland shall be cleared. The
remaining 40% shall be maintained as permanent open space.
B. Replacement of woodlands credit. In the case of mature woodlands, the
developer may clear or develop more than the area otherwise permitted
to be disturbed by this section, provided that the total mature woodland
or woodland area disturbed shall not be increased by more than 50% of
the area otherwise permitted to be disturbed. No more than 22.5% of
mature woodlands may be disturbed. No more than 45% of all
woodlands may be disturbed. In addition:
(1) The developer shall designate a new woodland area on a part of the
site not forested.
§ 220-202 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-203
216:814
§ 220-204. Steep slope provisions.
The provisions of this section shall apply to additional building lots created
by a subdivision plan. Furthermore, these regulations shall not apply to
existing man-made slopes.
§ 220-205. Scenic river corridor standards.
In addition to the performance standards of this chapter, the following
provisions within state-designated scenic river corridor for Yellow Breeches
Creek shall apply:
(2) The new woodland area shall consist of 1.2 times the surface
acreage of the woodland area disturbed pursuant to this section.
(3) The new woodland area shall be planted with new trees at 1.5 times
the number of woodland trees removed. New trees shall have a
minimum caliper of 2.5 inches. Trees shall be planted in
accordance with a planting plan provided a by a design
professional.
C. Removal of any woodlands shall be in accordance with an approved
timber harvesting plan.
A. The development, grading and stripping of vegetation shall be limited
to a percentage of land within steep slope categories established by this
section. The applicant proposing the subdivision shall prepare a
topographic site plan, with contour intervals of five feet (or of greater
detail), depicting the slope of all areas within the site in categories of
15% to 24.9%, and greater than 25%. Such plan shall be sealed by a
professional engineer, a professional land surveyor or a landscape
architect.
B. The maximum area of land which may be developed, graded and
stripped of vegetation shall be as follows:
(1) No greater than 30% of areas with slopes ranging from 15% to
24.9% shall be developed, graded or stripped of vegetation.
(2) No greater than 15% of areas with slopes greater than 25% shall be
developed, graded or stripped of vegetation.
A. Any activity shall be conducted in accordance with guidelines as set
forth within the Management Guidelines of the Scenic Rivers Program,
as amended. Such guidelines address the following activities:
(1) Dams and encroachments.
(2) Earthmoving activities.
(3) Flood management.
(4) Forest management.
§ 220-203 (RESERVED) § 220-205
216:815
§ 220-206. Floodplain management.
Any activity within the floodway or flood-fringe, as herein defined, shall be
in accordance with applicable Township floodplain management provisions,
as amended.
§ 220-207. Wireless communications facilities. [Amended
10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04244]
(5) Mineral and fuel extraction.
(6) Recreation uses.
(7) Utility and transportation corridors.
(8) Waste disposal.
(9) Water quality/quantity.
B. No existing vegetation shall be removed within 100 feet of the
designated scenic river, measured from the edge of water at normal
flow, except:
(1) (Reserved)
(2) When associated with the development of an accessway. Such
accessway shall not exceed 10 feet in width. Access points
authorized by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission shall be
built in accordance with Commission regulations.
(3) The removal of dead, diseased or damaged vegetation.
(4) The removal of invasive species and replacement with native
species.
C. Any new vegetative plantings and/or replacement of existing vegetative
plantings shall be of native plant materials to stabilize any disturbed
landscapes, improve the function of the floodplain, screen and buffer
adjacent land uses and improve the aesthetic condition of the corridor
whenever possible. Regular maintenance/pruning of landscaping,
including the removal of dead and/or diseased vegetation, shall be
permitted.
A. Purposes and findings of fact.
(1) The purpose of this section is to establish uniform standards for the
siting, design, permitting, maintenance, and use of wireless
communications facilities in Lower Allen Township (referred to
herein as the "Township"). While the Township recognizes the
244. Editor's Note: This ordinance also set forth that the Township, by granting any permit or
taking any other action pursuant to this chapter, does not waive, reduce, lessen or impair
the lawful police powers vested in the Township under applicable federal, state and local
laws and regulations.
§ 220-205 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-207
216:816
importance of wireless communications facilities in providing high
quality communications service to its residents and businesses, the
Township also recognizes that it has an obligation to protect public
safety and to minimize the adverse visual effects of such facilities
through the standards set forth in the following provisions.
(2) By enacting these provisions, the Township intends to:
(a) Accommodate the need for wireless communications facilities
while regulating their location and number so as to ensure the
provision of necessary services;
(b) Provide for the managed development of wireless
communications facilities in a manner that enhances the
benefits of wireless communication and accommodates the
needs of both Township residents and wireless carriers in
accordance with federal and state laws and regulations;
(c) Establish procedures for the design, siting, construction,
installation, maintenance and removal of both tower-based and
nontower-based wireless communications facilities in the
Township, including facilities both inside and outside the
public rights-of-way;
(d) Address new wireless technologies, including but not limited
to, distributed antenna systems, data collection units, and
other wireless communications facilities;
(e) Minimize the adverse visual effects and the number of such
facilities through proper design, siting, screening, material,
color and finish, and by requiring that competing providers of
wireless communications services co-locate their nontower
WCF and related facilities on existing towers;
(f) Promote the health, safety and welfare of the Township's
residents.
B. General and specific requirements for nontower wireless
communications facilities.
(1) The following regulations shall apply to all nontower WCF:
(a) Permitted by right subject to regulations.
(b) The following sites shall be utilized by applicants as the
preferred order of location of proposed nontower WCF,
including antenna and related equipment. As determined
feasible, and in order of preference, the sites are:
[1] Existing WCF, utility poles, traffic signal poles,
smokestacks, water towers, or any other tall structures.
§ 220-207 (RESERVED) § 220-207
216:817
[2] I-1 General Industrial District, I-2 Mineral Recovery
District, and I-3 Industrial/Commercial District.
[3] Publicly owned structures.
[4] C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District, C-2 General
Commercial District, C-3 Planned Business Center
District, and C-4 Regional Commercial District.
[5] Residential zones which are MUN Mixed-Use
Neighborhood District, R-1 Single-Family Established
Residential District, R-2 Single-Family Rural Residential
District, and R-3 Multifamily Residential District, as a
conditional use.
(c) Nonconforming wireless support structures. Nontower WCF
shall be permitted to co-locate upon non-conforming towerbased
WCF and other non-conforming structures. Co-location
of WCF upon existing tower-based WCF is encouraged even if
the tower-based WCF is non-conforming as to use within a
zoning district.
(d) Standard of care. Any nontower WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable
technical, safety and safety-related codes, including the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code. Any WCF shall at all
times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and
repair by qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so
that the same shall not endanger the life of any person or any
property in the Township.
(e) Wind. All nontower WCF structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind gusts of at least 100 miles per
hour in addition to the standard designed by the American
National Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering
departments of the Electronics Industry Association, and
Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/TIA-222, as
amended).
(f) Aviation safety. Nontower WCF shall comply with all federal
and state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(g) Public safety communications. Nontower WCF shall not
interfere with public safety communications or the reception of
broadband, television, radio or other communication services
enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
(h) Radio frequency emissions. A nontower WCF shall not, by itself
or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency
emissions in excess of the standards and regulations of the
FCC, including but not limited to, the FCC Office of
§ 220-207 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-207
216:818
Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(i) Removal. In the event that use of a nontower WCF is
discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the
Township of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the
use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned WCF or
portions of WCF shall be removed as follows:
[1] All abandoned or unused WCFs and accessory facilities
shall be removed within two months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved
by the Township.
[2] If the WCF or accessory facility is not removed within two
months of the cessation of operations at a site, or within
any longer period approved by the Township, the WCF
and/or associated facilities and equipment may be
removed by the Township and the cost of removal assessed
against the owner of the WCF.
(j) Insurance. Each entity that owns or operates a nontower WCF
on Township property or in Township rights-of-way shall
provide the Township with a certificate of insurance evidencing
general liability coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage in
the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering
the nontower WCF.
(k) Indemnification. Each entity that owns or operates a nontower
WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and
hold harmless the Township, its elected and appointed officials,
employees and agents, at all times against any and all claims
for personal injury, including death, and property damage
arising in whole or in part from, caused by or connected with
any act or omission of the entity, its officers, agents, employees
or contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the
construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal
of the nontower WCF. Each entity that owns or operates a
nontower WCF shall defend any actions or proceedings against
the Township in which it is claimed that personal injury,
including death, or property damage was caused by the
construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal
of a nontower WCF. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless
and defend shall include, but not be limited to, the obligation to
pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages, reasonable
attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all
other costs of indemnification.
§ 220-207 (RESERVED) § 220-207
216:819
(l) Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the following
maintenance requirements shall apply:
[1] The nontower WCF shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for
maintenance or emergency repair.
[2] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the
upkeep of the facility in order to promote the safety and
security of the Township's residents.
[3] All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than
the best available technology for preventing failures and
accidents.
(m) Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit for the
construction or placement of a tower-based WCF, the WCF
applicant shall provide to the Township financial security
sufficient to guarantee the removal of the tower-based WCF,
but in no case less than 20% of construction costs. Said
financial security shall remain in place until the tower-based
WCF is removed.
(2) The following regulations shall apply to all co-located nontower
WCF that do not substantially change the physical dimensions of
the wireless support structure to which they are attached, or
otherwise fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband
Collocation Act.
(a) Permit required. WCF applicants proposing the modification of
an existing nontower WCF shall obtain a permit from the
Township. In order to be considered for such permit, the WCF
applicant must submit a permit application to the Township in
accordance with applicable permit policies and procedures.
(b) Timing of approval for applications that fall under the WBCA.
Within 30 calendar days of the date that an application for a
nontower WCF is filed with the Township, the Township shall
notify the WCF applicant in writing of any information that may
be required to complete such application. Within 60 calendar
days of receipt of a complete application, the Township shall
make its final decision on whether to approve the application
and shall advise the WCF applicant in writing of such decision.
The Township shall notify the WCF applicant as to
completeness of the WCF Application within 30 days of receipt.
The timing requirements in this section shall only apply to
proposed facilities that fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless
Broadband Collocation Act.
(c) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Township's
§ 220-207 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-207
216:820
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval of a nontower WCF or $1,000, whichever is less.
(3) The following regulations shall apply to all nontower WCF that do
substantially change the wireless support structure to which they
are attached, or that otherwise do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act:
(a) Prohibited on certain structures. No nontower WCF shall be
located on single-family detached residences, single-family
attached residences, or any residential accessory structure.
(b) Conditional use required. Any WCF applicant proposing the
construction of a new nontower WCF, or the modification of an
existing nontower WCF, shall first obtain a conditional use from
the Township. New constructions, modifications, and
replacements that do fall under the WBCA shall not be subject
to the conditional use process. The conditional use application
shall demonstrate that the proposed facility complies with all
applicable provisions in the Lower Allen Township Zoning
Ordinance.
(c) Historic buildings. No nontower WCF may be located upon any
property or on a building or structure that is listed on either
the National or Pennsylvania Registers of Historic Places, or is
listed on the official historic structures and/or historic districts
list maintained by the Township, or has been designated by the
Township to be of historical significance.
(d) Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant(s)
and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the Township in reviewing
and evaluating the application for approval of the WCF and,
once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential
violations of the terms and conditions of these WCF provisions.
The WCF applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall reimburse
the Township for all costs of the Township's consultant(s) in
providing expert evaluation and consultation in connection
with these activities.
(e) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Township's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval of a nontower WCF, as well as related inspection,
monitoring and related costs.
(f) Development regulations. Where permitted by federal law,
nontower WCF shall be co-located on existing wireless support
structures, such as existing buildings or tower-based WCF,
subject to the following conditions:
[1] The total height of any wireless support structure and
mounted WCF shall not exceed 20 feet above the
§ 220-207 (RESERVED) § 220-207
216:821
maximum height permitted in the underlying zoning
district, unless the WCF applicant applies for, and
subsequently obtains, a variance.
[2] In accordance with industry standards, all nontower WCF
applicants must submit documentation to the Township
justifying the total height of the nontower WCF. Such
documentation shall be analyzed in the context of such
justification on an individual basis.
[3] If the WCF applicant proposes to locate the related
equipment in a separate building, the building shall
comply with the minimum requirements for the applicable
zoning district, and landscaping shall be required to
screen as much of the equipment building as possible. An
evergreen screen shall surround the site. The evergreen
screen shall be a minimum height of six feet at planting
and shall grow to a minimum of 15 feet at maturity. The
WCF owner shall be responsible for replacing any dead,
destroyed, or intentionally removed portions of the
evergreen screen within 15 days' notice of such death,
destruction, or removal.
(g) A security fence with a minimum height of six feet and a
maximum height of eight feet, with openings no greater than
nine inches, shall surround any separate communications
equipment building. Vehicular access to the communications
equipment building shall not interfere with the parking or
vehicular circulations on the site for the principal use.
(h) Noncommercial usage exemption. Township residents utilizing
satellite dishes and antennas for the purpose of maintaining
television, phone, and/or internet connections at their
respective residences shall be exempt from the regulations
enumerated in this section of the Zoning Ordinance.
(i) Design regulations.
[1] Nontower WCF shall employ stealth technology and be
treated to match the wireless support structure in order to
minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the stealth
technology chosen by the WCF applicant shall be subject
to the approval of the Township. The Township Board of
Commissioners or its designee shall employ the judgment
of a reasonable person evaluating the totality of the
circumstances when determining whether the stealth
technology chosen by the applicant appropriately blends in
with the surrounding area.
[2] Omnidirectional or whip communications Antennas shall
not exceed 20 feet in height or seven inches in diameter.
§ 220-207 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-207
216:822
[3] Directional or panel communications antennas shall not
exceed eight feet in height or three feet in width.
[4] Cylinder-type antennas shall not exceed 10 feet in length
and not exceed 12 inches in diameter and shall be of a
color that is identical or similar to the color of the
supporting structure to make the antenna and any related
accessory equipment visually unobtrusive.
[5] Satellite and microwave dishes shall not exceed 10 feet in
diameter. Dish antennas greater than three feet in
diameter shall be screened with an appropriate
architectural treatment that is compatible with or integral
to the architecture or building to which they are attached.
This screening requirement shall not apply to dishes
located upon towers.
(j) Removal, replacement and modification.
[1] The removal and replacement of nontower WCF and/or
accessory equipment for the purpose of upgrading or
repairing the WCF is permitted, so long as such repair or
upgrade does not substantially change the overall size of
the WCF or the number of antennas.
[2] Any material modification to a WCF shall require notice to
be provided to the Township, and possible supplemental
permit approval to the original permit or authorization.
(k) Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any
WCF to ensure compliance with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance and any other provisions found within the Township
Code or state or federal law. The Township and/or its agents
shall have the authority to enter the property upon which a
WCF is located at any time, upon reasonable notice to the
operator, to ensure such compliance.
(4) Regulations applicable to all nontower WCF located in the public
rights-of-way. In addition to the nontower WCF provisions listed in
Subsection B of § 220-207, the following regulations shall apply to
nontower WCF located in the public rights-of-way:
(a) Co-location. Nontower WCF in the right-of-way shall be colocated
on existing poles, such as existing utility poles or light
poles. If co-location is not technologically feasible, the WCF
applicant shall locate its nontower WCF on existing poles or
freestanding structures that do not already act as wireless
support structures with the Township's approval.
(b) Design requirements.
§ 220-207 (RESERVED) § 220-207
216:823
[1] WCF installations located above the surface grade in the
public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, those on
streetlights and joint utility poles, shall consist of
equipment components that are no more than six feet in
height and that are compatible in scale and proportion to
the structures upon which they are mounted. All
equipment shall be the smallest and least visibly intrusive
equipment feasible.
[2] Antennas and related equipment shall be treated to match
the supporting structure and may be required to be
painted, or otherwise coated, to be visually compatible
with the support structure upon which they are mounted.
(c) Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the
time, place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair
and/or removal of all nontower WCF in the right-of-way based
on public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the
right-of-way, and related considerations. For public utilities,
the time, place and manner requirements shall be consistent
with the police powers of the Township and the requirements
of the Public Utility Code.
(d) Equipment location. Nontower WCFs and related equipment
shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual
obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to
otherwise inconvenience public use of the right-of-way as
determined by the Township. In addition:
[1] In no case shall ground-mounted related equipment, walls,
or landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of
the curb or within an easement extending onto a privately,
owned lot;
[2] Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be placed
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent
possible, through the use of landscaping or other
decorative features to the satisfaction of the Township.
[3] Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to
blend in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of
the Township.
[4] Any graffiti on any wireless support structures or any
related equipment shall be removed at the sole expense of
the owner.
[5] Any proposed underground vault related to nontower WCF
shall be reviewed and approved by the Township.
§ 220-207 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-207
216:824
(e) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within two months
following written notice from the Township, or such longer
period as the Township determines is reasonably necessary or
such shorter period in the case of an emergency, an owner of a
WCF in the right-of-way shall, at its own expense, temporarily
or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position
of any WCF when the Township, consistent with its police
powers and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations,
shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or
alteration is reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances:
[1] The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of
any Township or other public improvement in the right-ofway;
[2] The operations of the Township or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way;
[3] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility
easement; or
[4] An emergency as determined by the Township.
C. General and specific requirements for all tower-based wireless
communications facilities.
(1) The following regulations shall apply to all tower-based wireless
communications facilities, excluding any tower-based WCF that is
less than 70 feet in height and owned and operated by a federally
licensed amateur radio status operator.
(a) Standard of care. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable
technical, safety and safety-related codes, including the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code. Any tower-based
WCF shall at all times be kept and maintained in good
condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance and
construction personnel, so that the same shall not endanger
the life of any person or any property in the Township.
(b) Notice. Upon submission of an application for a tower-based
WCF and the scheduling of the public hearing upon the
application, the WCF applicant shall mail notice to all owners
of every property within 500 feet of the proposed facility. The
WCF applicant shall provide proof of the notification to the
Township.
(c) In certain zoning districts conditional use authorization
required. Tower-based WCF are permitted in the MUN Mixed-
Use Neighborhood District, R-1 Single-Family Established
§ 220-207 (RESERVED) § 220-207
216:825
Residential District, R-2 Single-Family Rural Residential
District, and R-3 Multifamily Residential District, by
conditional use and at a height necessary to satisfy their
function in the WCF applicant's wireless communications
system. No WCF applicant shall have the right under these
regulations to erect a tower to the maximum height specified in
this section unless it proves the necessity for such height. The
WCF applicant shall demonstrate that the antenna/tower/pole
for the tower-based WCF is the minimum height necessary for
the service area.
[1] Prior to the Board's approval of a conditional use
authorizing the construction and installation of towerbased
WCF, it shall be incumbent upon the WCF applicant
for such conditional use approval to prove to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the WCF
applicant cannot adequately extend or infill its
communications system by the use of equipment such as
redoes, repeaters, antenna(s) and other similar equipment
installed on existing structures, such as utility poles or
their appurtenances and other available tall structures.
The WCF applicant shall further demonstrate that the
proposed tower-based WCF must be located where it is
proposed in order to serve the WCF applicant's service
area and that no other viable alternative location exists.
[2] The conditional use application shall be accompanied by a
propagation study evidencing the need for the proposed
tower or other communication facilities and equipment, a
description of the type and manufacturer of the proposed
transmission/radio equipment, the frequency range
(megahertz band) assigned to the WCF applicant, the
power in watts at which the WCF applicant transmits, and
any relevant related tests conducted by the WCF applicant
in determining the need for the proposed site and
installation.
[3] The conditional use application shall also be accompanied
by documentation demonstrating that the proposed towerbased
WCF complies with all state and federal laws and
regulations concerning aviation safety.
[4] Where the tower-based WCF is located on a property with
another principal use, the WCF applicant shall present
documentation to the Board of Commissioners that the
owner of the property has granted an easement for the
proposed WCF and that vehicular access will be provided
to the facility.
[5] The conditional use application shall also be accompanied
by documentation demonstrating that the proposed tower-
§ 220-207 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-207
216:826
based WCF complies with all applicable provisions in this
section.
(d) Engineer inspection. Prior to the Township's issuance of a
permit authorizing construction and erection of a tower-based
WCF, the applicant shall testify at the conditional use hearing
that it will obtain written certification from a structural
engineer registered in Pennsylvania of the proposed WCF's
ability to meet the structural standards offered by either the
Electronic Industries Association or the Telecommunication
Industry Association and certify the proper construction of the
foundation and the erection of the structure.
(e) Visual appearance and land use compatibility. Tower-based
WCF shall employ stealth technology, which may include the
tower portion to be painted silver or another color approved by
the Board of Commissioners, or shall have a galvanized finish.
All tower-based WCF and related equipment shall be
aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the
surrounding environment and shall maximize the use of a like
facade to blend with the existing surroundings and
neighboring buildings to the greatest extent possible. The
Board of Commissioners shall consider whether its decision
upon the subject application will promote the harmonious and
orderly development of the zoning district involved; encourage
compatibility with the character and type of development
existing in the area; benefit neighboring properties by
preventing a negative impact on the aesthetic character of the
community; preserve woodlands and trees existing at the site
to the greatest possible extent; and encourage sound
engineering and land development design and construction
principles, practices and techniques. The Township Board of
Commissioners or its designee shall employ the judgment of a
reasonable person evaluating the totality of the circumstances
when determining whether the stealth technology chosen by
the applicant appropriately blends in with the surrounding
area.
(f) Co-location and siting. An application for a new tower-based
WCF shall demonstrate that the proposed tower-based WCF
cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved structure
or building, or sited on land owned and maintained by Lower
Allen Township. The Board of Commissioners may deny an
application to construct a new tower-based WCF if the WCF
applicant has not made a good-faith effort to mount the
commercial communications antenna(s) on an existing
structure. The WCF applicant shall demonstrate that it
contacted the owners of tall structures, buildings, and towers
of a height equal to or greater than the proposed WCF within a
one-fourth-mile radius of the site proposed, sought permission
§ 220-207 (RESERVED) § 220-207
216:827
to install an antenna on those structures, buildings, and towers
and was denied for one of the following reasons:
[1] The proposed antenna and related equipment would
exceed the structural capacity of the existing building,
structure or tower, and its reinforcement cannot be
accomplished at a reasonable cost.
[2] The proposed antenna and related equipment would cause
radio frequency interference with other existing
equipment for that existing building, structure, or tower,
and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable
cost.
[3] Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have
adequate location, space, access, or height to
accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to
perform its intended function.
[4] A commercially reasonable agreement could not be
reached with the owner of such building, structure, or
tower.
(g) Permit required for modifications. To the extent permissible
under applicable state and federal law, any WCF applicant
proposing the modification of an existing tower-based WCF,
which increases the overall height of such WCF, shall first
obtain a building permit from the Township. Nonroutine
modifications shall be prohibited without such permit.
(h) Gap in coverage. A WCF applicant for a tower-based WCF must
demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage or
capacity exists in the applicable area and that the type of WCF
being proposed is the least intrusive means by which to fill that
gap in wireless coverage. The existence or nonexistence of a
gap in wireless coverage shall be a factor in the Township's
decision on an application for approval of tower-based WCF.
(i) Additional antennas. Where permitted by federal law, as a
condition of approval for all tower-based WCF, the WCF
applicant shall provide the Township with a written
commitment that it will allow other service providers to colocate
antennas on tower-based WCF where technically and
economically feasible. The owner of a tower-based WCF shall
not install any additional antennas without obtaining the prior
written approval of the Township.
(j) Wind. Any tower-based WCF structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind gusts of at least 100 miles per
hour in addition to the standard designed by the American
National Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering
departments of the Electronics Industry Association, and
§ 220-207 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-207
216:828
Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/EIA/TIA-222),
as amended.
(k) Height.
[1] Any tower-based WCF shall be designed at the minimum
functional height. In all zoning districts the maximum
height of any new tower-based WCF shall be 200 feet. An
existing tower may be modified or extended to a height not
to exceed a total height of 215 feet to accommodate the colocation
of additional communications antennas. Towerbased
WCF in the public rights-of-way shall not exceed the
average height of other poles in the public rights-of-way,
such as light poles or utility poles.
[2] WCF installations located above the surface grade in the
public right-of-way including, but not limited to, those on
streetlights and joint utility poles, shall consist of
equipment components that are no more than six feet in
height and that are compatible in scale and proportion to
the structures upon which they are mounted. All
equipment shall be the smallest and least visibly intrusive
equipment feasible.
(l) Related equipment. Either one single-story wireless
communications equipment building not exceeding 500 square
feet in area or up to five metal boxes placed on a concrete pad
not exceeding 10 feet by 20 feet or other method of approved
installation in area housing the receiving and transmitting
equipment may be located on the site for each unrelated
company sharing commercial communications antenna(s)
space on the tower-based Wireless Communications Facility.
(m) Public safety communications. No tower-based WCF shall
interfere with public safety communications or the reception of
broadband, television, radio or other communication services
enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
(n) Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall
apply:
[1] Any tower-based WCF shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for
maintenance or emergency repair.
[2] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the
upkeep of the WCF in order to promote the safety and
security of the Township's residents, and utilize the best
available technology for preventing failures and accidents.
(o) Radio frequency emissions. A tower-based WCF shall not, by
itself or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio
§ 220-207 (RESERVED) § 220-207
216:829
frequency emissions in excess of the standards and regulations
of the FCC, including but not limited to, the FCC Office of
Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(p) Historic buildings or districts. A tower-based WCF shall not be
located upon a property, and/or on a building or structure that
is listed on either the National or Pennsylvania Registers of
Historic Places, or eligible to be so listed, or is included in the
official historic structures and/or historic districts list
maintained by the Township.
(q) Signs. All tower-based WCFs shall post a sign in a readily
visible location identifying the name and phone number of a
party to contact in the event of an emergency. The only other
signage permitted on the WCF shall be those required by the
FCC, or any other federal or state agency.
(r) Lighting. No tower-based WCF shall be artificially lighted,
except as required by law. If lighting is required, the WCF
applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting,
demonstrating as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is
permissible under state and federal regulations. The WCF
applicant shall promptly report any outage or malfunction of
FAA-mandated lighting to the appropriate governmental
authorities and to the Township Manager.
(s) Noise. Tower-based WCF shall be operated and maintained so
as not to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards
under state law and the Township Code, except in emergency
situations requiring the use of a backup generator, where such
noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis only.
(t) Aviation safety. Tower-based WCF shall comply with all federal
and state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(u) Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant
and/or expert necessary to assist the Township in reviewing
and evaluating the application for approval of the tower-based
WCF and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any
potential violations of the terms and conditions of these
provisions. The WCF applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall
reimburse the Township for all costs of the Township's
consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and consultation
in connection with these activities.
(v) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a tower-based WCF is filed with the Township,
the Township shall notify the WCF applicant in writing of any
information that may be required to complete such application.
All applications for tower-based WCFs shall be acted upon
§ 220-207 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-207
216:830
within 150 days of the receipt of a fully completed application
for the approval of such tower-based WCF, and the Township
shall advise the WCF applicant in writing of its decision. If
additional information was requested by the Township to
complete an application, the time required by the WCF
applicant to provide the information shall not be counted
toward the one-hundred-fifty-day review period.
(w) Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming tower-based WCF which
are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or
cause may be repaired and restored at their former location,
but must otherwise comply with the terms and conditions of
this section.
(x) Removal. In the event that use of a tower-based WCF is
planned to be discontinued, the owner shall provide written
notice to the Township of its intent to discontinue use and the
date when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned
WCF or portions of WCF shall be removed as follows:
[1] All unused or abandoned tower-based WCFs and accessory
facilities shall be removed within six months of the
cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension
is approved by the Township.
[2] If the WCF and/or accessory facility is not removed within
six months of the cessation of operations at a site, or
within any longer period approved by the Township, the
WCF and accessory facilities and equipment may be
removed by the Township and the cost of removal assessed
against the owner of the WCF.
[3] Any unused portions of tower-based WCF, including
antennas, shall be removed within six months of the time
of cessation of operations. The Township must approve all
replacements of portions of a tower-based WCF previously
removed.
(y) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Township's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval of a tower-based WCF, as well as related inspection,
monitoring, and related costs.
(z) FCC license. Each entity that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF over 40 feet in height shall submit a copy of its current
FCC license, including the name, address, and emergency
telephone number for the operator of the facility.
(aa) Insurance. Each entity that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF greater than 40 feet in height shall provide the Township
with a certificate of insurance evidencing general liability
§ 220-207 (RESERVED) § 220-207
216:831
coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum
amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence covering the towerbased
WCF. Each entity that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF 40 feet or less in height shall provide the Township with
a certificate of insurance evidencing general liability coverage
in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and
property damage coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per occurrence covering each tower-based WCF.
(bb) Indemnification. Each entity that owns or operates a towerbased
WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the Township, its elected and
appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against
any and all claims for personal injury, including death, and
property damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or
connected with any act or omission of the entity, its officers,
agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited
to, the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of the tower-based WCF. Each entity that owns or
operates a tower-based WCF shall defend any actions or
proceedings against the Township in which it is claimed that
personal injury, including death, or property damage was
caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of tower-based WCF. The obligation to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities,
damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees,
court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
(cc) Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for a tower-based
WCF shall contain a seal and signature of a professional
structural engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(dd) Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit for the
construction or placement of a tower-based WCF, the WCF
applicant shall provide to the Township financial security
sufficient to guarantee the removal of the tower-based WCF,
but in no case less than 20% of construction costs. Said
financial security shall remain in place until the tower-based
WCF is removed.
(2) The following regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless
communications facilities located outside the public rights-of-way:
(a) Development regulations.
[1] Tower-based WCF shall not be located in, or within 75 feet
of, an area in which utilities are primarily located
underground.
§ 220-207 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-207
216:832
[2] Tower-based WCF are permitted outside the public rightsof-
way in the following zoning districts, subject to the
above prohibition:
[a] C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District.
[b] C-2 General Commercial District.
[c] C-3 Planned Business Center District.
[d] C-4 Regional Commercial District.
[e] I-1 General Industrial District.
[f] I-2 Mineral Recovery District.
[g] I-3 Industrial/Commercial District.
[3] Tower-based WCF are permitted by conditional use,
outside the public rights-of-way, subject to the prohibition
in § 220-207C(2)(a)[1], as well as in § 220-207C(1)(c), in
the following zoning districts:
[a] MUN Mixed-Use Neighborhood District.
[b] R-1 Single Family Established Residential District.
[c] R-2 Single Family Rural Residential District.
[d] R-3 Multifamily Residential District.
[4] Sole use on a lot. A tower-based WCF shall be permitted as
a sole use on a lot, provided that the underlying lot meets
the minimum size specifications set forth in the Township
Zoning Code.
[5] Combined with another use. A tower-based WCF may be
permitted on a property with an existing use, or on a
vacant parcel in combination with another use, except
residential, subject to the following conditions:
[a] The existing use on the property may be any permitted
use in the applicable district, and need not be
affiliated with the WCF.
[b] Minimum lot area. The minimum lot shall comply with
the requirements for the applicable district and shall
be the area needed to accommodate the tower-based
WCF and guy wires, the equipment building, security
fence, and buffer planting if the proposed WCF is
greater than 40 feet in height.
[c] Minimum setbacks. The minimum distance between
the base of a tower-based WCF and any adjoining
property line or street right-of-way line shall be equal
§ 220-207 (RESERVED) § 220-207
216:833
to 100% of the height of the tower-based WCF or
the minimum front yard setback of the underlying
zoning district, whichever is greatest. Where the site
on which a tower-based WCF is proposed to be located
is contiguous to an educational use, child day-care
facility, or residential use, the minimum distance
between the base of a tower-based WCF and any such
adjoining uses shall equal 250 feet, regardless of the
height of the tower-based WCF, unless it is
demonstrated to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Board that in the event of failure the WCF is designed
to collapse upon itself within a setback area less than
the required minimum setback without endangering
such adjoining uses and their occupants.
(b) Design regulations.
[1] The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact.
Application of the stealth technology chosen by the WCF
applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Township.
The Township Board of Commissioners or its designee
shall employ the judgment of a reasonable person
evaluating the totality of the circumstances when
determining whether the stealth technology chosen by the
applicant is appropriate for the Township.
[2] To the extent permissible by law, any height extensions to
an existing tower-based WCF shall require prior approval
of the Township.
[3] Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects to
accommodate both the WCF applicant's antennas and
comparable antennas for future users.
[4] Any tower-based WCF over 40 feet in height shall be
equipped with an anti-climbing device, as approved by the
manufacturer.
(c) Surrounding environs.
[1] The WCF applicant shall ensure that the existing
vegetation, trees and shrubs located within proximity to
the WCF structure shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible.
[2] The WCF applicant shall submit a soil report to the
Township complying with the standards of Appendix I:
Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222, as amended,
to document and verify the design specifications of the
§ 220-207 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-207
216:834
foundation of the tower-based WCF, and anchors for guy
wires, if used.
(d) Fence/screen.
[1] A security fence with a minimum height of six feet and a
maximum height of eight feet, with openings no greater
than nine inches, shall completely surround any towerbased
WCF greater than 40 feet in height, as well as guy
wires, or any building housing WCF equipment.
[2] Landscape screening.
[a] Landscaping shall be required to screen as much of a
newly constructed tower-based WCF as possible. The
Board of Commissioners may permit any combination
of existing vegetation, topography, walls, decorative
fences or other features instead of landscaping, if, in
the discretion of the Board, they achieve the same
degree of screening. Existing vegetation shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible.
[b] When evergreen screening is utilized, the evergreen
screen shall be a minimum height of six feet at
planting and shall be grown to a minimum of 15 feet at
maturity. The WCF owner shall be responsible for
replacing any dead, destroyed, or intentionally
removed, portions of the evergreen screen within 15
days' notice of such death, destruction, or removal.
(e) Accessory equipment.
[1] Ground-mounted related equipment associated or
connected with a tower-based WCF shall be placed
underground or screened from public view using Stealth
Technologies, as described above.
[2] All related equipment, utility buildings and accessory
structures shall be compatible with the height and
appearance of other buildings and structures in the
immediate area.
(f) Access road. An access road, turnaround space and parking
shall be provided to ensure adequate emergency and service
access to tower-based WCF. The access road shall be a dustfree
all-weather surface for its entire length. Maximum use of
existing roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the
extent practicable. Road grades shall closely follow natural
contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and minimize
soil erosion. Where applicable, the WCF owner shall present
documentation to the Township that the property owner has
granted an easement for the proposed facility.
§ 220-207 (RESERVED) § 220-207
216:835
(g) Parking. For each tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet in
height, there shall be two off-street parking spaces.
(h) Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any
tower-based WCF to ensure compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance and any other provisions found within the Township
Code or state or federal law. The Township and/or its agents
shall have the authority to enter the property upon which a
WCF is located at any time, upon reasonable notice to the
operator, to ensure such compliance.
(3) The following regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless
communications facilities located in the public rights-of-way.
(a) Location and development standards.
[1] Tower-based WCF in the public rights-of-way shall not be
sited within 100 feet of a subdivision in which, or a street
along which, all utilities are buried underground.
[2] Tower-based WCF in the public rights-of-way shall not be
located in front of the facade of any structure.
[3] Tower-based WCF 40 feet or shorter in height shall be
permitted along certain collector roads and arterial roads
throughout the Township, regardless of the underlying
zoning district, provided that they are not situated within
50 feet of an area in which utilities are underground. A
map of such permitted roads is kept on file at the Township
Zoning Office.
(b) Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the
time, place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair
and/or removal of all tower-based WCF in the right-of-way
based on public safety, traffic management, physical burden on
the right-of-way, and related considerations. For public
utilities, the time, place and manner requirements shall be
consistent with the police powers of the Township and the
requirements of the Public Utility Code.
(c) Equipment location. Tower-based WCF and related equipment
shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual
obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or otherwise to
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or
otherwise to inconvenience public use of the right-of-way as
determined by the Township. In addition:
[1] In no case shall ground-mounted related equipment, walls,
or landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of
the curb.
§ 220-207 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-207
216:836
[2] Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be placed
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent
possible, through the use of landscaping or other
decorative features to the satisfaction of the Township.
[3] Required electrical meter cabinets shall the screened to
blend in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of
the Township.
[4] Any graffiti on the tower or on any related equipment shall
be removed at the sole expense of the owner.
[5] Any underground vaults related to tower-based WCFs
shall be reviewed and approved by the Township.
(d) Design regulations.
[1] The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact.
The application of the stealth technology chosen by the
WCF applicant shall be subject to the approval of the
Township. The Township Board of Commissioners or its
designee shall employ the judgment of a reasonable
person evaluating the totality of the circumstances when
determining whether the stealth technology chosen by the
applicant is appropriate for the Township.
[2] Tower-based WCF in the public right-of-way shall not
exceed 40 feet in height.
[3] To the extent permissible under state and federal law, any
height extensions to an existing Tower-based WCF shall
require prior approval of the Township, and shall not
increase the overall height of the tower-based WCF to
more than 40 feet.
[4] Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects to
accommodate both the WCF applicant's antennas and
comparable antennas for future users.
(e) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following
written notice from the Township, or such longer period as the
Township determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter
period in the case of an emergency, an owner of tower-based
WCF in the right-of-way shall, at its own expense, temporarily
or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position
of any WCF when the Township, consistent with its police
powers and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations,
shall determine that such removal, relocation, change or
§ 220-207 (RESERVED) § 220-207
216:837
§ 220-208. through § 220-210. (Reserved)
alteration is reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances:
[1] The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of
any Township or other public improvement in the right-ofway;
[2] The operations of the Township or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way;
[3] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility
easement; or
[4] An emergency as determined by the Township.
(f) Reimbursement for right-of-way use. In addition to permit fees
as described in this section, every tower-based WCF in the
right-of-way is subject to the Township's right to fix annually a
fair and reasonable fee to be paid for use and occupancy of the
right-of-way. Such compensation for right-of-way use shall be
directly related to the Township's actual right-of-way
management costs, including, but not limited to, the costs of
the administration and performance of all reviewing,
inspecting, permitting, supervising and other right-of-way
management activities by the Township. The owner of each
tower-based WCF shall pay an annual fee to the Township to
compensate the Township for the Township's costs incurred in
connection with the activities described above.
§ 220-207 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-208
216:838
ARTICLE XX
General Standards
§ 220-211. Height regulations.
Height regulations shall not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas or domes not
used for human occupancy, chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks,
silos, utility poles, towers, flagpoles, solar collectors and ornamental or
necessary appurtenances.
§ 220-212. Yard regulations.
A. Where the street or streets upon which the lot abuts are less than 50
feet in width, the front yard depth and the width of the side yard
abutting the street shall be measured from a line parallel to 25 feet
from the center line of the street. In no case shall any structure
interfere with the individually designated clear-sight triangles for lots
and/or tracts at street intersections.
B. Front yards.
(1) Where buildings exist in the same block, the setback line of the
building to be constructed shall be at least the average of buildings
constructed within the same block. In measuring to determine said
building line, open porches shall not be construed as part of the
building.
(2) On multiple frontage lots, front yards shall be required for such
sides facing the street rights-of-way.
C. Side yards.
(1) On multiple frontage lots, a side yard shall be provided for any lot
line that is not a front line.
D. Interior yards (open space between principal structures).
(1) Front-to-front, rear-to-rear or front-to-rear parallel principal
structures shall have 50 feet between faces for one story in height,
plus five feet for each additional story. If the front or rear faces are
obliquely aligned, the above distances may be decreased by as
much as 10 feet at one end if increased by similar or greater
distances at the other end. Where service drives or bank grade
changes or collector walks are introduced in this space, the
distance between structures shall be at least 50 feet.
(2) From end to end, there shall be a distance of 25 feet between
principal structures for a one-story structure, plus five additional
feet for each story in excess of one.
(3) From end to front or from end to rear, there shall be a distance of
30 feet between principal structures for each one-story structure,
plus five feet additional for each story in excess of one.
§ 220-211 (RESERVED) § 220-212
216:839
§ 220-213. Projections in yards.
§ 220-214. Obstruction to vision.
§ 220-215. Fences and walls.
(4) When adjacent principal structures differ in the number of stories,
the required distance between structures shall be calculated based
upon the taller of the structures.
A. Unenclosed terraces, patios, porches and associated stairways at or
below ground floor level may project not more than 1/2 of the required
setback into any required yard setback or no more than 10 feet into any
required yard setback, whichever is less. However, in no instance shall
a side or rear yard setback be reduced to less than five feet. Ramps for
the physically challenged are exempt from this requirement and may
project into any required yard setback as necessary.
B. Chimneys, flues, columns, sills and ornamental architectural features
may project not more than two feet into a required yard setback.
A. Walls, fences, signs or other structures shall not be erected or altered,
and hedges, trees or other growth shall not be planted or maintained,
which may cause danger to traffic on a street or road by obstructing the
view.
B. A clear sight triangle of 25 feet, measured along the street center lines
of intersecting streets, shall be maintained, within which such
structures or planting shall be limited to a height of not more than three
feet or less than 10 feet above the street grade, excepting the trunks of
street trees or other ornamental trees whose foliage is kept trimmed to
a height of 10 feet above the street grade.
A. Fences and walls may be erected, altered and maintained in accordance
with the following location requirements:
(1) Fences and walls may only be placed in a public right-of-way by the
authority having jurisdiction over the right-of-way, in accordance
with generally accepted construction practices. These structures
provide functions such as pedestrian and traffic safety, access
limitation, retaining walls and noise abatement.
(2) Fences and walls may not restrict access to easements unless
constructed in accordance with guidelines of, and with written
permission of, the entity to which the easement rights were
granted.
(3) Fences and walls must be located up to but not across an
established property line unless a written agreement exists
between the affected property owners, addressing maintenance of
the fence and location of actual property lines. Such agreement
shall be binding on all future property owners, heirs and assigns of
§ 220-212 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-215
216:840
the property, and shall provide for maintenance cross easements of
no less than three feet.
B. Fences and walls may be erected, altered and maintained in accordance
with the following height limitations:
(1) Fences and walls located within a clear sight triangle of
intersecting streets shall not exceed three feet in height.
(2) Fences and walls located outside a clear sight triangle, but within a
required front yard for a primary building, shall not exceed 3.5 feet
in height, with the following exceptions.
(a) Fences on farms, as defined herein, may be up to six feet in
height if at least 50% of the fence area is open area.
(b) Fences and walls installed as solid screening per § 220-201B.
(c) Retaining walls, constructed to hold back or support an
earthen berm, shall not be limited in height.
(d) Any portion of a retaining wall greater than four feet in height
and within five feet of a property line shall be protected by a
physical barrier, not less than three feet in height, on the
upslope side of the retaining wall.
(e) Where a public thoroughfare is classified as an alley and its
intersection with another public thoroughfare creates a corner
lot, fences and walls within the required yard along the alley
may be up to eight feet in height if located at least 10 feet from
the alley right-of-way, and outside of the required front yard of
the intersecting street.
(f) When two corner lots are situated in the same block in a
manner that two houses face streets in opposite directions, and
the backs of the two houses face each other, a fence up to six
feet in height may be installed in the required front yard along
the common street frontage between the two rear building
lines.
(3) Fences and walls located within required side or rear yards shall
not exceed six feet in height; however, the height limit may be
increased to eight feet if the portion of the fence above six feet in
height is at least 50% open area, with the following exceptions:
(a) Fences and walls installed as solid screening in accordance
with § 220-201B.
(b) Retaining walls, constructed to hold back or support an
earthen berm, shall not be limited in height.
§ 220-215 (RESERVED) § 220-215
216:841
§ 220-216. Space regulations.
No yard or other space provided for any building or structure for the
purpose of complying with this chapter shall be considered as a yard or
other open space for another building or structure.
§ 220-217. Control of traffic and protection of public safety.
The application for a permit for any and all uses shall be accompanied by a
site plan showing building location, service and parking areas and access to
highways. Where a driveway or access road gives access to a state road or
highway, approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shall
be required.
§ 220-218. Reduction of lot dimensions.
The area, width or depth of any lot shall not be reduced by subdivision, sale
or development so that the lot width, lot area, lot area per dwelling unit,
and yards or other spaces are smaller or so that the impervious coverage is
greater than prescribed in the underlying zoning district regulations.
(4) Fences and walls located anywhere on a lot where a primary
building can be located are limited to eight feet in height, with the
following exceptions that are not limited in height:
(a) Fences and walls erected for prison security.
(b) Fences having at least 50% open area for athletic fields and
sports courts, such as tennis court enclosures and baseball
backstops.
(c) Retaining walls constructed to hold back or support an earthen
berm.
C. All fences and walls shall be erected, altered and maintained in
accordance with Chapter 70, Building Construction and Safety
Standards. Any fence or wall not limited in height by the provisions of
this chapter may be limited in height by compliance with structural
design criteria of the applicable construction code.
§ 220-215 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-218
216:842
ARTICLE XXI
Nonconforming Buildings, Structures and Uses
§ 220-219. General provisions.
All lawful or previously nonconforming buildings, structures and uses of
land or of a building, sign or other structure existing on the effective date of
this chapter may be continued, altered, restored, reconstructed, changed,
sold or maintained, even though such building, structure or use may not
conform to the use, height, area, yard and other regulations of the district
in which it is located, provided that such nonconforming conditions shall
comply with the following sections of Article XXI.
§ 220-220. Certificate of nonconformance.
The owner of the premises occupied by a lawful nonconforming use,
structure or building existing at the effective date of this chapter may
secure a certificate of nonconformance, which shall be for the purpose of
ensuring to the owner the right to continue a nonconforming structure,
building or use.
§ 220-221. Alterations.
Repairs and structural alterations may be made to a nonconforming
building or structure or a building or structure occupied by a
nonconforming use, provided that such alterations and repairs are in
conformance with the regulations as set forth in this chapter and other
applicable codes and ordinances adopted by the Township.
§ 220-222. Extensions or enlargements.
A. The types of extensions and enlargements listed below are permitted
for nonconforming uses and buildings or structures existing on the
effective date of this chapter:
(1) The extension of a nonconforming use of land upon a lot occupied
by such use.
(2) The extension or enlargement of a conforming building or structure
occupied by a nonconforming use.
(3) The extension or enlargement of a nonconforming building or
structure occupied by a nonconforming use.
(4) The extension or enlargement of a nonconforming building or
structure occupied by a conforming use.
B. The foregoing extensions or enlargements of such nonconforming
buildings, structures or uses shall be subject to the following
conditions:
§ 220-219 (RESERVED) § 220-222
216:843
§ 220-223. Reconstruction and restoration.
(1) The extension or enlargement shall conform to the height, area,
yard and impervious coverage regulations of the district in which it
is located. Where a building, structure or use is nonconforming as
to a required side yard or rear yard setback, the established
nonconforming setback may be continued, so long as the proposed
extension or enlargement does not project further into any yard,
whether a front, side or rear yard, than the original setback line
extended. Extension or enlargement of the nonconforming use,
building or structure shall not exceed 50% of the floor area or use
existing on the effective date of this chapter or the date of an
amendment thereto thereby creating the nonconformity.
(2) The entire building, structure or use shall be provided with offstreet
parking and loading spaces as required by Article XXIV
herein.
(3) The extension or enlargement does not replace a conforming use.
(4) The extension or enlargement of a building, structure or use used
for a nonconforming use shall not be permitted to extend into
vacant parcels of land adjacent to the initial parcel of land existing
and occupied on the effective date of this chapter, where such
vacant parcels have been recorded separately or acquired
following the effective date of this chapter.
(5) Any lawful nonconforming use of a building, structure or land may
be changed to another nonconforming use of substantially the same
character upon approval by special exception by the Zoning
Hearing Board. The applicant shall satisfactorily prove to the
Zoning Hearing Board that the proposed change in nonconforming
use will not increase the need for off-street parking or produce any
noise, glare, heat, dust, traffic vibration or illumination in excess of
the existing nonconforming use.
A. A nonconforming building, structure or use which is damaged by fire,
explosion, windstorm or other natural or criminal acts may be
reconstructed and used for the same purposes, provided that:
(1) The reconstruction and/or restoration of the building or structure is
commenced within one year from the date of occurrence of the
damage and is carried to completion without undue delay; and
(2) The reconstructed building, structure or occupied area does not
exceed the height, area and volume of the original structure and
occupied use.
B. In the event that any nonconforming building, structure and/or use is
destroyed or partially destroyed and the owner of such has determined
reconstruction/restoration unfeasible, the owner will be responsible for
§ 220-222 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-223
216:844
§ 220-224. Discontinuance.
If a nonconforming use ceases operations for a continuous period of more
than 12 months, and intent to abandon has been demonstrated by the
Township, then such use and any subsequent use, structure or building shall
conform to the regulations of this chapter.
§ 220-225. Nonconforming lots.
the complete removal of the structure and debris, as well as the filling
of any excavated areas.
A. Any lot held in single and separate ownership at the effective date of
this chapter which does not conform to one or more of the applicable
area regulations in the district in which it is located shall be considered
nonconforming. A building may be erected upon any vacant
nonconforming lot, provided that a special exception is authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board, and further provided that the applicant does
not own or control other adjoining property sufficient to comply with
the provisions of this chapter. Such development shall comply with the
following provisions:
(1) The proposed use is permitted within the district in which it is
located.
(2) The proposed building shall comply with all applicable district
regulations, as well as area and yard requirements as set forth in
§ 220-212 herein.
B. On a lot in a residential district held in single and separate ownership
from adjacent land at the effective date of this chapter, with a lot width
less than that required for the zoning district, only one dwelling unit
may be erected, and side yards shall be provided in accordance with the
following requirements:
(1) On lots less than 50 feet but not less than 27 feet in width, two side
yards shall be provided, each equaling 20% of the lot width.
(2) On lots less than 27 feet but not less than 20 feet in width, one side
yard of no less than five feet in width shall be provided. One side
wall of the building shall be constructed abutting the lot line
without openings but shall not be constructed as a party wall.
(3) On lots less than 20 feet in width, a building may be constructed
the full width of the lot. Side walls abutting the lot lines shall have
no openings and shall not be constructed as party walls. For such
dwellings constructed to a depth of more than two rooms, a court
not less than six feet in width shall be provided abutting the side
wall for all rooms beyond the second room.
(4) On a lot, in any nonresidential district, held in single and separate
ownership from adjacent land at the effective date of this chapter,
§ 220-223 (RESERVED) § 220-225
216:845
§ 220-226. Nonconforming signs.
Signs in existence at the effective date of this chapter or amendments
thereto may be continued subject to the regulations contained in Article
XXV herein.
with a lot width less than that required for the zoning district, the
required side yards shall be determined by the Zoning Hearing
Board upon application for a variance based on the same criteria
as listed under Subsection B(2) above for residential structures.
§ 220-225 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-226
216:846
ARTICLE XXII
Airport Hazard Zoning Provisions
§ 220-227. Intent.
In accordance with Act 164 of 1984, entitled "Pennsylvania Laws Relating
to Aviation to Prevent the Creation or Establishment of Airport Hazards,"
the following provisions, as contained within the Model Airport Zoning
Ordinance for Lower Allen Township, prepared by L. Robert Kimball and
Associates, 1989, as well as all referenced material and mapping contained
within the cited model ordinance, are adopted as part of this chapter.
Copies of the Model Airport Zoning Ordinance for Lower Allen Township are
available in the Township offices.
§ 220-228. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meaning given to each herein and shall supersede definitions as contained
in Article II of this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance, except an unpowered hang glider or
parachute, used for manned ascent into or flight through the air.
AIRPORT — Harrisburg International and Capital City Airports, and any
area of land or water which is used or intended to be used for the landing
and takeoff of aircraft, and any appurtenant areas which are used or
intended to be used for airport buildings or air navigation facilities or
rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings and facilities thereon. As
used herein, the term "airport" includes public airports but excludes private
airports and heliports. Public and private airports are defined separately in
this section.
AIRPORT ELEVATIONS — The highest point of an airport's usable landing
area, measured in feet above sea level (Harrisburg International Airport:
310 feet; Capital City Airport: 347 feet).
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure or object, natural or man-made, or use
of land which obstructs the airspace required for flight of aircraft in landing
or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous as defined by "airport
hazard" in 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA — Any area of land or water upon which an airport
hazard might be established if not prevented as provided for in this article
and Act 164 of 1984 (Pennsylvania Laws Relating to Aviation).245
APPROACH SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on the extended
runway center line, extending outward and upward from the end of the
primary surface and at the same slope as the approach surface zone height
limitation slope set forth in § 220-229.1 of this article. In plan, the perimeter
of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach
surface zone.
245. Editor's Note: See 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq.
§ 220-227 (RESERVED) § 220-228
216:847
APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL AND CONICAL SURFACE
ZONES — These zones are set forth in § 220-229A this chapter.
CONICAL SURFACE — A surface extending outward and upward from the
periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal
distance of 4,000 feet.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation.
HEIGHT — In determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this
article and shown on the Zoning Map, the datum shall be the mean sea level
elevation, unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE — A horizontal plane 150 feet above the
established airport elevation, the perimeter of which, in plan, coincides with
the perimeter of the horizontal surface zone.
LARGER-THAN-UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and
intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than 12,500
pounds maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any preexisting structure, object of natural
growth or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter or an amendment thereto.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only
horizontal guidance or area type navigation equipment for which a straightin
nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or
planned.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth or other object, including a mobile
object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in this article.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint-stock association or governmental entity, and includes a
trustee, a receiver, an assignee or similar representative.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System
(ILS) or a Precision Approach Radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which
a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved
airport layout plan or any other planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When
the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface
extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway. For military runways or
when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface or planned hard
surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of
the primary surface is set forth in this article. The elevation of any point on
the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the
runway center line.
§ 220-228 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-228
216:848
PRIVATE AIRPORT — An airport which is privately owned and which is not
open or intended to be open to the public as defined in 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.
PUBLIC AIRPORT — An airport which is either publicly or privately owned
and which is open to the public as defined in 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.
RUNWAY — A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff
of aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE — An object, including a mobile object, constructed or
installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers,
cranes, smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES — These surfaces extend outward at ninetydegree
angles to the runway center line and the runway center line
extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from
the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect
the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions
of the precision approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the
limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured
horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at ninety-degree
angles to the extended runway center line.
TREE — Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and intended to be
used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight
or less.
VISUAL RUNWAY — A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft
using visual approach procedures.
§ 220-229. Establishment of airport surface zones.
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created
and established certain zones which include all lands lying beneath the
approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces and conical
surfaces as they apply to the Harrisburg International and Capital City
Airports. Such zones are shown on the Harrisburg International and Capital
City Airport Height Limitation and Zoning District Maps, prepared by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation, and dated
1989, which, by reference, is made a part of this article. An area located in
more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone
with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby
established and defined as follows:
A. Utility Runway Visual Approach Surface Zone: established beneath the
visual approach surface. The inner edge of this zone coincides with the
width of the primary surface and is 250 feet wide. The zone expands
outward uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a horizontal distance of
5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center line is the continuation
of the center line of the runway.
§ 220-228 (RESERVED) § 220-229
216:849
B. Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone:
established beneath the nonprecision instrument approach surface. The
inner edge of this zone coincides with the width of the primary surface
and is 500 feet wide. The zone expands outward uniformly to a width of
2,000 feet at a horizontal distance 5,000 feet from the primary surface.
Its center line is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
C. Runway Larger Than Utility Visual Approach Surface Zone: established
beneath the visual approach surface. The inner edge of this zone
coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide.
The zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,500 feet at a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center
line is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
D. Runway Larger Than Utility with a Visibility Minimum Greater Than 3/4
Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone: established
beneath the nonprecision instrument approach surface. The inner edge
of this zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500
feet wide. The zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet
at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its
center line is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
E. Runway Larger Than Utility with a Visibility Minimum as Low as 3/4
Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone: established
beneath the nonprecision instrument approach surface. The inner edge
of this zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000
feet wide. The zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet
at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its
center line is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
F. Precision Instrument Runway Approach Surface Zone: established
beneath the precision instrument approach surface. The inner edge of
this zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000
feet wide. (NOTE: Appropriate runway type and dimension for the
width of the primary surface is set forth in Federal Aviation Regulation
Part 77, Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace, Dimensional Standards
Table, page 19, January, 1975.) The zone expands outward uniformly to
a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the
primary surface. Its center line is the continuation of the center line of
the runway.
G. Transitional Surface Zone: established beneath the transitional
surfaces adjacent to each runway and approach surface as indicated on
the Height Limitation and Zoning District Map.
H. Horizontal Surface Zone: established beneath the horizontal surface,
150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which
is constructed in accordance with the provisions contained within the
Model Airport Zoning Ordinance to Limit the Height of Objects Around
Airports, prepared by L. Robert Kimball and Associates for the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation, 1989.
§ 220-229 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-229
216:850
§ 220-229.1. Airport surface zone height limitations.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be erected,
altered or maintained and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone
created by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height limit
herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are
hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows:
The Horizontal Surface Zone does not include the approach surface and
transitional surface zones.
I. Conical Surface Zone: established beneath the conical surface. This
zone commences at the periphery of the horizontal surface and extends
outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
A. Utility Runway Visual Approach Surface Zone: slopes 20 feet outward
for each foot upward, beginning at the end of and at the same elevation
as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000
feet along the extended runway center line.
B. Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone:
slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward, beginning at the end of
and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway center line.
C. Runway Larger Than Utility Visual Approach Surface Zone: slopes 20
feet outward for each foot upward, beginning at the end of and at the
same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal
distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway center line.
D. Runway Larger Than Utility With a Visibility Minimum Greater Than 3/4
Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone: slopes 34 feet
outward for each foot upward, beginning at the end of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance
of 10,000 feet along the extended runway center line.
E. Runway Larger Than Utility With a Visibility Minimum as Low as 3/4
Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone: slopes 34 feet
upward, beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet
along the extended runway center line.
F. Precision Instrument Runway Approach Surface Zone: slopes 50 feet
outward for each foot upward, beginning at the end of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance
of 10,000 feet along the extended runway center line; thence slopes
upward 40 feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional
horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway center
line.
G. Transitional Surface Zone:
§ 220-229 (RESERVED) § 220-229.1
216:851
§ 220-230. Airport zoning requirements.
(1) Slopes seven feet outward for each foot upward, beginning at the
sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the
approach surface and extending to a height of 150 feet above the
airport elevations as follows:
(a) Harrisburg International Airport: 310 feet above mean sea
level.
(b) Capital City Airport: 347 feet above mean sea level.
(2) In addition to the foregoing, when an airport has a Precision
Instrument Runway Approach Surface Zone, there are established
height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward,
beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach
surface and extending to where they intersect the conical surface.
Where the Precision Instrument Runway Approach Surface Zone
projects beyond the Conical Surface Zone, there are established
height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward,
beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach
surface and extending a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured
at ninety-degree angles to the extended runway center line.
H. Horizontal Surface Zone: established at 150 feet above the established
airport elevation or at heights as follows:
(1) Harrisburg International Airport: 460 feet above mean sea level.
(2) Capital City Airport: 497 feet above mean sea level.
I. Conical Surface Zone: slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward,
beginning at the periphery of the horizontal surface and at 150 feet
above the established airport elevation, herein defined and extending to
a height of 350 feet above the established airport elevation, herein
defined.
J. Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure or
growth of any tree in accordance with provisions contained within the
Model Airport Zoning Ordinance to Limit the Height of Objects Around
Airports, prepared by L. Robert Kimball and Associates for the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation, 1989.
A. Reasonableness. All airport zoning regulations adopted under this
article shall be reasonable. None shall impose any requirement or
restriction unless it is reasonably necessary to effectuate the purpose of
this article. In determining what regulations it may adopt, each
municipality and, if existing, joint airport zoning board shall consider,
among other factors, the character of the flying operations expected to
be conducted at the airport, the nature of the terrain within the airport
§ 220-229.1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-230
216:852
§ 220-231. Permits and variances.
hazard area, the character of the neighborhood and the uses to which
the property to be zoned is put and adaptable.
B. Use restrictions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter,
no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this
chapter in such a manner as to create electrical interference with
navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and
aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights
and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair
visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards or
otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff or
maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
C. Nonconforming uses (for purposes of this article).
(1) Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this
chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or
other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming
to the regulations as of the effective date of this chapter or
otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming
use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the
construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the
construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective
date of this chapter and is diligently executed.
(2) Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of
this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or
tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and
maintenance thereon or nearby of such markers and lights as shall
be deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer to indicate to the
operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of
such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be
installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the applicant.
A. Future uses. Except as specifically provided hereunder, no material
change shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or
otherwise established and no tree shall be planted in any zone hereby
created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and
granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for
which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to
be determined whether the resulting use, structure or tree would
conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is
in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use
inconsistent with the provisions of this article shall be granted unless a
variance has been approved in accordance with Subsection D herein.
(1) In the area lying within the limits of the Horizontal Surface Zone
and Conical Surface Zone, no permit shall be required for any tree
or structure less than 75 feet in vertical height above the ground,
§ 220-230 (RESERVED) § 220-231
216:853
except when, because of terrain, land contour or topographic
features, such tree or structure would extend above the height
limits prescribed for such zones.
(2) In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones but at a
horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the
runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less
than 75 feet in vertical height above the ground, except when,
because of terrain, land contour or topographic features, such tree
or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for
such approach zones.
(3) In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond
the perimeter of the horizontal zones, no permit shall be required
for any tree or structure less than 75 feet in vertical height above
the ground, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain,
land contour or topographic feature, would extend above the height
limit prescribed for such transition zones. Nothing contained in any
of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or
intending to permit any construction or alteration of any structure
or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits
established by this article, except that no permit is required to
make maintenance repairs to or to replace parts of existing
structures which do not enlarge or increase the height of an
existing structure.
B. Existing uses. Before any nonconforming structure may be replaced,
substantially altered or rebuilt or any tree may be allowed to grow
higher or be replanted, a permit must be secured from the Township,
authorizing the replacement or change. No permit shall be granted that
would allow the establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a
nonconforming use, structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air
navigation than it was on the effective date of this chapter or any
amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is
made.
C. Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the Zoning
Officer determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been
abandoned or more than 80% torn down, physically deteriorated or
decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or
tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from this
article.
D. Variance. For purposes of this article, any person desiring to erect any
structure or increase the height of any structure or permit the growth
of any object of natural growth or otherwise use his property in
violation of airport zoning regulations may apply to the Zoning Hearing
Board for a variance from the zoning regulations in question. A variance
shall only be granted after the requirements of § 220-269C are satisfied.
A variance may be allowed where a literal application or enforcement of
the regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary
§ 220-231 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-231
216:854
§ 220-232. Enforcement; notice.
hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public
interest but would do substantial justice and would be in accordance
with the spirit of the regulations and this chapter. Any variance may be
granted subject to any reasonable conditions that the Zoning Hearing
Board may deem necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
The application for a variance shall be accompanied by a determination
from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal
on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use
of navigable airspace. Additionally, no application for variance to the
requirements of this chapter may be considered by the Zoning Hearing
Board unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the
applicable airport manager (or person of equivalent description) for
advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the applicable
airport manager (or person of equivalent description) does not respond
to the application within 15 days after receipt, the Zoning Hearing
Board may act without such input to grant or deny said application.
E. Hazard marking and lighting. In granting any permits or variance under
this section, the Board shall, if it deems the action advisable to
effectuate the purpose of this article and reasonable under the
circumstances, so condition the permit or variance as to require the
owner of the structure or object of natural growth in question to permit
the Township, at its own expense, or require the person or persons
requesting the permit or variance, to install, operate and maintain
thereon such markers and lights as may be required by guidelines or
regulations adopted by the FAA.
A. Local enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to
administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications
for permits and variance shall be made to the Zoning Officer upon a
form published for that purpose. Applications required by this article to
be submitted to the Zoning Officer shall be promptly considered and
granted or denied. Application for action by the Zoning Hearing Board
shall be forthwith transmitted by the Zoning Officer.
B. Notice to Department of Transportation. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, a municipality or board which decides to grant a
permit or variance under this article shall notify the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation, of its decision. This
notice shall be in writing and shall be sent so as to reach the
Department at least 10 days before the date upon which the decision is
to be issued.
§ 220-231 (RESERVED) § 220-232
216:855

ARTICLE XXIII
Groundwater Nonuse Overlay District
§ 220-233. Purpose and intent; authority.
§ 220-234. Establishment and delineation.
The Groundwater Nonuse Overlay District shall be defined as that area
within the corporate boundaries of the Township as is set forth on the
Zoning Map and incorporated herein by reference thereto. Specifically,
the Nonuse Overlay District is defined as all lands zoned I-3 Industrial/
Commercial at the time of adoption on October 27, 2003, or lying within
1000 feet of those lands so zoned.. Where the boundary of the Nonuse
Overlay District divides any property, the entire property shall be
considered to lie within the Nonuse Overlay District.
§ 220-235. Regulated groundwater uses.
Within the Nonuse Overlay District, land uses shall be regulated as follows:
A. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare through the prohibition of groundwater use for agricultural use
or as a drinking water supply. The designation of the Nonuse Overlay
District, as provided herein, and the regulation of activities within such
Nonuse Overlay District will reduce the potential for public exposure to
contaminated groundwater. The delineation of the Nonuse Overlay
District and the development of the provisions of this article are based
upon a professional study of the hydrogeologic features of the Township
and the distribution of groundwater contamination within the Township
and surrounding areas.
B. This article is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as
amended, which provisions authorize the Township to enact ordinances
regulating development and land uses to ensure the public health and
safety, provide a safe, reliable and adequate water supply, and preserve
natural values and aquifers.
A. Groundwater may not be used as a drinking water source or for
agricultural use.
B. Any property currently using groundwater as a drinking water source
or for agricultural use must immediately connect to the existing
community water supply.
C. Following connection, the existing well must be abandoned as a
drinking water source or for agricultural use in accordance with PA
DEP well abandonment criteria and guidelines.
§ 220-233 (RESERVED) § 220-235
216:857
§ 220-236. Subdivision and land development plans.
All subdivision and land development plans to be located within the Nonuse
Overlay District shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer and the Township
Planning Commission for compliance with the provisions of this article. It
shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Officer and the Township Planning
Commission to recommend approval, disapproval or approval with
conditions and modifications of the proposed plan so as to assure
compliance with the provisions of this article.
D. Grandfathering of existing uses is prohibited. The use of all existing
wells as drinking water sources or for agricultural uses must cease
within 90 days after the effective date of this article.
E. It shall be the responsibility of any person owning real property and/or
owning or operating a business within the Township of Lower Allen
Township to make a determination of the applicability of the Nonuse
Overlay District as it pertains to the property and/or business under his/
her ownership or operation, and his/her failure to do so shall not excuse
any violations of said sections.
§ 220-235 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-236
216:858
ARTICLE XXIV
Off-street Parking
§ 220-237. General parking regulations.
§ 220-238. Parking for the physically challenged.
A. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided to lessen on-street
congestion. The facilities required herein shall be available to patrons
throughout the hours of operation of the particular business or use for
which such facilities are provided. As used herein, the term "parking
space" includes either covered garage space or uncovered parking
space located off the public right-of-way.
B. All parking spaces shall be ample in size for the vehicles for which use
is intended. The net parking space per vehicle shall be not less than
nine feet wide, when measured at right angles to the edge of the
parking area, and 18 feet long. Parking spaces and the approaches
thereto shall be stone, gravel or paved surfaces.
C. A garage or carport may be located wholly or partly inside the walls of
the principal building or attached to the outer walls. If separated from
the principal building, the garage shall conform to all accessory
building requirements. A garage may be constructed under a yard,
provided that the level of such yard shall conform to the general level of
the other yards on the lot. The space above such an underground
garage shall be deemed to be part of the open space of the lot on which
it is located.
D. Parking shall not be permitted in front yards of residential uses, except
on paved driveways. Turnarounds shall be considered as part of a
driveway.
A. All multifamily, commercial, public and industrial uses shall provide
handicapped parking spaces for the physically challenged as follows:
Required
Total Parking Spaces Accessible Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
§ 220-237 (RESERVED) § 220-238
216:859
§ 220-239. Off-street parking facilities requirements.
Any of the following facilities erected or enlarged, any facility converted
into one of the following facilities and any open area used shall be provided
with not less than the minimum parking spaces and loading/unloading areas
as set forth below, together with adequate access drives, driveways or other
means of circulation and access to and from a street.
Required
Total Parking Spaces Accessible Spaces
501 to 1,000 2% of the total number of spaces
Over 1,000 20, plus 1 additional space per
each 100 spaces over 1,000
B. Design of accessible spaces shall be completed in accordance with the
International Building Code Chapter 11, and ICC/ANSI A117.1-2003,
American National Standard, Accessible and Usable Buildings and
Facilities (as amended).
C. Accessible parking spaces shall be designated as reserved by a sign
showing the symbol of accessibility. Such signs shall be located so as
not to be obscured by a vehicle parked in the space.
A. Specific parking space requirements. [Amended 6-13-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-08]
Uses
Required Parking Spaces
(GFA = Gross Floor Area)
Banks/financial institutions 1 per 300 square feet GFA
Bowling centers 5 for each bowling lane, in addition to
requirements for eating
establishments on site
Conference center 1 per sleeping room or suite, plus 1
per every 2 employees on the largest
work shift, plus 1 per 2 persons to the
maximum capacity of each public
meeting and/or banquet room, plus
50% of the spaces otherwise required
for accessory uses (i.e., restaurants
and bars)
Convenience stores 1 per 150 square feet GFA
Campground 1 10-foot-by-30-foot space per
campsite
§ 220-238 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-239
216:860
Uses
Required Parking Spaces
(GFA = Gross Floor Area)
Swimming pools, roller/ice
rinks, and other similar uses
1 per 100 square feet GFA of
recreational surface, plus one for each
30 square feet of GFA used for
spectator seating purposes, as
applicable
Day-care facilities 1 per employee, plus 1 safe passenger
off-street loading/unloading space per
5 children
Eating establishments 1 per 2 seats
Fast-food establishments 1 per 30 square feet GFA
Family-care and group-care
facilities
1 per 4 residents, plus 1 per employee
in the maximum working shift
Family day-care and group
day-care facilities
1 per nonresident employee, plus 1
safe passenger off-street loading/
unloading space per 4 nonresident
children
Funeral homes/mortuaries 1 per 100 square feet GFA used for
memorial services, viewing area,
business office and products display
Furniture, carpet or appliance
store
1 per 500 square feet GFA
Gasoline service station 1 per 3 gasoline pumps in addition to
fueling and pump stacking area
Golf Course 4 per tee, plus 1 per employee
Golf Course (miniature) 2.5 per hole plus 1 per employee
Golf driving range 1.5 per tee, plus 1 per employee
Health or exercise facility 1 per 100 square feet of GFA
Home occupations 1 per nonresident employee, in
addition to the requirement for the
dwelling unit; plus requirements
determined by the Zoning Hearing
Board in granting the special
exception
Hospitals and medical
facilities
1 per 4 beds, plus 1 per 2 employees
of the maximum working shift, plus
one per staff doctor
Outpatient medical centers 2 per patient room, plus 1 per
employee of the maximum working
shift
§ 220-239 (RESERVED) § 220-239
216:861
Uses
Required Parking Spaces
(GFA = Gross Floor Area)
Hotels, motels, boarding
homes and lodging/rooming
houses, bed-and-breakfast
establishments (excluding
conference centers)
1 per sleeping room, plus 1 per 200
square feet GFA of public meeting
area, plus 1 per every 2 employees on
the largest work shift
Industrial uses 1 per 800 square feet of GFA
Junk yard 1 per employee, plus 1 per 5,000
square feet of lot area, excluding
required buffer area
Laboratories, research and
development
3.5 per 1,000 square feet of GFA
Laundries: Self-serve 1 per washing machines
Building supply establishment 1 per 500 square feet GFA, plus 1 per
1,000 square feet of indoor/outdoor
storage area
Medical offices 1 per 250 square feet GFA
Nursery/greenhouse 1 per 1,000 square feet GFA, plus 1
per 2,000 square feet lot area,
excluding buffer area
Nursing/personal health care
facilities
1 per 3 beds, plus 1 per 2 employees
in the maximum working shift, plus 1
per staff doctor
Office
50,000 square feet GFA or
less
1 per 200 square feet GFA
50,001 to 100,000 square
feet GFA
1 per 225 square feet GFA
100,001 + square feet GFA 1 per 250 square feet GFA
Places of public or private
assembly (churches,
community centers, theaters
or similar meeting and
assembly uses)
1 per 3 seats or 1 per 100 square feet
GFA where no seats are provided
Residential uses
Single-family dwellings 2 per dwelling unit
§ 220-239 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-239
216:862
Uses
Required Parking Spaces
(GFA = Gross Floor Area)
Multifamily dwellings
(including conversion
apartments and excluding
accessory apartments)
[NOTE: The total number of
required off-street parking
spaces for a multifamily
dwelling building shall not
be less than two spaces per
dwelling unit.]
Age-restricted dwellings 0.5 per dwelling unit
Efficiency/studio 1 per dwelling unit
1 bedroom 1 per dwelling unit
2 bedrooms 2 per dwelling unit
3 bedrooms or more 3 per dwelling unit
Visitor parking 0.2 per dwelling unit
Staff parking 1 per employee on maximum shift
Retail sales establishments
50,000 square feet GFA or
less
1 per 200 square feet GFA
50,001 to 100,000 square
feet GFA
1 per 250 square feet GFA
100,001 to 400,000 square
feet GFA
1 per 300 square feet GFA
400,001 + square feet GFA 1 per 350 square feet GFA
Retail sales, outdoor 1 per 500 square feet of open sales/
display area, plus 1 per employee
during maximum shift
Produce stands 1 per 200 square feet of sales area
Storage facility
Individual mini-storage 1 per 10 units, plus 1 per 200 square
feet of office area, plus 2 per resident
manager
Commercial 2 per unit
Schools
Elementary 2 per classroom, but not less than 1
per teacher and staff member
Intermediate 1.5 per classroom, but not less than 1
per teacher and staff member
§ 220-239 (RESERVED) § 220-239
216:863
Uses
Required Parking Spaces
(GFA = Gross Floor Area)
Secondary 1 per teacher and staff member and 1
per four students, based on design
capacity
Stadiums, auditoriums,
gymnasiums and similar
places of assembly
Additional spaces in accordance with
places of assembly requirements
Shopping centers (regional)
Under 400,000 square feet
GFA
1 per 250 square feet GFA
400,000 to 500,999 square
feet GFA
1 per 300 square feet GFA
600,000 + square feet GFA 1 per 350 square feet GFA
Shopping centers
(neighborhood)
1 per 250 square feet GFA for the first
1,000 square feet, plus 5 for each
additional 1,000 square feet GFA, plus
additional spaces, as required herein,
for associated offices, theaters and
eating establishments
Taverns, clubs, lodges and
similar uses
1 per bar seat, plus 1 per 20 square
feet GFA of bar area, plus 1 per
employee on maximum shift, plus
public assembly requirements for
meeting space
Utility facilities 1 per vehicle normally required to
service such facility
Vehicular parts sales/service
garages sales area
3 per bay, plus 1 for every 200 square
feet of retail parts
Vehicular sales or rental
establishment
1 per 500 square feet of indoor GFA,
plus 1 per 2,500 square feet of
outdoor sales/rental area, plus 2 per
service bay, plus 1 per employee, but
never fewer than five total spaces
Vehicular wash 2 per washing lane, in addition to
stacking lanes
Veterinary facility 4 per doctor or allied professional
trained person occupying the use, plus
1 per every additional employee
Warehouse or distribution
center
§ 220-239 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-239
216:864
§ 220-240. Drive-through service facility stacking distance
requirements.
Stacking areas for drive-through facilities shall be in accordance with the
following requirements. Such stacking areas shall not be located within the
parking lot aisle or gas station pump area.
Use Required Stacking Area
Financial establishment 4 vehicle lengths per lane, drive-up
teller, kiosk or ATM
Car wash/self service 4 vehicle lengths per bay at
entrance; 1 vehicle length per bay at
exit
Car wash/automatic 4 vehicle lengths per bay at
entrance; 2 vehicle lengths per bay
at exit
Fast-food eating establishment 6 vehicle lengths behind menu
board; 4 vehicle lengths behind first
window
Retail service, such as photo
processing, dry cleaner, pharmacy,
coffee-to-go, etc.
2 vehicle lengths per window
Vehicular fueling pumps 2 vehicle lengths per pump
Uses
Required Parking Spaces
(GFA = Gross Floor Area)
Under 50,000 square feet
GFA
1 per 5,000 square feet GFA, plus
required spaces for any office or sales
areas
50,001 square feet and over
GFA
1 per 10,000 square feet GFA, plus
required spaces for any office or sales
areas
B. For all other uses not provided for herein, required parking spaces shall
be determined by a study to be prepared by the applicant and approved
by the Township. The study shall include the following:
(1) The type of use and estimated number of total trips generated
during peak conditions (inbound and outbound).
(2) The estimated parking duration per vehicle trip (turnover rate).
(3) Based on the estimated number of trips generated and average
parking duration per trip, the calculated number of spaces
required.
(4) The estimated number of employees; one space is to be provided
for every two employees working the maximum shift.
§ 220-239 (RESERVED) § 220-240
216:865
Use Required Stacking Area
Gated parking lot entrance 1 vehicle length per gate
Gated unit or overhead door 1 vehicle length per door
§ 220-241. Reduction in parking spaces and stacking distance
requirements.
The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize, by special exception, a reduction
in the number and size of required off-street parking spaces and/or stacking
distance requirements in cases where the applicant can justify the
reduction and still provide adequate parking facilities and stacking
distances to serve the proposed uses of the structure or land.
§ 220-242. Parking area location and design requirements.
A. Existing parking. Structures and uses existing on the effective date of
this chapter shall not be subject to the requirements of this article so
long as the type or extent of use is not changed, provided that any
parking facility now serving such structures or uses shall not in the
future be reduced below such requirements.
B. Changes in requirements. Whenever there is an alteration of a
structure or change or extension of a use which increases the parking
requirements according to the standards contained herein, the total
parking required for the existing structure and use, as well as the
alteration, change or extension, shall be provided in accordance with
the requirements of that section.
C. Conflict with other uses. No parking area shall be used for any use that
interferes with its availability for the parking need it is required to
serve. This shall include the utilization of required parking areas for the
storage and sale of seasonal merchandise.
D. Continuing obligation. All required parking facilities shall be provided
and maintained so long as the use exists which the facilities were
designed to serve. Off-street parking facilities shall not be reduced in
total extent after their provision. Reasonable precautions are to be
taken by the owner or sponsor of particular uses to assure the
availability of required facilities for the employees or other persons
whom the facilities are designed to serve. Facilities shall at no time
constitute a nuisance, hazard or unreasonable impediment to traffic.
E. Drainage, surfacing and maintenance. Drainage, surfacing and
maintenance of off-street parking areas, including driveways and
access drives, shall be completed in accordance with Chapter 184,
Stormwater Management, as amended, and Chapter 192, Subdivision
and Land Development, as amended.
F. Shared parking. Two or more uses may provide for required parking in
a common parking lot if the total space provided is not less than the
§ 220-240 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-242
216:866
sum of the spaces required for each use individually. The number of
spaces required in a common parking facility may be reduced below
this total only as a special exception if it can be demonstrated to the
Zoning Hearing Board that the hours or days of peak parking needed
for the uses are so different that a lower total will adequately provide
for all uses served by the facility. A maintenance agreement for shared
parking facilities shall be established between affected parties. Such
agreement shall be binding on all future affected parties, heirs and
assigns of the property.
G. Computation of spaces. Where the computation of required parking
spaces results in a fractional number, any fraction shall be counted as
one.
H. Internal access and circulation.
(1) Internal access and circulation to parking areas shall be designed
so as not to obstruct the free flow of traffic. Pedestrian crosswalks
leading from parking areas to main building entrances shall be
provided and shall be appropriately marked.
(2) The geometric design of driveways, access drives and parking lots
or areas shall allow access by emergency service vehicles.
I. Location of spaces.
(1) Single- and two-family residential off-street parking spaces shall be
provided on the same lot or premises with the use served, unless
provided for otherwise on an approved subdivision or land
development plan.
(2) Parking spaces for multifamily dwellings and nonresidential uses
shall be readily accessible to the buildings served thereby. Such
spaces shall be in the same zoning district as the principal building
or open area and shall conform to the following regulations:
(a) The required parking spaces shall be located within 600 feet of
the principal building or open space in question, measured
from the edge of structure or open space to the edge of the
parking lot closest to the structure or open space.
(b) If parking is to be provided on a lot other than the lot of the
principal building or use, then the applicant for a use or
building permit shall submit, with his/her application, an
instrument duly executed and acknowledged which subjects
such parcels of land to parking uses in connection with the
principal use to which it is accessory. Upon issuance of a
permit, the Zoning Officer shall cause such instrument to be
recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds.
J. Lighting of parking areas shall be required for all parking areas having
more than 20 spaces. Such lighting may be provided through the use of
§ 220-242 (RESERVED) § 220-242
216:867
light fixtures on either a pole or building and shall comply with
performance standards as set forth in Article XV herein.
K. Screen planting and buffer yards shall be provided in accordance with
Article XV herein.
L. Dimensional requirements.
(1) Minimum dimensions.
(a) The minimum dimensions of parking facilities to be provided
shall be as follows:
Angle of
Parking
Parking
Space
Width
(feet)
Depth*
(feet)
Aisle
Width
One-Way
(feet)
Two-Way
(feet)
90° 9 18 24 24
60° 9 20 18 20
45° 9 18 15 20
30° 9 16 12 20
Parallel 8 22 12 20
NOTES:
* Space depth is the perpendicular measurement from the
curb or edge of the parking lot toward the interior portion
of the lot to be occupied by the parking vehicles and not
including any part of the drive.
(b) All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide
sufficient backup area for the end stalls of the parking area.
(c) Parking areas shall be designed so that each motor vehicle may
proceed to and from the respective parking space without
requiring the moving of any other motor vehicle.
(d) Parking aisles shall not exceed 300 feet in length without
providing a circulatory access drive.
(2) Setbacks for parking areas shall be provided as follows:
(a) All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least 10 feet
from any multifamily dwelling or nonresidential building on the
lot.
(b) All parking spaces, driveways and access drives shall be at
least five feet from any lot line, except where buffer yards are
required, in which case such parking spaces, driveways and
access drives may not encroach on the buffer yard area.
§ 220-242 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-242
216:868
§ 220-243. Off-street loading and unloading requirements.
(c) No parking area shall be located within a public right-of-way.
(3) Separation.
(a) Except at entrance and exit drives, the parking area shall be
physically separated from any public and/or private streets
with a minimum six-foot-wide planting strip.
(b) All off-street parking spaces shall be marked so as to indicate
their location, except for single-family and two-family
residential uses.
(4) Curb radius. No less than a five-foot radius of curvature shall be
permitted for all curblines in all parking lots.
A. Required spaces.
(1) For all nonresidential uses requiring delivery or pick up of
materials, a minimum number of off-street loading and unloading
spaces shall be provided as follows:
Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
Required Number of Loading/Unloading
Spaces
6,000 or less 1
6,001 to 20,000 2
Above 20,000 2, plus 1 additional space for each
additional 50,000 square feet of gross floor
area
(2) Hotels shall have at least one loading space, with an additional
loading berth when the floor area exceeds 50,000 square feet.
(3) All off-street loading spaces shall be provided and maintained so
long as the use exists which the facilities were designed to serve.
B. Design standards. Off-street loading facilities shall be designed in
accordance with the following specifications:
(1) Each required space shall be not less than 12 feet in width, 45 feet
in length and 14.5 feet in height, exclusive of driving and
maneuvering space, and located entirely on the lot being served.
(2) There shall be separate means of access to a street or alley, as well
as adequate maneuvering space.
(3) The maximum width of driveway openings, measured at the street
lot line, shall be 40 feet; the minimum width shall be 20 feet.
(4) All off-street loading and unloading spaces, and access to those
spaces, shall be graded, surfaced and drained in accordance with
§ 220-242 (RESERVED) § 220-243
216:869
§ 220-244. Motor vehicle access.
Motor vehicle access to lots shall be provided as follows:
the provisions contained within applicable Township codes and
ordinances.
A. Driveways. Driveways shall have the following characteristics:
(1) Driveways shall be located so as to provide sight distance at
intersections with streets and shall not be located within any
required clear sight triangle.
(2) Driveways which intersect other than a minor or local street shall
provide adequate turnaround within the lot so egress to the street
is in a forward direction.
(3) Only one driveway connection per 100 feet of lot frontage is
permitted, with the exception of circular driveways for residential
dwellings.
(4) The Board of Commissioners may limit the number of driveways
providing access from a single property or development to collector
or arterial streets. The Board may also require the use of shared
driveways to provide ingress and egress to two residential units.
(5) Driveways shall not connect with a public street within 40 feet of
the right-of-way lines of any intersecting streets, nor within five
feet of a fire hydrant.
(6) Driveway access shall be provided to the street of lesser
classification when there is more than one street classification
involved.
(7) All driveways shall be set back at least five feet from any adjacent
side or rear lot lines.
(a) A driveway may be located less than five feet from a property
line if a written agreement exists between the affected
property owners allowing a lesser distance. Such agreement
shall be recorded in the Cumberland County Office of Recorder
of Deeds, and shall be binding on all future property owners,
heirs and assigns of both properties.
(8) Driveway location shall be delineated on all land development
plans; however, subdivision and land development plans may
delineate location or provide a notice of conformity to this chapter.
B. Access drives. Access drives shall conform to the following standards:
(1) The vertical alignments of access drives shall conform to the
specifications for streets, in accordance with Chapter 192,
Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 220-243 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-244
216:870
(2) 246 The horizontal alignments of access drives shall be measured
along the center line. Horizontal curves shall be used at all angle
changes in excess of two degrees. All curves shall be tangential
arcs. The minimum horizontal curve radius shall be 75 feet.
(3) All access drive intersections shall be:
(a) Subject to approval of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation when intersecting a state road.
(b) Subject to the approval of the Township Board of
Commissioners when intersecting a Township road.
(c) Set back a minimum of 100 feet from the intersection of any
other access drive located upon the same lot (measured from
the edge of the cartway).
(d) Set back a minimum of 10 feet from any side and/or rear
property lines; however, this setback shall not be required
along one property line when a shared access drive or parking
is shared by adjoining uses and satisfactory agreements are in
place.
(e) Designed with right angle intersections whenever possible. No
access drive intersection shall utilize an angle less than 75°,
unless turning movement restrictions are imposed.
(f) Rounded by a tangential arc with a minimum radius of 20 feet.
The Township may require a fifty-five-foot radius where truck
traffic is anticipated.
(g) Provided with a clear sight triangle and sight distance in
accordance with the provisions contained within Chapter 192,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(4) Access drives or a connect network of access drives shall not
exceed 1,000 feet in total length, measured from the center line
intersection of a street. Access drives exceeding this length shall be
considered a private or public street.
(5) The terminus of access drives shall incorporate a paved turnaround
with a minimum diameter of 100 feet.
(6) Where vehicular parking is prohibited along access drives, the
prohibition must be noted on the plan and properly signed along
the cartway.
246. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2), which provided that no more than eight dwelling
units/lots could be accessed by one access drive or a connected network of access drives,
was repealed 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-08. This ordinance also provided for the
renumbering of former Subsection B(3) through (9) as Subsection B(2) through (8),
respectively.
§ 220-244 (RESERVED) § 220-244
216:871
(7) The cartway of all access drives shall be constructed according to
the local street standards in accordance Chapter 192, Subdivision
and Land Development. Additionally, all work procedures shall
conform to the latest edition of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Manual 408.
(8) The following table specifies various access drive width
requirements:
Function
Required Cartway Width
(feet)
2 lanes of traffic with on-street
parking
36
2 lanes of traffic without on-street
parking
24
1 lane of traffic with 1 lane of onstreet
parking
20
1 lane of traffic without on-street
parking
12
NOTES:
1 Access drives that serve less than four residential units may
have a cartway width of 18 feet.
2 Off-street parking lots must be provided in accordance with
this chapter.
3 The one-way direction of traffic must be identified along the
cartway.
§ 220-244 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-244
216:872
ARTICLE XXV
Signs
§ 220-245. Purpose.
The intent of this article is to strike a reasonable balance between the need
or desire to display public information on signs with the need or desire
to minimize visual conflicts that can occur when placement of signs is not
adequately controlled. Appropriate design, placement and maintenance of
signage can complement the visual appeal of the community and facilitate
safe and efficient travel within the Township. Absence of appropriate
standards can allow development of signage that distracts or competes
excessively for visual attention or that detracts from the desirable
appearance of the community.
§ 220-246. Definitions.
In addition to the words and terms included in § 220-6, Definitions, pictorial
descriptions of certain sign types defined in this section are provided by
Exhibits XXV-1 through XXV-2.247
§ 220-247. General regulations.
A. No sign shall be placed, erected, altered, enlarged or relocated until a
permit for doing so has been issued by the Zoning Officer. A
construction permit shall also be required unless the sign proposal
satisfies exemption criteria listed in Chapter 70, Building Construction
and Safety Standards. Signs listed in § 220-251 herein are exempt from
zoning permit requirements, provided that the use of such signs is in
accordance with other provisions of this article. Applications shall be
submitted on forms provided by the Township, shall indicate consent of
the owner of the premises upon which the sign is to be located and shall
be accompanied by supporting information that is sufficient to
determine compliance with this article and any other relevant
ordinances. Examples of supporting data that may be required include
a scale drawing with relevant dimensions noted to illustrate the
proposed height, area, size and sign copy; a plot plan of the property on
which the sign will be located to illustrate the position of proposed
signs relative to buildings, structures, lot lines and rights-of-way;
illumination method and materials; and support systems, structural
loads, stresses and anchoring details. Compliance with performance
criteria may require certification by a registered design professional.
B. Signs and sign components may be removed for repair and
maintenance, provided that they are restored to the same height, size,
area and location authorized by permit. Repair and maintenance
activities that do not affect the height, size, area or location of a sign do
not require a zoning permit; however, if these activities affect structural
247. Editor's Note: Exhibits XXV-1 and XXV-2 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 220-245 (RESERVED) § 220-247
216:873
§ 220-248. Sign standards.
or electrical components of the sign, a construction permit may be
necessary.
C. No sign may be erected or maintained that may be confused with any
authorized traffic control device.
D. Animated signs are not permitted in any district.
E. Changeable message signs are permitted in all zoning districts, subject
to limitations contained in § 220-252D herein.
F. Every sign permitted by this article shall be kept in good condition and
repair. When the Code Official determines that a sign is unsafe,
unsecured, is a menace to the public or has been installed, erected or
maintained in violation of any provision of this chapter, written notice
shall be given to the owner of the sign, in accordance with § 220-268
herein. Said notice shall set forth a reasonable time period in which
violation(s) shall be corrected. Immediate action may be required in the
case of imminent danger to the public.
G. Any off-premises directional sign associated with a use that is no longer
active, and any on-premises sign copy that no longer relates to a use
conducted at the property on which it is located, except memorial signs,
shall be covered or removed by the sign owner or property owner
within 30 days after receipt of written notice from the Code Official, in
accordance with § 220-268 herein. Any obsolete sign structure that is
not reused for a new sign within one year of such notice shall be
deemed abandoned. Any abandoned sign and structure, and any
temporary sign that is displayed beyond the permitted time limit, shall
be removed by the sign owner or property owner within 30 days of
receipt of written notice from the Code Official, in accordance with
§ 220-268 herein. Upon failure to comply with a notice regarding an
obsolete or abandoned sign, or a temporary sign that remains in place
after expiration of the display time period, the Code Official is hereby
authorized to cause removal or covering of obsolete sign copy, or
removal of temporary and abandoned signs. Any expense incident
thereto shall be assessed to the property. When an obsolete or
abandoned wall sign is removed, the wall of the building or structure on
which it was attached shall be restored to resemble the appearance of
the wall surrounding the sign location.
A. Placement standards.
(1) No sign shall be installed in a public right-of-way unless installation
is authorized by the authority having jurisdiction. Permitted sign
types are limited to traffic control devices, signs displayed on
public transportation passenger shelters, temporary street banners
advertising special events for civic or charitable nonprofit
§ 220-247 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-248
216:874
organizations and building identification signs displayed on
mailboxes.
(2) No sign shall be affixed to a natural object such as a tree, shrub or
rock, or to a utility structure or utility pole, with the following
exceptions: regulatory notice signs, such as those used to regulate
hunting and trespassing, may be attached to a tree. A street banner
may be attached to a utility structure or utility pole, or a tree,
provided that permission is granted from the owner of the utility
structure, utility pole or tree.
(3) No sign may be mounted on a roof; however, signs may be mounted
on roof-like architectural projections of walls, such as pent eaves
and mansards, provided that the sign does not project above the
highest part of the wall. Roof signs are pictorially described on
Exhibits XXV-1 and XXV-2.
(4) No sign or sign structure shall be erected at any street intersection
in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, nor at any
location where it may interfere with or obstruct any traffic control
device.
(5) A vertical clearance height of at least eight feet shall be provided
between the surface of a public walkway and any sign that projects
over the walkway.
(6) No freestanding sign, together with any supporting framework,
shall extend to a height above the maximum building height
allowed within the respective district.
B. Safety standards. No sign may be erected and maintained which:
(1) Is structurally unsafe in accordance with the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code as modified by Chapter 70, Building
Construction and Safety Standards, as amended.
(2) Constitutes a hazard to public safety and health by reason of
dilapidation, abandonment or inadequate maintenance.
(3) Obstructs free entrance or exit from a required door, window or fire
escape.
(4) Obstructs light or air, or interferes with proper functioning of a
building.
C. Illumination standards.
(1) Signs may be internally or externally illuminated. Externally
illuminated signs shall only be illuminated with steady, stationary,
shielded light sources directed solely onto the signs.
§ 220-248 (RESERVED) § 220-248
216:875
§ 220-249. Nonconforming signs.
§ 220-250. Determination of sign area and height.
(2) Illuminated signs shall not be permitted to produce glare in
violation of performance standards for outdoor lighting contained
in Article XIX herein.
(3) Strings of bulbs are not permitted, except as part of a holiday
celebration.
(4) All electrical components of any sign shall comply with the
electrical code referenced in the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code as modified by Chapter 70, Building
Construction and Safety Standards, as amended.
A. Any sign lawfully existing at the effective date of this chapter that does
not conform to the requirements of this chapter shall be considered
nonconforming, and the nonconforming use, location, area, height and/
or size may be continued until such time as replacement or rebuilding
becomes necessary. Replacement of copy or panels upon which copy is
displayed does not constitute replacement or rebuilding of the sign,
provided that the structure supporting the copy or copy panels is not
rebuilt or replaced, and the new copy or copy panels are not larger in
any dimension than those being replaced.
B. When a nonconforming sign is replaced or rebuilt, the following
limitations shall apply:
(1) A nonconforming sign damaged by fire, explosion, windstorm or
other sudden natural or criminal act may be reconstructed or
restored, provided that the reconstruction or restoration does not
conflict with any regulation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and the degree of nonconformity of the original sign is not
increased.
(2) When the land upon which a nonconforming sign is located is taken
for public purposes through eminent domain proceedings, the
nonconforming sign may be relocated or replaced elsewhere on the
residual property, provided that the degree of nonconformity of the
original sign is not increased.
(3) All other nonconforming signs may only be replaced with or rebuilt
as conforming signs, in accordance with all applicable provisions of
this chapter.
A. The area of a sign shall be the area of the smallest geometric figure, or
the sum of the combination of regular geometric figures, which
comprise the sign face. The area of any double-sided or V-shaped sign
shall be the area of the largest single face. Any portion of the sign face
that displays a street address for the building to which the sign is
associated shall not be included in the area calculation.
§ 220-248 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-250
216:876
(1) In the case of panel or cabinet-type signs, the sign face shall
include the entire area of the sign panel, cabinet or substrate upon
which the sign copy is displayed or illustrated, but not open space
between separate panels or cabinets.
(2) In the case of sign structures with routed areas of sign copy, the
sign face shall include the entire area of the surface that is routed,
except interrupted by a reveal, border or contrasting surface or
color.
(3) In the case of signs painted on a building, or individual letters or
graphic elements affixed to a building or structure, the sign face
shall comprise the sum of the geometric figures or combination of
regular geometric figures drawn closest to the edge of the letters
or separate graphic elements comprising the sign copy, but not the
open space between separate groupings of sign copy on the same
building or structure.
(4) In the case of sign copy enclosed within a painted or illuminated
border, or displayed on a background contrasting in color with the
building or structure, the sign face shall comprise the area within
the contrasting background, or within the painted or illuminated
border.
(5) Sign area computation methodology is pictorially described on
Exhibits XXV-3 and XXV-4.
B. Height.
(1) The height of any building sign is limited to the actual height of the
building. The height limit for a freestanding sign shall be
established in the specific regulations for the district in which it is
located, but in no case may it be greater than the maximum
permitted building height of the respective district.
(2) The height limit of any freestanding sign shall be measured relative
to the surface elevation of the road from which the freestanding
sign is intended to be viewed. If the center-line elevation of the
road cartway has a higher elevation than the ground elevation at
the proposed sign location, when measured along a line connecting
these two points and running perpendicular to the intersecting lot
line, the sign height limit may be increased by the resulting
difference in elevation. If this same measurement methodology
indicates that the ground at the proposed sign location has a higher
elevation than the center-line elevation of the roadway from which
the sign is intended to be viewed, then the sign height limit
prescribed by the appropriate section within this article may not be
adjusted, and any lot elevation increase achieved by mounding the
proposed sign location shall be subtracted from the maximum
allowable sign height. When a proposed sign will be readable from
multiple roads, the greatest sign height resulting from application
of this section shall be permitted.
§ 220-250 (RESERVED) § 220-251
216:877
§ 220-251. Exceptions to permit requirements.
The following signs shall be exempt from zoning permit requirements, but
must conform to all other requirements of this article. Construction permits
may be necessary.
A. Signs erected or posted and maintained for public safety and welfare,
pursuant to any governmental function, law or other regulation, and
any sign related to an emergency.
B. On-premises directional signs that are placed at driveways solely to
indicate the location of ingress and egress at public streets. Such signs
may not exceed four square feet per face or extend higher than 3.5 feet
above ground level. Such signs shall not contain any advertising, but up
to 25% of the sign area may contain the business name and/or logo.
C. Incidental signs, in accordance with § 220-252K.
D. Memorial signs in accordance with § 220-252B.
E. Real estate and on-premises residential sales signs, in accordance with
temporary sign provisions of § 220-254.
F. Regulatory signs, in accordance with § 220-252L.
G. A bulletin board or similar sign not exceeding 40 square feet per sign
face, with a limit of two sign faces, in connection with any church,
neighborhood or civic association, museum, library, school or similar
public or semipublic nature, provided that the top of the sign shall be
not more than eight feet above ground level, and provided that it
complies with all other provisions of this article.
H. Holiday decorations displayed for recognized holidays, except as they
may interfere with traffic safety or in any other way become a safety
hazard.
I. Flags of any political or noncommercial entity.
J. Sign, or portions thereof, devoted solely to display of building address
numbers.
K. Any on-premises event, identification or marketing sign that is not
primarily intended for viewing from a public street, or adjacent
property, and the copy of which is not readily discernible from an
adjacent property or the public street that abuts the property on which
the sign is located.
L. Off-premises signs located at athletic facilities, typically utilized for
fund-raising purposes, that are attached to fences, scoreboards and
other structures, provided that they are primarily oriented for viewing
by participants and spectators.
M. Opinion and election campaign signs, in accordance with the general
sign regulations of the underlying zoning district.
§ 220-251 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-252
216:878
§ 220-252. Regulations by sign type.
A. Freestanding signs. Any freestanding sign, unless permitted in a public
street right-of-way, is limited to a height of 3.5 feet when located less
than 10 feet from a public street right-of-way. Specific zoning district
height limits (§ 220-253) apply when such signs are placed at least 10
feet from a public street right-of-way. No freestanding sign may be
located within five feet of a side or rear property line, nor in such a
manner that it interferes with a traffic control device or a driver's view
of approaching, merging or intersecting traffic.
B. Memorial signs. Freestanding memorial signs are limited to 10 square
feet per face, with a maximum of two faces. When affixed to the surface
of a building, they shall either be cut into exterior masonry facing, or
constructed of durable, noncombustible material and fastened to the
exterior surface of the building. Memorial signs affixed to building
surfaces are limited to 10 square feet and one such sign per street
frontage.
C. Portable signs are only permitted as temporary signs and shall comply
with temporary sign placement provisions contained in § 220-254
herein.
D. Changeable message signs. Nonresidential uses in all residential
zoning districts may install changeable message signs in accordance
with other provisions of this article, provided that activation of message
change is by manual means. Changeable message signs may be either
electrically or manually activated in commercial and industrial districts.
Electrical activation may include projection or rotation of sign copy, or
electronically programmed message changes. Scrolling message
changes are permitted, but flashing and animated signs, as defined
herein, are prohibited.
E. Building signs. Such signs may not project horizontally beyond or
vertically above the face of the building upon which they are displayed.
Panels, cabinets and individual copy elements may not extend
perpendicularly from the building face more than 15 inches, unless
classified as, and subject to limitations, for projecting signs contained
in § 220-252F herein.
F. Projecting signs. Signs attached to buildings and having copy elements
displayed perpendicularly to the building face may project more than
15 inches from the building face, provided that:
(1) Vertical clearance of at least eight feet shall be provided below all
parts of a projecting sign.
(2) Horizontal projection shall not extend past a vertical plane
established by the location of any minimum building setback line,
except as specifically allowed in a traditional neighborhood
development or neighborhood redevelopment.
§ 220-252 (RESERVED) § 220-252
216:879
(3) Sign area is limited to the maximum area for a freestanding sign in
the district in which the projecting sign is located.
(4) Method of structural attachment is subject to construction code
compliance if the sign area exceeds 2.5 square feet.
G. Temporary signs: refer to § 220-254 herein.
H. Outdoor advertising signs. Signs classified as billboards are only
permitted in C-2 General Commercial, I-1 General Industrial, I-3
Industrial/Commercial and C-4 Regional Commercial Zoning Districts,
subject to the following limitations:
(1) Such signs shall be located at least 100 feet from any residence or
residential zoning district; at least 10 feet from any property or
street right-of-way line; and at least 1,000 feet from any other
billboard.
(2) The number of faces is limited to two in the C-2, C-4 and I-3
Districts and to four faces in the I-1 District.
(3) Sign area is limited to 300 square feet per face in the C-2, C-4 and
I-3 Districts; and to 672 square feet per face in the I-1 District.
Temporary embellishments may be added to billboards in the I-1
District, provided that they do not increase sign area beyond 750
square feet per face.
(4) The maximum height of any billboard, measured in accordance
with § 220-250 herein, shall be 25 feet.
I. Window signs. Such signs that are designed so they can be legibly
viewed from an adjacent property or public street right-of-way shall be
classified as building signs, and the area of these window signs shall be
included in the total window sign area permitted on the property.
Incidental and regulatory signs are exempt from this requirement. No
more than 30% of the area of a window may be covered with window
signs that are classified as building signs.
J. Development identification signs. Freestanding signs that identify
shopping centers or groups of related buildings, such as residential
subdivisions, institutional campuses, industrial and business parks and
office and apartment complexes, may be installed in addition to any
identification signs that may be permitted for individual buildings or
uses, provided that the following limitations are met:
(1) The land area of nonresidential developments must be at least 10
acres.
(2) Unless otherwise permitted in a public street right-of-way, all
development identification signs shall be located at least 10 feet
from said right-of-way.
§ 220-252 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-252
216:880
(3) The height limitation for such signs is six feet when located in a
residential district; otherwise, this limitation shall be the maximum
height of a freestanding sign in the district in which the sign is
located.
(4) External illumination is the only type of illumination permitted in a
residential district.
(5) The area of such signs is limited to 40 square feet per face, with a
maximum of two faces per sign, in any zoning district, with the
following exception: development identification signs for shopping
centers in a C-2 District shall comply with § 220-253D(6).
(6) Where primary access to a development is provided by a boulevard,
an off-premises development identification sign may be located in
the boulevard island, provided that the sign location and
construction is approved by the Township Engineer, the island is
not maintained by the Township and the entity responsible for
island maintenance agrees in writing to maintain, repair and
replace the sign and indemnify the Township against any claims or
actions resulting from damage caused by or to the sign.
K. Incidental signs. These signs are limited to two faces per sign. The sign
area per face shall be limited to four square feet in residential districts,
and six square feet in all other districts.
L. Regulatory signs. These signs are limited to two faces per sign. The sign
area per face shall be limited to four square feet in residential districts
and six square feet in all other districts, except where a larger size is
mandated by regulations promulgated under authority of state or
federal statutes or by judicial order.
M. Off-premises directional signs. These signs must be freestanding signs.
They are intended to guide motorists to residential developments and
nonresidential destinations that do not have readily apparent access or
visibility from a public street. The following limitations apply to offpremises
directional signs:
(1) Sign copy is limited to name and/or logo of premises and distance
and/or directional information. Copy may not be illuminated in
residential districts.
(2) These signs must be located on private property, with written
consent of the property owner. They must be located at street
intersections that are within one mile of the destination. No more
than two signs may be erected per use.
(3) In all residential zoning districts, these signs are limited to 3.5 feet
in height and 6.0 square feet per face, with a limit of two faces per
sign, and two signs per property.
§ 220-252 (RESERVED) § 220-252
216:881
§ 220-253. Regulations by zoning district.
(4) In all other zoning districts, these signs have the same limits as
residential districts if located within 10 feet of the street right-ofway.
If located 10 or more feet from the street right-of-way, limits
for these signs are a height of eight feet, 10.0 square feet per face
with a limit of two faces per sign and four signs per property. These
signs must be a minimum of five feet from side and rear property
lines.
(5) Tourist-oriented destination (TOD) signs and travel logo signs
erected in public rights-of-way by the authorities having
jurisdiction over them are exempt from these regulations.
N. Mall signs. Building signs at malls, mall identification signs, and mall
direction signs shall be subject to the standards and limitations set
forth in 220 Attachment 2 (Zoning Ordinance Sign Table – By Zoning
District). [Added 10-13-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-06]
A. The purpose of these regulations is to allow signs that are customary
and reasonable for the variety of dwelling unit types permitted in these
districts, and to allow signs for permitted nonresidential uses that
sufficiently identify these uses in a manner that is compatible with
predominant residential uses. Signs in R-1 Single-Family Residential
Districts, R-2 Single-Family Rural Residential Districts and R-3
Multifamily Residential Districts shall be subject to the following
limitations:
(1) Identification signs for residential uses are limited to street
address, owner/occupant name, customarily incidental welcome
messages and lawfully existing home occupations. Freestanding
signs may not be located in a public street right-of-way, unless
limited to one square foot per face and located on a mailbox that is
installed in accordance with United States Postal Service
guidelines. These signs may be illuminated in accordance with
§ 220-248C.
(2) All uses in these residential districts may display temporary signs
in accordance with § 220-254 herein.
(3) Development identification signs may be installed in accordance
with § 220-252J herein.
(4) All uses may display incidental and regulatory signs in accordance
with § 220-252K and 220-252L, respectively.
(5) Opinion and election campaign signs in accordance with the Zoning
Ordinance Sign Table — By Zoning District.248
248. Editor's Note: The sign tables are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 220-252 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-253
216:882
B. The purpose of these regulations is to provide adequate signage for the
mix of residential and commercial uses that are permitted to coexist in
this Mixed-Use Neighborhood District. Limited commercial uses are
provided with adequate opportunities for identification that also
minimize the impact upon adjacent residential uses. Signs in MUN
Mixed-Use Neighborhood Districts shall be subject to the following
limitations:
(1) Signs for all residential uses shall be in accordance with Subsection
A herein.
(2) All uses in this district may display temporary signs in accordance
with § 220-254 herein.
(3) Development identification signs may be installed in accordance
with § 220-252J herein.
(4) All uses may display incidental and regulatory signs in accordance
with § 220-252K and L, respectively.
(5) Opinion and election campaign signs in accordance with the Zoning
Ordinance Sign Table — By Zoning District.249
C. The purpose of these regulations is to provide adequate signage for
permitted commercial uses, while minimizing the impact upon adjacent
residential districts. Signs in C-1 Neighborhood Commercial Districts
shall be subject to the following limitations:
(1) Signs for permitted residential uses shall be in accordance with
§ 220-253A herein.
(2) All uses in this district may display temporary signs in accordance
with § 220-254 herein.
(3) Development identification signs may be installed in accordance
with § 220-252J herein.
(4) All uses may display incidental and regulatory signs in accordance
with § 220-252K and 220-252L, respectively.
(5) Opinion and election campaign signs in accordance with the Zoning
Ordinance Sign Table — By Zoning District.250
D. The goal of these regulations is to provide legible signage for autooriented
commercial facilities that attract regional retail business,
while moderating visual competition. Signs within the C-2 General
Commercial and C-4 Regional Commercial Districts shall comply with
the following provisions. Signs in C-2 General Commercial and C-4
Regional Commercial Districts shall be subject to the following
conditions:
249. Editor's Note: The sign tables are included as attachments to this chapter.
250. Editor's Note: The sign tables are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 220-253 (RESERVED) § 220-253
216:883
(1) Permitted residential uses may display signs in accordance with
Subsection A herein.
(2) All uses may display temporary signs in accordance with § 220-254
herein.
(3) Development identification signs may be installed in accordance
with § 220-252J.
(4) All uses may display incidental and regulatory signs in accordance
with § 220-252K and L, respectively.
(5) Freestanding signs used for events, marketing or identification.
(a) Number: limit is one such sign per street frontage of a lot. If
multiple commercial uses exist on the lot, they must share a
common freestanding sign, except in cases where multiple
signs are permitted due to multiple street frontages, and the
number of permitted freestanding signs equals or exceeds the
number of uses.
(6) Building signs used for events, marketing and identification.
(a) Number. The number of such attached signs is not limited;
however, the signs may only be attached to the building or its
appurtenances on building elevations that front a street,
parking area or adjacent properties used for commercial
purposes.
(b) Supplemental sign area. Any portion of the total available
building sign area not utilized for permanently affixed building
signs may be utilized for placement of temporarily affixed signs
without being subjected to time limitations otherwise placed
upon display of temporary signs, in accordance with provisions
for temporary commercial signs contained in § 220-254B(6).
(7) Event, marketing and identification signs may be illuminated in
accordance with § 220-248C.
(8) Opinion and election campaign signs in accordance with the Zoning
Ordinance Sign Table — By Zoning District.251
(9) Mall identification signs, mall directional signs, and building signs
at malls may be installed at malls in accordance with the standards
and limitations set forth in 220 Attachment 2 (Zoning Ordinance
Sign Table – By Zoning District). [Added 10-13-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-06]
E. The purpose of these regulations is to provide adequate signage for
permitted nonresidential uses that do not require as much sign area as
uses in the C-2 General Commercial and C-4 Regional Commercial
251. Editor's Note: The sign tables are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 220-253 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-253
216:884
§ 220-254. Temporary sign regulations.
Temporary signs provide an alternative or supplement to permanent signs
for communicating information to the public. Their messages are generally
applicable for a limited time, and the signs are not permanently fastened to
the ground or a structure.
Districts because the uses permitted in these districts do not generally
attract regional retail business. Signs in C-3 Planned Business Center
Districts, I-1 General Industrial Districts, I-2 Mineral Recovery
Districts, and I-3 Industrial/Commercial Districts shall be installed in
accordance with the following limitations:
(1) Permitted residential uses may install signs in accordance with
Subsection A herein.
(2) All uses may display temporary signs in accordance with § 220-254
herein.
(3) Development identification signs may be installed in accordance
with § 220-252J herein.
(4) All uses may display incidental and regulatory signs in accordance
with § 220-252K and L, respectively.
(5) Signs for permitted nonresidential uses shall be permitted in
accordance with § 220-253C herein.
(6) Event, marketing and identification signs may be illuminated in
accordance with § 220-248C.
(7) Opinion and election campaign signs in accordance with the Zoning
Ordinance Sign Table — By Zoning District.
A. General regulations for temporary signs.
(1) Placement, public rights-of-way. The only temporary signs
permitted in a public right-of way are those classified as traffic
control devices or emergency signs. They may only be installed by,
or at the direction of, the authority having jurisdiction over the
right-of-way.
(2) Placement, private property. All other temporary signs must be
located on private property. In the case of off-premises temporary
signs, written permission of the private property owner must be
obtained, and the signs must bear the name, address and telephone
number of the person responsible for placement of the sign.
(a) Temporary signs may be freestanding or attached to
permanent buildings or structures.
(b) All temporary signs must be located at least 5.0 feet from any
adjacent property line.
§ 220-253 (RESERVED) § 220-254
216:885
(3) Permits. A zoning permit shall be obtained prior to displaying any
temporary sign except opinion, election campaign, real estate and
on-premises residential sale signs.
(4) Illumination. The only temporary signs that may be illuminated are
on-premises commercial signs and community event signs that are
located on properties used for nonresidential purposes.
Illumination must be in accordance with § 220-248C.
(5) Durability and wind resistance. Temporary signs need not be
constructed of permanent materials, but they must be constructed
so that the sign and its message remain intact for the duration of
the display period. The placement of a temporary sign must include
a method of attachment to a structure or the ground that provides
sufficient resistance to uplifting, overturning or transporting of the
sign by wind forces. Freestanding temporary signs must either be
fastened to a support structure that is embedded into the ground or
displayed on a portable structure that is anchored to the ground.
(6) Height limits. Attached temporary signs may not exceed the height
of the building upon which they are fastened and may not be
installed as projecting signs. Freestanding temporary signs are
limited to 3.5 feet in height when installed within 10.0 feet of the
dedicated public right-of-way line. When installed greater than or
equal to 10.0 feet from the dedicated public right-of-way line, they
may be up to 6.0 feet in height if located on a property used for
residential purposes, and up to 10.0 feet in height if located on a
property used for nonresidential purposes.
(7) Off-premises outdoor advertising. These temporary sign
regulations are not intended to preclude or limit the legitimate use
of off-premises outdoor advertising signs, commonly referred to as
"billboards." Temporary signs displayed on a public transportation
shelter located in a public right-of-way shall be regulated in a
manner prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction over the
right-of-way.
B. Specific regulations for temporary signs.
(1) Residential sales. This type of temporary sign is intended for use
with garage sales, yard sales, auctions and similar events. These
temporary signs may be displayed not more than 10 days before the
event and must be removed not more than one day after the event.
(2) Commercial signs. This type of temporary sign provides an
opportunity for businesses to replace or supplement permanent
signs on a short-term basis. They also provide an opportunity for
businesses to display public information regarding special events,
new products and services, changes in ownership or management,
employment opportunities and similar messages. Temporary
commercial signs shall be on-premises signs and must be placed
and maintained in accordance with the general regulations for
§ 220-254 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-254
216:886
temporary signs. Home occupations are excluded from using this
type of sign.
(a) Freestanding temporary commercial sign limitations.
[1] When a temporary freestanding sign is used as a shortterm
substitute for a permanent freestanding sign that is
removed for replacement or repair, the temporary
freestanding sign area may exceed the zoning district area
limitation, provided that the temporary sign area is not
greater than the area of the permanent sign.
(b) Temporary commercial building sign limitations.
[1] When a temporary building sign is used as a short-term
substitute for a permanent building sign that is removed
for replacement or repair, the area of such temporary sign
may not exceed the area of the permanent building sign.
§ 220-254 (RESERVED) § 220-254
216:887

ARTICLE XXVI
Amendments
§ 220-255. Procedure.
The Township Board of Commissioners may, from time to time, amend,
supplement or repeal any of the regulations and provisions of this chapter
after public notice and hearing. Before the public hearing, each proposed
amendment, except those prepared by the Township Planning Commission,
must be referred to the Township Planning Commission for its
recommendations at least 30 days prior to the hearing on such amendment.
If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is substantially changed or is revised to include land previously
not affected by it, the Township Board of Commissioners shall hold another
public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on
the amendment. At least 30 days prior to the hearing on the chapter
amendment by the Township Board of Commissioners, the Township
Planning Commission shall submit the proposed chapter amendments to
the Cumberland County Planning Commission for recommendations.
Amendment procedures shall be in compliance with Section 609 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.252
§ 220-256. Procedure for curative amendments.
The procedure for curative amendments shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as
amended, Sections 609.1 and 609.2.253
§ 220-257. Publication, advertisement and availability of ordinance.
A. Proposed zoning ordinances and amendments shall not be enacted
unless notice of proposed enactment is given in the manner set forth in
this section and shall include the time and place of the meeting at which
passage will be considered and a reference to a place within the
Township where copies of the proposed ordinance or amendment may
be examined without charge or obtained for a charge not greater than
the cost thereof. The Township Board of Commissioners shall publish
the proposed ordinance or amendment once in one newspaper of
general circulation in the Township not more than 60 days nor less than
seven days prior to passage. Publication of the proposed ordinance or
amendment shall include either the full text thereof or the title and a
brief summary prepared by the Township Solicitor and setting forth all
the provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
(1) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township at the time the public notice is
published.
252. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.
253. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10609.2.
§ 220-255 (RESERVED) § 220-257
216:889
§ 220-258. Zoning Map amendment application requirements.
The Township Board of Commissioners shall have the power to enact,
by resolution, Zoning Map change application requirements for those
requesting a Zoning Map change of a land area in the Township from one
zoning classification to another zoning classification.
§ 220-259. Enactment of Zoning Ordinance amendments.
(2) An attested copy of the proposed ordinance or amendment shall be
filed in the Cumberland County Law Library or other county office
designated by the County Commissioners, who may impose a fee no
greater than that necessary to cover the actual costs of storing said
ordinances or amendments.
B. In the event that substantial amendments are made in the proposed
ordinance or amendment, before voting upon enactment, the Township
Board of Commissioners shall, at least 10 days prior to enactment,
readvertise in one newspaper of general circulation in the Township a
brief summary setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail,
together with a summary of the amendments.
A. For the preparation of amendments to this chapter, the procedures set
forth in Section 607 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
as amended,254 for the preparation of a proposed zoning ordinance shall
be optional.
B. Before voting on enactment of an amendment, the Board of
Commissioners shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public
notice. In addition, if the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map
change, notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by
the Township at points deemed sufficient by the Township along the
tract to notify potentially interested citizens. The affected tract or area
shall be posted at least one week prior to the date of the hearing.
C. In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Planning
Commission, the Board of Commissioners shall submit each such
amendment to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the
hearing on such proposed amendment to provide the Planning
Commission an opportunity to submit recommendations.
D. If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is changed substantially or is revised to include land
previously not affected by it, the Board of Commissioners shall hold
another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to
vote on the amendment.
254. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10607.
§ 220-257 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-259
216:890
ARTICLE XXVII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 220-260. Appointment and powers of Zoning Officer.
For the administration of this chapter, a Zoning Officer, who may not hold
any elective office in the Township, shall be appointed. The Zoning Officer
shall administer this chapter in accordance with its literal terms and shall
not have the power to permit any construction or any use or change of use
which does not conform to this chapter.
§ 220-261. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer, who is hereby given the power and
authority, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Zoning Officer shall
examine all applications for permits, issue permits for construction and uses
which are in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, record and
file all applications for permits with accompanying plans and documents
and make such reports as the Township Board of Commissioners may
require. Permits for construction and uses which are a special exception
or a variance to requirements of this chapter shall be issued only upon
approval by the Zoning Hearing Board. Permits for construction and uses
which are a conditional use are issued only upon approval of the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 220-262. Permits.
A. Requirements of permits. A zoning permit shall be required prior to the
erection, construction, reconstruction, addition, conversion, alteration
or use of any building, structure or portion thereof prior to the use or
change in use of a building, structure or land and prior to the change or
extension of a nonconforming use. It shall be unlawful for any person to
commence work for the erection, construction, reconstruction,
addition, conversion, alteration or use of any building or for a change in
land use until a zoning permit has been duly issued therefor. No such
zoning permit shall be required in case of normal maintenance
activities or minor repairs. Applicants are hereby notified that a
building permit may also be required.
B. Application for permits. All applications for permits shall be
accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual
shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and
location of any buildings and structures existing on the lot, the lines
within which the proposed building or structure shall be erected or
altered, the existing and intended use of each building or part of a
building, the number of families or dwelling units the building is
designed to accommodate and such information as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter and all other codes and
ordinances. One copy of such plans shall be returned to the owner when
such plans have been reviewed and acted upon by the Zoning Officer.
§ 220-260 (RESERVED) § 220-262
216:891
§ 220-263. Inspection by the Zoning Officer.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer or his duly appointed
representative to make the following minimum number of inspections of
property for which a permit has been issued. Such inspections shall be in
addition to any required to determine compliance with Chapter 70, Building
Construction and Safety Standards.
All applications with accompanying plans and documents shall become
a public record after a permit is issued or denied.
C. Issuance of permits.
(1) No permit shall be issued until the Zoning Officer has certified that
the proposed building or structure, addition or alteration complies
with all the provisions of this chapter, as well as the provisions of all
other applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) Applicants are hereby notified that other codes and ordinances
enforced by the Codes Official may be applicable.
(3) A permit issued hereunder shall become void 12 months after
issuance date if construction or use is not commenced, unless a
request for extension has been submitted to and approved by the
Zoning Officer. Such request shall be filed with the Zoning Officer
at least 30 days prior to the permit expiration date.
(4) Temporary permits. A temporary permit may be authorized by the
Zoning Officer for a structure or use which is deemed necessary to
promote the proper development of the community, provided that
such structure or use shall be completely removed upon expiration
of the permit without cost to the Township. Such permits shall be
issued for a specified period of time not to exceed 180 days and
may be renewed no more than twice.
D. Revoking of permits. The Zoning Officer may revoke a permit or
approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in case of any false
statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the plans
on which the permit or approval was based or if it found that the work
performed or the use to which the property is put is not in conformance
with the application, approved plans or provisions of all pertinent laws.
A. Beginning of construction. A record shall be made indicating the time
and date of inspection and the finding of the Zoning Officer in regard to
conformance of the construction with plans submitted with the
approved permit application. If the actual construction does not
conform to the application, a written notice of violation shall be issued
by the Zoning Officer, and such construction shall be discontinued.
Upon proper correction of the violation and receipt of written notice
from the Zoning Officer, construction shall proceed.
§ 220-262 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-263
216:892
§ 220-264. Fees.
§ 220-265. Certificate of use and occupancy.
B. Throughout construction. Before issuing any permit, the Zoning Officer
may, at his discretion, examine or cause to be examined all buildings,
structures, signs or land and portions thereof for which an application
has been filed for the erection, construction, alteration, repair,
extension, replacement, relocation, conversion and/or use. Thereafter,
he may make such inspections during the completion of work for which
a permit has been issued.
C. Final inspection. Upon completion of work and before issuing a
certificate of use and occupancy, a final inspection shall be made. All
violations of the approved plans or permit shall be noted, the holder of
the permit shall be notified of the discrepancies and all discrepancies
shall be corrected before a certificate of use and occupancy is issued.
A. The Township Board of Commissioners shall establish, by resolution, a
schedule of fees, charges and expenses, as well as a collection
procedure for zoning permits, certificates of use and occupancy,
appeals, variances, special exceptions, amendments, bonds and other
matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be posted
in the office of the Zoning Officer and may be amended only by the
Township Board of Commissioners.
B. Such nonrefundable fees shall be payable to the Township, and until all
applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, the
application shall be considered incomplete and no action shall be taken
on any applications or appeal.
A. A certificate of use and occupancy shall be a statement issued by the
Zoning Officer setting forth that a building, structure, parcel or use of
land complies with the provisions of this chapter.
B. No vacant land shall be occupied or used and no structure or part of a
structure hereafter erected, substantially altered or changed in use
shall be occupied or used until a certificate of use and occupancy shall
have been issued by the Zoning Officer.
C. A certificate of use and occupancy to establish a use on vacant land, for
a change to an existing land use, for an alteration to or a change in use
of an existing building, or for the use, in whole or part, of a new
building, shall be applied for coincident with the application for a
zoning permit. The certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued by
the Zoning Officer for the use listed on the zoning permit application
within five business days following receipt of a final inspection report
that verifies compliance with the Zoning Ordinance. When the proposed
use also requires a building permit, and a combined certificate of use
and occupancy is being used by the Zoning Officer and Building Code
Official, the time limit to issue the zoning approval for use and
§ 220-263 (RESERVED) § 220-265
216:893
§ 220-265.1. Certificate of nonconformance.
A certificate of nonconformance shall be issued by the Zoning Officer to the
owner of any property, upon request, which, at the time of the effective date
of this chapter, is identified by the owner as containing a nonconforming use
or structure. The owner's property and the issuance date of such certificate
shall be registered in the records of the Township as follows:
§ 220-266. Special exceptions and variances.
Applications for any special exception permitted by this chapter or
variances shall be made to the Zoning Hearing Board through the Zoning
Officer. The Zoning Hearing Board may refer the matter to the Planning
Commission for report thereon as to its effect on the community goals and
objectives of Lower Allen Township, pursuant to § 220-4 herein.
§ 220-266.1. Conditional uses.
occupancy shall not commence until the Building Code Official has
received a final inspection report signifying that construction work
has been completed in compliance with the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code.
D. A certificate of use and occupancy for changing or extending a
nonconforming use existing at the time of the passage of this chapter or
of an amendment thereto shall be applied for and issued before any
such nonconforming use shall be changed or extended. Such certificate
shall be issued within 15 days after a final inspection and approval by
the Zoning Officer.
E. A record of all certificates of use and occupancy shall be kept on file in
the office of the Zoning Officer.
F. A temporary certificate of use and occupancy may be authorized by the
Zoning Officer for a structure or use. Such temporary certificate of use
and occupancy shall be issued for a specified period of time not to
exceed 180 days and may be renewed no more than twice.
A. The certificate of nonconformance shall set forth in detail all of the
nonconforming conditions of said property.
B. A copy of the certificate of nonconformance shall be retained and filed
by the Zoning Officer.
C. The certificate shall be for the purposes of ensuring the owner the right
to continue a nonconforming use in accordance with the regulations of
this chapter.
A. Applications for any conditional use permitted by this chapter shall be
made to the Zoning Officer, who shall refer the application to the
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review the
§ 220-265 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-266.1
216:894
§ 220-267. Appeals and applications.
An appeal or application for an amendment, special exception, or variance
from the terms of this chapter shall be filed with the Zoning Officer and
shall contain:
application and submit its recommendation to the Board of
Commissioners for approval or denial.
B. In addition to the information required on the permit application, the
conditional use application must show:
(1) Names and addresses of adjacent property owners, including
properties directly across a street or public right-of-way from the
subject property.
(2) A surveyed, scaled site plan with sufficient detail and accuracy to
demonstrate compliance with applicable provisions of this chapter.
(3) A written description of the proposed use in sufficient detail to
demonstrate compliance with this chapter.
C. Each applicant for a conditional use must demonstrate with appropriate
evidence the following:
(1) That the proposed use is consistent with the purpose and intent of
the Zoning Ordinance and is listed as a conditional use in the
zoning district in which it is proposed.
(2) That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the
conditional use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public
health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare.
(3) That the conditional use will not be injurious to the use or
enjoyment of other properties for permitted purposes.
(4) That establishment of the conditional use will not impede the
normal and orderly development and improvement of other
properties for uses permitted in the zoning district.
(5) That the conditional use is consistent with the goals and objectives
of the Township's Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
(6) That adequate utilities, infrastructure and other public services are
available or will be provided.
(7) That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide
ingress and egress, to minimize traffic congestion and to facilitate
the movement of vehicles and pedestrians.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of the owner of the real estate to be affected by
such proposal.
§ 220-266.1 (RESERVED) § 220-267
216:895
§ 220-268. Violations and penalties.
The erection, construction, reconstruction, excavation, alteration,
conversion, maintenance or use of any structure, building, sign, land or
landscaping or the change of use, area of use, percentage of use or
displacement of use of any structure, building, sign, land or required
landscaping/screen planting without first obtaining a zoning permit; the
use of any building, structure, sign or land without receipt of a certificate
of use and occupancy; the use or maintenance of any building, structure,
sign or land for a use or in a manner which is not in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter; the use of property for a use different from that
set forth in any zoning permit or certificate of use and occupancy which
has been granted for the property without applying for and being granted
a zoning permit and certificate of occupancy for such new or different use;
the failure to comply with any other provisions of this chapter; and the
violation of any condition imposed upon the grant of a special exception or
variance by the Zoning Hearing Board or by a court, conditional use by the
Board of Commissioners or accord of competent jurisdiction if such special
exception, variance or conditional use is granted by such court are hereby
declared to be violations of this chapter.
C. A brief description and location of the real estate to be affected by such
proposal.
D. A statement of the present zoning classification of the real estate in
question and an accurate description of the present improvements and
the alterations intended to be made under this application, indicating
the size and use of such proposed improvements and general
construction thereof. In addition, there shall be attached a plot plan of
the real estate to be affected, as required to accompany applications for
permits, indicating the location and size of the lot and location of
improvements now erected and Aproposed to be erected thereon.
E. A statement of the section of this chapter under which the appeal or
application requested may be allowed and reasons why it should be
granted or a statement of the section of this chapter governing the
situation in which the alleged erroneous ruling is being appealed and
reasons for the appeal.
F. Any other pertinent data required by the Zoning Hearing Board,
Township Board of Commissioners and/or Zoning Officer, as
appropriate to their individual authorities set forth in this article.
A. Notice of violation.
(1) When written notice of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter has been served by the Zoning Officer on the owner, agent
or occupant or contractor, such violation shall be discontinued
immediately.
§ 220-267 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-268
216:896
(2) All appeals from determinations by the Zoning Officer under this
section shall be made to the Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days
of the date of the determination.
B. Causes of action. In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is
or is proposed to be erected, constructed, excavated, reconstructed,
altered, converted, maintained or used in violation of this chapter, the
Township Board of Commissioners or, with the approval of the Township
Board of Commissioners, an officer of the Township, or any aggrieved
owner or tenant of real property who shows that his property or person
will be substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to
other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure or
landscaping of land or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act,
conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When any such action
is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be
served upon the Township at least 30 days prior to the time the action is
begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the Township Board of
Commissioners. No such action may be maintained until such notice
has been given.
C. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than
$500, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the Magisterial District
Judge, determining that there has been a violation, further
determines that there was a good faith basis for person,
partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have believed
that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be
deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge, and, thereafter, each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs
and reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation shall be
paid over to Lower Allen Township.
(2) The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
§ 220-268 (RESERVED) § 220-268
216:897
§ 220-269. Zoning Hearing Board.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have three members appointed by the
Township Board of Commissioners, and have such powers and authority
as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247),
as amended. The duly established Zoning Hearing Board shall have the
following functions:
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
A. Hearings. The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and make
decisions in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code (Act 247), as amended. Notice shall be given to the public, the
applicant, the landowner, the Zoning Officer, such other persons as the
Zoning Hearing Board shall designate and any person who has made
timely request for the same. Notices shall be given at such time and in
such manner prescribed by the adopted Rules of the Zoning Hearing
Board. The Township Board of Commissioners may establish reasonable
fees, based on costs, to be paid by the applicant and persons requesting
any notice or materials not required by ordinance.
B. Jurisdiction. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction
to hear and render final adjudications in the following matters, as set
forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code:
(1) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,
except those brought before the governing body pursuant to
Sections 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of the Code.255
(2) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption, which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken within 30 days after effective date of said ordinance.
(3) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including but
not limited to the granting or denial of any permit or failure to act
on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist
order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming
use, structure or lot.
(4) Appeals from a determination by the Township Engineer or Zoning
Officer with reference to the administration of any floodplain
ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance.
(5) Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter and/or
such provisions within a land use ordinance, pursuant to Section
910.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.256
255. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1(a)(2).
256. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10910.2.
§ 220-268 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-269
216:898
(6) Applications for special exceptions under this chapter or the
floodplain ordinance or such provisions within a land use
ordinance, pursuant to Section 912.1 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.257
(7) Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged
with the administration of any transfer of development rights or
performance density provisions of this chapter.
(8) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under Section
916.2, Procedure to Obtain Preliminary Opinion, of the code.258
(9) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Township
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or
provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
development not involving applications under Article V or Article
VII of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
C. Variances. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances
where it is alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary
hardship upon the applicant. The Zoning Hearing Board may, by rule,
prescribe the form of application and may require application to the
Zoning Officer. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a variance,
provided that the following findings are made where relevant in a given
case:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
district in which the property is located.
(2) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
authorization of a variance is therefor necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the district in which the property is located nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property nor be detrimental to the public
welfare.
257. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10912.1.
258. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 220-269 (RESERVED) § 220-269
216:899
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and represent the least modification
possible of the regulation in issue. In granting any variance, the
Zoning Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of
this chapter.
D. Special exceptions. In this chapter, special exceptions may be granted
or denied by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to expressed
standards and criteria contained in this chapter. The Zoning Hearing
Board shall hear and decide requests for such special exceptions in
accordance with such standards and criteria and prescribe the
application form to be used. The Board may grant approval of a special
exception, provided that the applicant complies with the following
standards and that the proposed special exception shall not be
detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the neighborhood. The
burden of proof shall rest with the applicant.
(1) The applicant shall establish, by credible evidence, compliance
with all conditions on the special exception contained within this
chapter which give the applicant the right to seek the special
exception.
(2) The applicant shall establish, by credible evidence, that the
proposed special exception shall be properly serviced by all
existing public service systems. The peak traffic and parking
demands generated by the subject of the application shall be
accommodated in a safe and efficient manner or improvements
shall be made in order to effect the same. Similar responsibilities
shall be assumed with respect to other public service systems,
including, but not limited to police protection, fire protection,
utilities, and parks and recreational facilities.
(3) The applicant shall establish, by credible evidence, that the
proposed special exception shall be in and of itself properly
designed with regard to internal circulation, parking, buffering and
all other elements of proper design as specified in this chapter and
any other governing law or regulation.
(4) The applicant shall provide the Board with sufficient plans, studies
or other data to demonstrate compliance with all applicable
regulations.
(5) For uses, structures or any development within the overlay
Floodway (FW) and Flood-Fringe (FF) Districts, the applicant shall
present evidence of the effect of the use, structure or development
on flood levels, flood frequencies and velocities; the susceptibility
of the use, structure or development to flood damage; the
availability of emergency access to the use, structure or
development in times of flood; the necessity of the use, structure or
development to be located near the floodplain; and the compliance
§ 220-269 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-269
216:900
with the requirement that the use, structure or development will
not be located in the floodplain if the use, structure or development
increases the base flood elevation.
(6) The applicant shall inform the Board whether any structures on the
property are listed upon the National Register of Historic Places or
any other registry of historic structures.
(7) The proposed special exception shall not substantially injure or
detract from the use of neighboring property or from the character
of the neighborhood and the use of property adjacent to the area
included in the special exception application shall be adequately
safeguarded.
(8) The Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards
as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of and ensure
compliance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended, and this chapter, which conditions may include plantings
and buffers, harmonious designs of buildings and the elimination of
noxious, offensive or hazardous elements.
(9) Unless otherwise specified by the Board or by law, a special
exception shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain a zoning
permit within 12 months from the date of authorization thereof by
the Board or by the court if such special exception has been
granted after an appeal or fails to complete any erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration or change in use
authorized by the special exception approval within one year from
the date of authorization thereof by the Board or by the court if
such special exception has been granted after an appeal. The
Board, upon written application and for reasonable cause shown,
may extend the approval for an additional period of up to one year.
(10) Any site plan or plot plan presented in support of the special
exception shall become an official part of the record for said special
exception. Approval of any special exception shall also bind the use
in accordance with the submitted site plan or plot plan. Should a
change in the site plan or plot plan be required as a part of the
approval of the use, the applicant shall revise the site plan or plot
plan prior to the issuance of a zoning permit and present such
revised plan to the Zoning Officer. Any subsequent change to the
use on the subject property not reflected on the originally approved
site plan or the amended site plan filed with the Zoning Officer
prior to the issuance of the zoning permit shall require the granting
of another special exception to authorize such change.
(11) The Zoning Hearing Board's decision to grant a permit for a special
exception use shall be made only after public notice and public
hearing. Such permit shall apply specifically to the application and
plans submitted and presented at said public hearing. Any
§ 220-269 (RESERVED) § 220-269
216:901
subsequent amendments or additions shall be subject to review and
public hearing by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception.
(12) If the Zoning Hearing Board requests a report from the Planning
Commission pursuant to § 220-266, then no application for a permit
shall be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board for any special
exception use until said Board has first received and considered an
advisory report thereon from the Planning Commission with
respect to the location of such use in relation to the needs and
growth pattern of the Township of Lower Allen, where appropriate,
with reference to the adequacy of the site area and the
arrangement of buildings, driveways, parking areas, off-street
loading and unloading spaces and other pertinent features of the
proposal.
(13) The Planning Commission shall have 30 days from the date of its
receipt of the application within which to file its report thereon. In
the event that the Planning Commission shall fail to file its report
within 30 days, such application may be deemed to have been
recommended approval by the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission may have representation at the public hearing held by
the Zoning Hearing Board on such application. After receipt of the
report, the Zoning Hearing Board shall hear the application in the
same manner and under the same procedure as it is empowered by
law and ordinance to hear cases and make exceptions to the
provisions of this chapter. The Zoning Hearing Board may
thereafter direct the Zoning Officer to issue a permit if, in its
judgment, the request will not be detrimental to the health, safety
and general welfare of the Township of Lower Allen.
(14) A special exception use for which a permit is granted by the Zoning
Hearing Board pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be
construed to be a conforming use.
E. Parties appellant before the Zoning Hearing Board. Appeals raising the
substantive validity of any land use ordinance, except those to be
brought before the Township Board of Commissioners, pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, procedural
questions or alleged defects in the process or enactment or adoption of
land use ordinance; from the determination of the Zoning Officer,
including but not limited to the granting or denial of any permit or
failure to act on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease-anddesist
order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming
use, structure or lot; from a determination by the Township Engineer or
Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of any floodplain or
flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance;
or from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Township Engineer
in the reference to sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater
management, insofar as the same relate to the development not
involving subdivision and development or planned residential
development, may be filed with the Zoning Hearing Board in writing by
§ 220-269 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-269
216:902
the landowner affected, any officer or agency of the Township or any
person aggrieved. Requests for a variance and for special exception
may be filed with the Zoning Hearing Board by any landowner or tenant
with the permission of such landowner.
F. Time limitations.
(1) No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Zoning
Hearing Board later than 30 days after an application for
development, preliminary or final, has been approved by the
Township if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or limit
the approval in any manner, unless such person alleges and proves
that he had no notice, knowledge or reason to believe that such
approval has been given. If such person has succeeded to his
interest after such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of
his predecessor in interest. The failure of anyone other than the
landowner to appeal from an adverse decision on a tentative plan
or from an adverse decision by the Zoning Officer on a challenge to
the validity of this chapter or an amendment hereto or map or an
amendment thereto shall preclude an appeal from a final approval,
except in the case where the final submission substantially deviates
from the approved tentative approval.
(2) No issue of alleged defect in the process of enactment of any
ordinance or map or any amendment thereto shall be raised in any
proceeding filed with the Zoning Hearing Board later than 30 days
from the time such ordinance, map or amendment takes effect,
unless the person raising such issues alleges and proves that he
failed to receive adequate notice of the enactment or amendment.
If such person has succeeded to his interest after the enactment of
the ordinances, adequate notice to his predecessor in interest shall
be deemed adequate notice to him.
(3) All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be
filed by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the
determination is issued.
G. Stay of proceedings.
(1) Upon filing of any appeal proceeding before the Zoning Hearing
Board and during its pendency before the Zoning Hearing Board,
all land development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order
or approval of the Zoning Officer or of any agency or body and all
official action thereunder shall be stayed, unless the Zoning Officer
or any other appropriate agency or body certifies to the Board facts
indicating that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property, in which case the development or official action shall not
be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be
granted by the Zoning Hearing Board or by the court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals, on petition, after notice to the
Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or body. When an
§ 220-269 (RESERVED) § 220-269
216:903
§ 220-270. Interpretation; construal of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health,
safety, morals and general welfare. They are not intended to interfere with
or abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances, provided that
where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings
or premises or upon the height of a building or requires larger open spaces
than are imposed by such other rules, easements, covenants, restrictions,
regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 220-271. (Reserved)
application for development, preliminary or final, has been duly
approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the
approval are filed with the Zoning Hearing Board by persons other
than the applicant, the applicant may petition the court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order such persons to post bond as
a condition to continuing the proceedings before the Board.
(2) After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to
determine if the filing of the appeal is frivolous. At the hearing,
evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It shall be the
burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous.
After consideration of all evidence presented, if the court
determines that the appeal is frivolous, it shall grant the petition
for a bond. The right to petition the court to order the appellants to
post bond may be waived by the appellee, but such waiver may be
revoked by him if an appeal is taken from a final decision of the
court.
(3) The question of whether or not such petition should be granted and
the amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the
court. An order denying a petition for bond shall be interlocutory.
An order directing the responding party to post a bond shall be
interlocutory.
(4) If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from
an order of the court dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post
a bond and the appellate court sustains the order of the court below
to post a bond, the respondents to the petition for a bond, upon
motion of the petitioner and after hearing in the court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals, shall be liable for all reasonable
costs, expenses and attorney fees incurred by the petitioner.
§ 220-269 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-271
216:904
ARTICLE XXVIII
Floodplain Districts
§ 220-272. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prevent the loss of property and life, the
creation of health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and
governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of
public funds for flood protection and relief and the impairment of the tax
base of:
§ 220-273. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the Township
and shown on the Township Zoning Map as being located within the
boundaries of the Floodway (FW), Flood-Fringe (FF) and General Floodplain
Conservation (FA) Districts.
§ 220-274. Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be
located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally
altered except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this
article and any other applicable ordinances and regulations which apply to
uses within the jurisdiction of this article.
§ 220-275. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Regulating uses, activities and development which, acting alone or in
combination with other existing or future uses, activities and
development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights,
velocities and frequencies.
B. Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and development from
locating within areas subject to flooding.
C. Requiring all those uses, activities and developments that do occur in
flood-prone areas to be protected and/or floodproofed against flooding
and flood damage.
D. Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are
unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this article is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur on
rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This
article does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts or that
land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
§ 220-272 (RESERVED) § 220-275
216:905
§ 220-276. Establishment of floodplain districts.
The following floodplain districts are hereby created, each differing with
respect to the intensity and nature of their flooding problems:
B. This article shall not create liability on the part of the Township or any
office or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
A. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of Lower Allen
Township, subject to the one-hundred-year flood, which is identified as
Zone A (Area of Special Flood Hazard) in Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
dated March 16, 2009 and the accompanying maps or the most recent
revision thereof as issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood
Insurance Study.
B. Floodplain districts.
(1) The Floodway District (FW) is delineated for purposes of this article
using the criteria that a certain area within the floodplain must be
capable of carrying the waters of the one-hundred-year flood
without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more
than one foot at any point. The district is shown on the Township
Zoning Map. The areas included in this district are specifically
defined in Table 1 of the above referenced Flood Insurance Study
and shown on the accompanying Flood Boundary and Floodway
Map.
(2) The Flood-Fringe District (FF) is that area of the one-hundred-year
floodplain not included in the Floodway District (FW). The basis for
the outermost boundary of this district shall be the one-hundredyear-
flood elevations contained in the flood profiles of the above
referenced Flood Insurance Study.
(3) The General Floodplain Conservation District (FA) is the floodplain
area for which no specific flood profiles have been provided. It is
designated as Zone A on the maps accompanying the abovereferenced
Flood Insurance Study. Where the specific one-hundredyear-
flood elevation cannot be determined for this area using other
sources of data such as the United States Army Corps of Engineers
Floodplain Information Reports, United States Geological Survey
Flood Prone Quadrangles, etc., the applicant for the proposed use,
development and/or activity shall determine this elevation in
accordance with the hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
technique. This elevation information shall be subject to review by
the municipality and other agency that it shall designate, such as
the Corps of Engineers, the Department of Environmental
Protection, the River Basin Commission, etc. Flood elevations for
Cedar Run for the one-hundred-year flood have been provided by
§ 220-275 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-276
216:906
§ 220-277. District provisions.
and shall be obtained from the Township Engineer where not
inconsistent with the maps accompanying the above-referenced
Flood Insurance Study.
(4) FE (Special Floodplain Area): the areas identified as Zone AE in the
Flood Insurance Study, where one-hundred-year flood elevations
have been provided, but no floodway has been delineated.
C. Overlay concept.
(1) The floodplain districts described above shall be overlays to the
existing underlying districts as shown on the Official Zoning
Ordinance Map, and as such, the provisions for these three districts
shall serve as a supplement to the underlying district provisions. All
such districts shall be designated on the Township Zoning Map by
the Township Engineer.
(2) Where there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements
of any of the floodplain districts and those of any underlying
district, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
(3) In the event that any portion of the floodplain districts be declared
inapplicable as a result of any legislative or administrative actions
or judicial discretion, the underlying zoning applicable to such land
or use shall be deemed to be the district in which it is located
without consideration of this article.
D. Zoning Map. The boundaries of the floodplain districts are established
as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township which is declared to be a
part of this article and which shall be kept on file at the Township
Municipal Building.
E. District boundary changes. The delineation of any of the floodplain
districts may be revised by the Board of Commissioners where natural
or man-made changes have occurred or more detailed studies conduced
or undertaken by the United States Army Corps of Engineers,
Susquehanna River Basin Commission or other qualified agency or
individual. However, prior to any such change, approval must be
obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).
F. Interpretation of district boundaries. Initial interpretations of the
boundaries of the floodplain districts shall be made by the Township
Engineer. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of the
districts, the Zoning Hearing Board shall make the necessary
determination with the recommendations of the Township Engineer.
The person questioning or contesting the location of the district
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to
the Board and to submit his own technical evidence if he so desires.
§ 220-276 (RESERVED) § 220-277
216:907
A. All uses, activities and development occurring within any floodplain
district shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the
provisions of this article and with all other applicable provisions of the
Code of the Township of Lower Allen. For purposes of this section, the
word "development" shall also mean "any man-made change to
improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation, installation of drainage facilities or drilling operations."
B. Under no circumstances shall any use, activity or development
adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any
watercourse, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system.
C. Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any stream of any
watercourse, stream, etc., within the Township, a permit shall be
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection. Further,
notification of the proposal shall be given to all affected adjacent
municipalities and state coordinating offices. Copies of such notification
shall be forwarded to both the Federal Insurance Administration and
the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development (DCED).
D. Floodway District (FW). In the Floodway District (FW), no use, activity
or development shall be permitted, except where the effect of such on
flood heights is fully offset by accompanying stream improvements
which have been approved by all appropriate local and/or state
authorities as required above.
(1) Permitted uses. In the Floodway District (FW), the following uses,
activities or developments are permitted, provided that they are in
compliance with the provisions of the underlying district, are not
prohibited by any other article and provided that they do not
require structures, fill or storage of materials and equipment:
(a) Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pastures, grazing,
outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry,
sod farming and wild crop harvesting.
(b) Public and private recreational uses and activities, such as
parks, day camps, picnic grounds, golf courses, boat-launching
and swimming areas, hiking and horseback riding trails,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries,
trap and skeet game ranges and hunting and fishing areas.
(c) Accessory residential uses, such as yard areas, gardens, play
areas and pervious parking areas.
(d) Accessory industrial and commercial uses, such as yard areas,
pervious parking and loading areas, etc.
(2) Uses permitted by special exception. The following uses, activities
and development may be permitted by special exception, provided
§ 220-277 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-277
216:908
that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying
district and are not prohibited by any other article:
(a) Water-related uses and activities, such as marinas, docks,
wharves, piers, etc.
(b) The extraction of sand, gravel and other materials.
(c) Temporary uses, such as circuses, carnivals and similar
activities.
(d) Other similar uses and activities, provided that they cause no
increase in flood heights or velocities. All uses, activities and
developments shall be undertaken in strict compliance with
the floodproofing provisions contained in all other applicable
articles.
E. Flood-Fringe District (FF). In the Flood-Fringe District (FF), uses,
activities or development shall be permitted in accordance with the
regulations of the underlying district, provided that all such uses,
activities or development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with
the elevation or floodproofing and related provisions contained in this
article and all other articles.
F. General Floodplain Conservation District (FA).
(1) In the General Floodplain Conservation District (FA), uses,
activities or development shall be permitted in accordance with
regulations of the underlying district, provided that all such uses,
activities or development shall be permitted only if the applicant
for the proposed development, use or activity has demonstrated
that the proposed undertaking, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, uses and activities, will not
increase the water surface elevation of the one-hundred-year flood
more than one foot at any point and shall be in strict compliance
with the elevation or floodproofing and related provisions
contained in this article and other applicable articles. The
engineering principle, equal reduction of conveyance, shall be used
to make the determination of increases in flood heights.
(2) In the floodway portion of the district, only those uses, activities or
development provided for in the Floodway District (FW) shall be
permitted in the floodway portion of this district, subject to the
limitations set forth herein.
G. Within any FE (Special Floodplain Area), no new construction or
development shall be allowed unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the
elevation of the one-hundred-year flood more than one foot at any point.
§ 220-277 (RESERVED) § 220-278
216:909
§ 220-278. Existing structures.
A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before
the enactment of these provisions but which is not in conformity with these
provisions may be continued subject to the following conditions:
§ 220-279. Administration.
A. Existing structures or uses located in the Floodway District (FW) shall
not be expanded or enlarged, unless the effect of the proposed
expansion or enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by
accompanying stream improvements.
B. Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement of
any kind to a structure or use located in the floodplain districts, the cost
of which is less that 50% of its market value, shall be elevated or
floodproofed to the greatest extent possible, regardless of its location in
the floodplain districts.
C. The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement of
any kind to a structure or use, regardless of location in the floodplain
districts, the cost of which is 50% or more of its market value, shall be
defined as a substantial improvement and shall be undertaken only in
full compliance with the provisions of this and any other applicable
ordinance.
D. Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not be
permitted to continue.
E. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any FE area that would, together with all other existing and
anticipated development, increase the one-hundred-year flood elevation
more than one foot at any point.
A. Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall administer and enforce this
article. If he/she finds a violation of the provisions of this article, he
shall notify the person responsible for such violation, indicating the
nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it.
B. Zoning permit.
(1) Zoning permit required. A zoning permit shall be required for any
use, activity or development, as defined in § 220-277, exterior
structural addition or any substantial improvement or alteration of
any building or structure or portion thereof prior to the use or
change of use of a building, structure or land or prior to the change
or extension of a nonconforming use in the floodplain districts.
(2) Application for zoning permits. Application for a zoning permit
shall be made, in duplicate, to the Zoning Officer, on forms
furnished by him, and shall include the following where applicable:
plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location,
§ 220-278 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-279
216:910
§ 220-280. Special exceptions and variances.
dimensions and elevations of the lot; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials and the location of the
foregoing in relation to the adjoining river, stream or watercourse,
the underlying district, the floodplain district and base flood
elevation data; all necessary permits from those governmental
agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law.
(3) Certificate of zoning compliance for new, altered or nonconforming
uses.
(a) No person shall use, develop or occupy or permit the use,
development or occupancy of any building or land or both or
part thereof hereafter erected, substantially improved or
altered, structurally altered, enlarged or changed in its use
until a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued
therefor by the Zoning Officer, stating that the use, activity or
development conforms to the requirements of this article.
(b) No nonconforming structure or use shall be used after
substantial improvement until a certificate of zoning
compliance shall state specifically the particulars, if any, in
which the nonconforming structure or use differs from the
provisions of this article.
(4) Construction and use to be as provided in applications, plans,
permits and certificates of zoning compliance. Zoning permits,
special exception uses and certificates of zoning compliance issued
on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the
use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement or
construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a
violation of this article and punishable as provided by this article.
The applicant shall be required to submit a certification by the
Township Engineer that the use, activity, development, building
floor elevations, floodproofing or other flood protection measures
are in compliance with the provisions of this article.
A. Application. Application for a variance or for any use listed in this
article as requiring a special exception may be allowed only upon
application to the Zoning Officer, on forms furnished by him, and
issuance of a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board. Upon
receipt of the application, the Zoning Officer shall forthwith submit it to
the Board. The provisions of Article XXVII shall govern, except as
otherwise provided in this article.
B. Procedure to be followed by Zoning Hearing Board in passing upon
application for special exception or variance.
(1) Upon receiving an application for a variance or by special permit
involving a use, activity or development in the floodplain districts,
§ 220-279 (RESERVED) § 220-280
216:911
the Board shall, prior to rendering a decision thereon, require
the applicant to furnish such of the following information as is
deemed necessary by the Board for determining the suitability of
the particular site for the proposed use, activity or development:
(a) Plans in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the nature,
location, dimensions and elevation of the lot, existing
floodproofing measures and the relationship of the above to the
location of the floodway and one-hundred-year flood.
(b) A typical valley cross-section showing the channel of the
stream or watercourse, dimensions and elevation of floodway
and one-hundred-year flood areas and adjoining each side of
the channel and cross-sectional areas to be occupied by the
proposed use, activity or development.
(c) A plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground: pertinent structural, fill or storage elevations; size,
location and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing
structures on the site; location and elevation of all proposed
and existing structures on the site; location and elevation of
streets, water supply, sanitary facilities, photographs showing
existing land uses and vegetation upstream and downstream,
soil types and other pertinent information.
(d) A profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow
line of the stream or watercourse.
(e) Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel
improvements, storage of materials, water supply and sanitary
facilities.
(2) The Board may, on its own initiative, retain the services of a
registered professional engineer for evaluation purposes, and, if
necessary, the Board shall transmit to such engineer one copy of
the information described herein for the purpose of obtaining his
evaluation of the proposed project with regard to potential flood
damage to the use, the magnitude of related floodplain
encroachment and other relevant matters.
(3) Based upon the technical evaluation by the designated engineer,
the Board shall determine the specific flood hazard at the site of the
proposed use or development for which a variance or special
exception is being applied and shall evaluate the suitability of the
proposed use in relation to the flood hazard.
C. Factors to be considered.
(1) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
§ 220-280 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-280
216:912
(2) The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or
downstream to the injury of others.
(3) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability
of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary
conditions.
(4) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners.
(5) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
(6) The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
(7) The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for
the proposed use.
(8) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
(9) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for the area.
(10) The safety of access to the property in times of flood of ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood water expected at this site.
(12) Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
article.
D. Variances can be granted for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places where appropriate.
E. Variances shall not be given in the floodway that result in any increase
in flood levels during the one-hundred-year flood.
F. Variances may be given for new construction and substantial
improvements on lots 1/2 acre or less in size, surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the one-hundred-year flood level.
G. Where variances are given for an activity described in Subsection F
herein, written notification signed by the Zoning Officer shall be given
to the applicant, indicating that:
(1) Increased insurance premiums will result.
(2) Construction occurring below the one-hundred-year-flood level will
increase risks to life and property.
H. Conditions attached to special exceptions or variances. Upon
consideration of the factors listed above and the purpose of this article,
§ 220-280 (RESERVED) § 220-280
216:913
§ 220-281. Development which may endanger human life.
the Board may attach such conditions to the granting of special
exceptions or variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes
of this article. Among such conditions, without limitation because of
specific enumeration, may be included:
(1) Modifications of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
(2) Limitations on periods of use and operation.
(3) Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed restrictions.
(4) Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees and other protective measures.
I. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use or
activity within any FE area that would, together with all other existing
and anticipated development, increase the one-hundred-year flood
elevation more than one foot at any point.
A. The provisions of this section shall be applicable in addition to any other
applicable provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance, code or
regulation.
B. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act and
the regulations adopted by the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development as required by said Act, any new or
substantially improved structure which will be used for the production
of storage of any of the following materials or substances or which will
be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply (more
than 550 gallons or other comparable volume or any amount of
radioactive substances) of any of the following materials or substances
on the premises shall not be permitted in any Floodplain District:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
§ 220-280 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-281
216:914
§ 220-282. Activities prohibited.
§ 220-283. Elevation certificates.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel, oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulfur and sulfur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
A. The provisions of this section shall be applicable in addition to any other
applicable provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance, code or
regulation.
B. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act and
the regulations adopted by the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development as required by the said Act, the following
obstructions and activities are not permitted in any Floodplain District:
(1) Hospitals, public or private.
(2) Nursing homes, public or private.
(3) Jails.
(4) New mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions and
substantial improvements to existing mobile home parks.
A. Township Engineer. The Township Engineer is hereby designated as the
Local Community Permit Officer for the purposes of completing the
elevation certificate as recommended by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, National Flood Insurance Program. Any building
owner, insurance agent or mortgage lender requiring an elevation
certificate shall submit the same to the Township Engineer.
(1) The applicant shall provide the following information:
(a) Complete name and complete mailing address of the owner of
the building being certified.
(b) Proper location or legal description of the building being
certified.
§ 220-281 (RESERVED) § 220-283
216:915
(2) Upon receipt of the elevation certificate, the Township Engineer, as
the designated Local Community Permit Officer, shall complete
Section I, Eligibility Certification, and Section II, Elevation
Certification. The owner or applicant, as applicable, shall be
required to have Section III, Floodproofing Certification,
completed.
B. Costs. When an owner or applicant submits an elevation certificate to
the Township for completion, the applicant shall also submit payment
for the application completion fee. Said fee shall be established by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 220-283 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § 220-283
216:916
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
97-1
5-12-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 220, Art. XIV
Ord. No.
97-1
7-7-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
97-3
3-10-1997 Treasurer amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2013-08
Res. No.
97-R-16
5-12-1997 Employee compensation
adjustment
NCM
Res. No.
97-R-17
5-12-1997 Cedar Run Watershed Plan NCM
Res. No.
97-R-18
5-12-1997 Appointment; EMS
Department
NCM
Res. No.
97-R-19
5-12-1997 Application for county aid NCM
Res. No.
97-R-20
6-9-1997 Employee compensation
adjustment
NCM
Res. No.
97-R-22
6-9-1997 Designation of agent NCM
Res. No.
97-R-23
6-9-1997 Deferred Compensation
Plan
NCM
Res. No.
97-R-24
6-9-1997 Plan revision; new land
development
NCM
Res.
Nos.
97-R-26
7-7-1997 Appointment of Emergency
Medical Technician
NCM
Res. No.
97-R-25
7-14-1997 Salaries NCM
Res. No.
97-R-27
7-14-1997 Job descriptions NCM
Res. No.
97-R-28
7-14-1997 Per capita exonerations NCM
Res. No.
97-R-29
8-11-1997 Salaries NCM
§ 220-283 (RESERVED) § DL-1
216:917
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
97-R-30
8-11-1997 Application NCM
Res. No.
97-R-31
8-11-1997 Public Safety Ad Hoc
Committee
NCM
Res. No.
97-R-34
9-8-1997 Appointment of technician NCM
Res. No.
97-R-35
9-22-1997 Adoption of Health and
Safety Manual
NCM
Res. No.
97-R-36
9-8-1997 Salaries NCM
Res. No.
97-R-37
10-13-1997 Salaries NCM
Res. No.
97-R-38
10-13-1997 Designation of tax
collection agent
NCM
Res. No.
97-R-39
10-6-1997 Waste disposal contract
extension
NCM
Ord. No.
97-7
11-10-1997 Building construction and
safety standards
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2004-1
Ord. No.
97-9
11-10-1997 Collection and disposal of
solid waste amendment
Ch. 180, Art. II
Ord. No.
97-10
11-10-1997 Residential permit parking Ch. 169
Ord. No.
97-11
11-10-1997 Per capita tax and
occupation tax
amendments
Ch. 197, Arts. II
and VI
Ord. No.
97-12
11-10-1997 Sewage facilities
amendment
Ch. 175, Art. II
Ord. No.
97-13
11-10-1997 Sewer connections
amendment
Ch. 175, Art. I
Ord. No.
97-14
11-10-1997 Vehicles and traffic Ch. 209
Ord. No.
97-15
11-10-1997 Sanitary sewer
specifications amendment
Ch. 175, Art. III
Ord. No.
97-16
11-10-1997 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
Res. No.
97-R-40
11-10-1997 Compensation NCM
Res. No.
97-R-41
11-10-1997 Per capita exemptions NCM
§ DL-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § DL-1
216:918
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
97-R-45
12-29-1997 Pay schedule for
established positions
NCM
Res. No.
97-R-46
12-29-1997 Hourly wage schedule NCM
Res. No.
97-R-47
12-29-1997 Police pension fund
employee contribution
NCM
Res. No.
97-R-48
12-31-1997 Treasurer's bond NCM
Res. No.
97-R-49
12-29-1997 Budget transfer NCM
Res. No.
97-R-51
12-29-1997 Lease agreement NCM
Ord. No.
97-18
12-31-1997 Budget NCM
Ord. No.
97-19
12-31-1997 1998 tax rate Annual measure
Ord. No.
97-20
12-31-1997 Manager amendment Ch. 32
Res. No.
98-R-2
1-12-1998 Compensation NCM
Ord. No.
98-1
2-9-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 220 (table
only)
Ord. No.
98-2
2-9-1998 General obligation bonds NCM
Ord. No.
98-3
Ord. No.
98-4
9-14-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
98-5
7-6-1998 General obligation note NCM
Ord. No.
98-6
8-10-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 209
Ord. No.
98-7
10-12-1998 Noise control Ch. 147
Ord. No.
98-8
11-9-1998 Police mutual aid Ch. 43
Ord. No.
98-9
11-9-1998 Sewers: industrial
pretreatment program
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2010-07
§ DL-1 (RESERVED) § DL-1
216:919
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
98-10
11-9-1998 Sewers: sewer connections
amendment; sanitary sewer
specifications amendment
Ch. 175, Arts. I and
III
Ord. No.
98-11
11-9-1998 Sewers: industrial
pretreatment program
amendment
Ch. 175, Art. IV
Ord. No.
98-12
11-9-1998 Adoption of Code
amendment; alarms
amendment; dogs running
at large amendment; BOCA
National Fire Prevention
Code amendment;
junkyards amendment;
excavations amendment;
snow and ice removal
amendment; vehicles and
traffic amendment; storage
of vehicles amendment
Chs. 1, Art. I; 61;
65, Art. II
(repealed by Ord.
No. 2014-01); 70,
Art. VI (repealed
by Ord. No.
2004-1); 121; 187,
Arts. I and V; 209;
212
Ord. No.
98-13
Void
Ord. No.
98-14
Void
Ord. No.
98-15
Void
Ord. No.
98-16
12-28-1998 Appropriations NCM
Ord. No.
98-17
12-28-1998 1999 tax rate Annual measure
Ord. No.
98-18
12-28-1998 Manager amendment Ch. 32
Ord. No.
99-1
2-8-1999 Temporary moratorium on
adult uses
NCM
Ord. No.
99-2
6-21-1999 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 220, table only
Ord. No.
99-3
8-30-1999 Adult bookstores repealer;
sexually oriented
businesses
Ch. 58, reference
only; Ch. 59
Ord. No.
99-4
8-9-1999 Alarms amendment Ch. 61
Ord. No.
99-5
10-11-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
§ DL-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § DL-1
216:920
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
99-6
8-9-1999 Recycling amendment Ch. 180, Art. I
Ord. No.
99-7
8-30-1999 Regional Police
Department
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2002-06
Ord. No.
99-8
10-11-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 209
Ord. No.
99-10
12-30-1999 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
99-11
12-30-1999 2000 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
99-12
12-30-1999 Manager amendment Ch. 32
Ord. No.
2000-01
4-10-2000 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 220, table only
Ord. No.
2000-02
3-13-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2000-3
11-13-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2000-4
Void
Ord. No.
2000-05
8-14-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 209
Ord. No.
2000-06
10-3-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2000-07
Void
Ord. No.
2000-08
12-11-2000 Collection and disposal of
solid waste amendment
Ch. 180, Art. II
Ord. No.
2000-09
12-11-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 209
Ord. No.
2000-10
12-28-2000 Building construction and
safety standards
amendment; trees
amendment
Chs. 70 (repealed
by Ord. No.
2004-01); 202
Ord. No.
2000-11
12-28-2000 2001 budget NCM
Ord. No.
2000-12
12-28-2000 2001 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2000-13
12-28-2000 Manager amendment Ch. 32
§ DL-1 (RESERVED) § DL-1
216:921
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2001-01
4-23-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2001-02
8-13-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2001-03
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2001-04
1-22-2001 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 220, table only
Ord. No.
2001-05
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2001-06
5-14-2001 Amusement tax
amendment
Ch. 197, Art. VIII
Ord. No.
2001-07
10-8-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 209
Ord. No.
2001-08
12-10-2001 Building construction and
safety standards
amendment; open burning
repealer
Ch. 70 (repealed
by Ord. No.
2004-01); Ch. 76,
reference only
Ord. No.
2001-09
12-10-2001 Massage establishments
amendment
Ch. 140
Ord. No.
2001-10
12-10-2001 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
Ord. No.
2001-11
12-27-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 209
Ord. No.
2001-12
12-27-2001 2002 budget NCM
Ord. No.
2001-13
12-27-2001 2002 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2001-14
12-27-2001 Manager amendment Ch. 32
Ord. No.
2002-01
3-25-2002 Treasurer amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2013-08
Ord. No.
2002-02
5-13-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2002-03
3-25-2002 General obligation note NCM
Ord. No.
2002-04
4-22-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 209
Ord. No.
2002-05
Not adopted
§ DL-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § DL-1
216:922
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2002-06
5-13-2002 Regional Police
Department repealer
Ch. 44, reference
only
Ord. No.
2002-07
7-8-2002 Parks and playgrounds
amendment
Ch. 151
Ord. No.
2002-08
7-8-2002 Streets and sidewalks:
unapproved right-of-way
structures
Ch. 187, Art. VI
Ord. No.
2002-09
Stormwater management Superseded by
Ord. No. 2004-03
Ord. No.
2002-10
10-28-2002 Intergovernmental
cooperation: solid waste
and recyclable materials
services
Ch. 23, Art. II
Ord. No.
2002-11
12-9-2002 Intergovernmental
cooperation: police, fire
and public safety
communications system
Ch. 23, Art. III
Ord. No.
2002-12
12-23-2002 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2002-13
12-23-2002 2003 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2002-14
12-23-2002 Manager amendment Ch. 32
Ord. No.
2003-01
1-13-2003 Solid waste: collection and
disposal of solid waste
amendment
Ch. 180, Art. II
Ord. No.
2003-02
4-28-2003 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 220, table only
Ord. No.
2003-03
3-24-2003 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2003-04
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2003-05
11-10-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2003-06
10-27-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2003-07
10-27-2003 Industrial pretreatment
program amendment
Ch. 175, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2003-08
12-8-2003 Subdivision of land
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 (RESERVED) § DL-1
216:923
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2003-09
12-22-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 209
Ord. No.
2003-10
12-30-2003;
readopted
2-23-2004
2004 budget NCM
Ord. No.
2003-11
12-30-2003;
readopted
2-23-2004
2004 tax rate Ch. 197, Art. VI
Ord. No.
2003-12
12-30-2003;
readopted
2-23-2004
Manager amendment Ch. 32
Ord. No.
2004-01
4-12-2004 Uniform construction
codes; property
maintenance
Chs. 70; 162
Ord. No.
2004-02
3-22-2004 Parks and playground
amendment
Ch. 151
Ord. No.
2004-03
3-8-2004 Stormwater management Ch. 184
Ord. No.
2004-04
5-24-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2004-05
8-23-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 209
Ord. No.
2004-06
9-27-2004 Solid waste Ch. 180
Ord. No.
2004-07
10-11-2004 Pennsylvania Municipal
Health Insurance
Cooperative
Ch. 23, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2004-08
Not enacted
Ord. No.
2004-09
Not enacted
Ord. No.
2004-10
12-13-2004 2005 budget NCM
Ord. No.
2004-11
12-13-2004 2005 tax levy Ch. 167, Art. III
Ord. No.
2004-12
12-13-2004 Township Manager's salary
amendment
Ch. 32
Ord. No.
2004-13
12-13-2004 Treasurer amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2013-08
§ DL-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § DL-1
216:924
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2004-14
12-27-2004 Emergency and municipal
services tax
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2007-15
Ord. No.
2005-01
Pending adoption
Ord. No.
2005-02
2-14-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2005-03
1-24-2005 Building construction and
safety standards
amendment
Ch. 70
Ord. No.
2005-04
2-14-2005 Treasurer amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2013-08
Ord. No.
2005-05
5-23-2005 Subdivision and land
development amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2005-06
7-1-2005 Intergovernmental
cooperation: Lower Allen
Township / Shiremanstown
Borough Walnut Street
Cooperative Agreement
Ch. 23, Art. V
Ord. No.
2005-07
8-8-2005 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2005-08
12-12-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 209
Ord. No.
2005-09
Not enacted
Ord. No.
2005-10
9-10-2005 Acquisition of land NCM
Ord. No.
2005-11
12-12-2005 Board of Commissioners
amendment
Ch. 11
Ord. No.
2005-12
12-27-2005 2006 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2005-13
12-27-2005 2006 budget NCM
Ord. No.
2006-01
1-23-2006 Manager amendment Ch. 32
Ord. No.
2006-02
4-20-2006 Manager amendment Ch. 32
Ord. No.
2006-03
9-11-2006 Street name changes NCM
Ord. No.
2006-04
5-22-2006 Street vacation NCM
§ DL-1 (RESERVED) § DL-1
216:925
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2006-05
9-11-2006 Streets and sidewalks:
name changes
Ch. 187, Art. VII
Ord. No.
2006-06
9-11-2006 Intergovernmental
cooperation: Cumberland
County Land Partnerships
Grant Program
Ch. 23, Art. VI
Ord. No.
2006-07
12-11-2006 Noise control amendment;
property maintenance
amendment; weeds
repealer
Chs. 147; 162; 216
(reference only)
Ord. No.
2006-08
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2006-09
12-26-2006 2007 budget NCM
Ord. No.
2006-10
12-26-2006 2007 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2006-11
12-26-2006 Manager amendment Ch. 32
Ord. No.
2007-01
Pending adoption
Ord. No.
2007-02
2-12-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 209
Ord. No.
2007-03
2-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 209
Ord. No.
2007-04
3-26-2007 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2007-05
Pending adoption
Ord. No.
2007-06
6-11-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2007-07
5-29-2007 Solid waste amendment Ch. 180
Ord. No.
2007-08
6-25-2007 Lighting service
assessments amendment
Ch. 133
Ord. No.
2007-09
7-9-2007 Parks and playgrounds
amendment; vehicles and
traffic amendment
Chs. 151; 209
Ord. No.
2007-10
7-9-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 209
§ DL-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § DL-1
216:926
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2007-11
8-13-2007 Intergovernmental
cooperation: special fire
police mutual aid
Ch. 23, Art. VII
Ord. No.
2007-12
10-8-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 220, table only
Ord. No.
2007-13
8-20-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 209
Ord. No.
2007-14
10-22-2007 Junkyards amendment;
storage of vehicles
amendment
Chs. 121; 212
Ord. No.
2007-15
11-13-2007 Local services tax Ch. 197, Art. III
Ord. No.
2007-16
12-10-2007 Streets and sidewalks:
snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 187, Art. V
Ord. No.
2007-17
12-26-2007 2008 budget NCM
Ord. No.
2007-18
12-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 209
Ord. No.
2007-19
12-26-2007 2008 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2007-20
12-26-2007 Manager amendment Ch. 32
Ord. No.
2008-01
5-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2008-02
8-11-2008 Intergovernmental
cooperation: Lower Allen
Township / Shiremanstown
Borough Mutual Yard
Waste Program
Ch. 23, Art. VIII
Ord. No.
2008-03
Not enacted
Ord. No.
2008-04
Not enacted
Ord. No.
2008-05
10-13-2008 Cable franchise agreement NCM
Ord. No.
2008-06
12-22-2008 Vacating Playground Drive NCM
Ord. No.
2008-07
12-29-2008 Tax collection fees NCM
§ DL-1 (RESERVED) § DL-1
216:927
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2008-08
12-29-2008 2009 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2008-09
12-29-2008 2009 budget NCM
Ord. No.
2008-10
12-29-2008 Manager amendment Ch. 32
Ord. No.
2009-01
4-13-2009 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 220, table only
Ord. No.
2009-02
7-13-2009 Zoning Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2009-03
2-23-2009 Floodplain management Ch. 110
Ord. No.
2009-04
2-23-2009 Outdoor hydronic heaters Ch. 117, Art. I
Ord. No.
2009-05
6-8-2009 Subdivision and land
development amendment
See Ch. 192
Ord. No.
2009-06
5-11-2009 Intergovernmental
cooperation: Municipal
Utility Alliance agreement
Ch. 23, Art. IX
Ord. No.
2009-07
5-11-2009 Pension Committee Ch. 156
Ord. No.
2009-08
4-27-2009 Official Map amendment NCM
Ord. No.
2009-09
5-17-2009 Incurrence of specific debt NCM
Ord. No.
2009-10
6-29-2009 Outdoor hydronic heaters
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. I
Ord. No.
2009-11
6-29-2009 Sexually oriented
businesses amendment;
massage establishments
amendment
Chs. 59; 140
Ord. No.
2009-12
6-29-2009 Contractors: verification of
workers' compensation
insurance
Ch. 80, Art. I
Ord. No.
2009-13
9-14-2009 Sexually oriented
businesses amendment
Ch. 59
Ord. No.
2009-14
12-14-2009 Intergovernmental
cooperation: purchasing of
electricity, natural gas and
liquid fuels
Ch. 23, Art. X
§ DL-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § DL-1
216:928
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2009-15
12-28-2009 2010 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2009-16
Not enacted
Ord. No.
2009-17
12-28-2009 2010 budget NCM
Ord. No.
2010-01
1-11-2010 Streets and sidewalks:
temporary right-of-way
obstructions
Ch. 187, Art. VIII
Ord. No.
2010-02
2-22-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 209
Ord. No.
2010-03
2-8-2010 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2010-04
8-23-2010 Subdivision and land
development
Ch. 192
Ord. No.
2010-05
10-25-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2010-06
10-11-2010 Cable franchise agreement NCM
Ord. No.
2010-07
10-11-2010 Sewers: industrial
pretreatment program
Ch. 175, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2010-08
11-22-2010 Taxation: earned income
tax
Ch. 197, Art. I
Ord. No.
2010-09
12-30-2010 2011 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2010-10
12-30-2010 2011 budget NCM
Ord. No.
2010-11
12-30-2010 Manager amendment Ch. 32
Ord. No.
2011-01
2-14-2011 Stormwater management Ch. 184
Ord. No.
2011-02
4-11-2011 Peddling and soliciting Ch. 155
Ord. No.
2011-03
4-11-2011 Sale of property NCM
Ord. No.
2011-04
4-11-2011 Sale of property NCM
§ DL-1 (RESERVED) § DL-1
216:929
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2011-05
5-9-2011 Sexually oriented
businesses amendment;
massage establishments
repealer
Chs. 59; 140,
reference only
Ord. No.
2011-06
4-11-2011 Lease rental debt NCM
Ord. No.
2011-07
10-24-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 209
Ord. No.
2011-08
6-13-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2011-09
Tabled
Ord. No.
2011-10
12-12-2011 Police pension plan
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2011-11
12-12-2011 Police pension plan
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2011-12
12-27-2011 2012 budget NCM
Ord. No.
2011-13
12-27-2011 2012 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2011-14
12-27-2011 Manager amendment Ch. 32
Ord. No.
2012-01
3-12-2012 Police pension plan
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2012-02
Zoning Map amendment Not adopted
Ord. No.
2012-03
4-9-2012 Lease rental debt NCM
Ord. No.
2012-04
4-23-2012 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2012-05
Tabled
Ord. No.
2012-06
11-26-2012 Noise control Ch. 147
Ord. No.
2012-07
11-26-2012 Earned income tax
amendment; per capital tax
repealer; occupation tax
repealer
Ch. 197, Arts. I; II
(footnote only); VI
(footnote only)
§ DL-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § DL-1
216:930
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2013-01
1-14-2013 Intergovernmental
cooperation: Lower Allen
Township/Hampden
Township agreement for
the collection, conveyance
and treatment of municipal
sanitary sewage
Ch. 23, Art. XI
Ord. No.
2013-02
2-11-2013 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 220 (table
only)
Ord. No.
2013-03
4-8-2013 Delinquent municipal
claims: attorney fees
amendment
Ch. 146, Art. I
Ord. No.
2013-04
4-8-2013 Bond replacement NCM
Ord. No.
2013-05
8-26-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2013-06
8-26-2013 Intergovernmental
cooperation: Lower Allen
Township/Upper Allen
Township Transportation
Development District
agreement
Ch. 23, Art. XII
Ord. No.
2013-07
12-9-2013 Lower Allen Township/
Upper Allen Township
Transportation
Development District
Ch. 23, Art. XII
(footnote only)
Ord. No.
2013-08
10-14-2013 Tax Collector and
Treasurer
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2014-02
Ord. No.
2013-09
11-25-2013 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 155
Ord. No.
2013-10
12-23-2013 2014 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2013-11
12-23-2013 Manager amendment Ch. 32
Ord. No.
2013-12
12-23-2013 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2013-13
11-25-2013 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2014-01
2-24-2014 Animals Ch. 65
§ DL-1 (RESERVED) § DL-1
216:931
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2014-02
2-24-2014 Tax Collector and
Treasurer
Ch. 51
Ord. No.
2014-03
3-24-2014 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2014-04
5-12-2014 Rental property
amendment
Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2014-05
5-27-2014 Streets and sidewalks:
unapproved right-of-way
structures amendment
Ch. 187, Art. VI
Ord. No.
2014-06
10-13-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2014-07
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2014-08
9-22-2014 Streets and sidewalks:
excavations amendment;
sidewalk and curb
specifications amendment;
snow and ice removal
amendment; unapproved
right-of-way structures
amendment; temporary
right-of-way obstructions
amendment; violations and
penalties
Ch. 187, Art. I; Ch.
187, Art. IV; Ch.
187, Art. V; Ch.
187, Art. VI; Ch.
187, Art. VIII; Ch.
187, Art. IX
Ord. No.
2014-09
12-22-2014 Parks and playgrounds
amendment
Ch. 151
Ord. No.
2014-10
12-22-2014 Manager amendment Ch. 32
Ord. No.
2014-11
12-22-2014 2015 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2014-12
12-22-2014 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2015-01
3-9-2015 Police and nonuniformed
employee pension plans
NCM
Ord. No.
2015-02
5-26-2015 Building construction and
safety standards
amendment; fire
prevention; fire
suppression equipment
repealer
Ch. 70; Ch. 103,
Ch. 106, reference
only
§ DL-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § DL-1
216:932
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2015-03
7-27-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2015-04
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2015-05
12-14-2015 Official Map amendment NCM
Ord. No.
2015-06
12-28-2015 Appropriation/budget NCM
Ord. No.
2015-07
Deleted
Ord. No.
2015-08
12-28-2015 2016 tax levy NCM
Ord. No.
2015-09
12-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 209
Ord. No.
2016-01
1-4-2016 Nomenclature change:
"Chief of Police" to "Chief
of Police or equivalent
official"
Ch. 15; Ch. 61; Ch.
121; Ch. 151; Ch.
155; Ch. 187, Art.
IX; Ch. 209
Ord. No.
2016-02
5-9-2016 Parks and playgrounds
amendment
Ch. 151
Ord. No.
2016-03
10-10-2016 Streets and sidewalks:
snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 187, Art. V
Ord. No.
2016-04
10-24-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2016-05
12-27-2016 2017 budget NCM
Ord. No.
2016-06
12-27-2016 2017 tax levy NCM
Ord. No.
2016-07
12-27-2016 Manager amendment Ch. 32
Ord. No.
2017-01
Zoning map amendment Not adopted
Ord. No.
2017-02
1-9-2017 Intergovernmental
cooperation: Capital Region
Council of Governments'
Building Code Department
Ch. 23, Art. XIII
Ord. No.
2017-03
7-24-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
§ DL-1 (RESERVED) § DL-1
216:933
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2017-04
4-10-2017 Noise control amendment Ch. 147
Ord. No.
2017-05
5-8-2017 Amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 63
Ord. No.
2017-06
8-28-2017 Lease rental debt NCM
Ord. No.
2017-07
10-23-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 209
Ord. No.
2017-08
12-11-2017 Taxation: volunteer service
credit program
Ch. 197, Art. IX
Ord. No.
2018-01
3-26-2018 Acquisition of Land NCM
Ord. No.
2018-02
4-9-2018 Alarms Amendment Ch. 61
Ord. No.
2018-03
5-14-2018 Fire Companies
Amendment
Ch. 21
Ord. No.
2018-04
7-9-2018 Parks and Playgrounds
Amendment
Ch. 151
Ord. No.
2018-05
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2018-06
8-27-2018 Authorities: Stormwater
Authority
Ch. 6, Art. II
Ord. No.
2018-07
8-27-2018 Noise Control Amendment Ch. 147
Ord. No.
2018-08
9-10-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2018-09
9-24-2018 Pension Plan NCM
Ord. No.
2018-10
10-22-2018 Authorities: Stormwater
Authority Amendment;
Stormwater Management
Amendment
Ch. 6, Art. II; Ch.
184
Ord. No.
2018-11
Pension Plan NCM
Ord. No.
2018-01
3-14-2018 Budget NCM
Ord. No.
2018-02
3-14-2018 Salaries and Compensation
Amendment
See Ch. 42
Ord. No.
2018-03
4-11-2018 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 LOWER ALLEN TOWNSHIP CODE § DL-1
216:934
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2018-04
4-11-2018 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2018-05
4-11-2018 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2018-06
6-13-2018 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2018-07
7-11-2018 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2018-08
9-10-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 220
Ord. No.
2018-09
9-24-2018 Pension Plan NCM
Ord. No.
2018-10
10-22-2018 Authorities: Stormwater
Authority Amendment;
Stormwater Management
Amendment
Ch. 6, Art. II; Ch.
184
Ord. No.
2018-11
Pension Plan NCM
Ord. No.
2018-12
12-10-2018 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2018-13
12-10-2018 2019 Tax Levy NCM
Ord. No.
2018-14
12-10-2018 Manager Amendment Ch. 32
Ord. No.
2019-01
3-25-2019 Acquisition of Land NCM
Ord. No.
2019-02
6-24-2019 Streets and Sidewalks:
Temporary Right-of-Way
Obstructions Amendment;
Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 187, Art. VIII;
Ch. 209
§ DL-1 (RESERVED) § DL-1
216:935